FORT WORTH, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-19 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 28196-12-2025, effective 12-9-2025
 
*Disclaimer: This may not be the most current version of the Fort Worth City
Code.
For more information, please contact the City Secretary's Office at (817) 392-
6150.
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS of the CITY OF FORT WORTH, TEXAS
(2025)
Mayor
Mattie Parker
City Council Members
Carlos Flores, District 2
Michael D. Crain, District 3
Charlie Lauersdorf, District 4
Deborah Peoples, District 5
Dr. Mia Hall, District 6
Macy Hill, District 7
Chris Nettles, District 8
Elizabeth Beck, District 9
Alan Blaylock, District 10
Jeanette Martinez, District 11
Officials
Leann Guzman      City Attorney
Jay Chapa         City Manager
Jannette Goodall  City Secretary
 
PART I: THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF FORT WORTH
   Chapter
      
I.   ORGANIZATION, BOUNDARIES, ANNEXATION OF ADJACENT TERRITORY
      
II.   POWERS OF THE CITY
      
III.   THE CITY COUNCIL
      
IV.   METHOD OF NOMINATING AND ELECTING MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL
      
V.   THE CITY MANAGER
      
VI.   DEPARTMENT OF LAW
      
VII.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
VIII.   ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS TO BE CONTROLLED AND ADMINISTERED BY THE
CITY MANAGER
      
IX.   DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
      
X.   THE BUDGET AND FINANCIAL PROCEDURE RELATING THERETO
      
XI.   DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
      
XII.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
XIII.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
      
XIV.   WATER WORKS DEPARTMENT
      
XV.   [REPEALED BY ORD. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, APPROVED 5-7-2022]
      
XVI.   RESERVED
      
XVII.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES
      
XVIII.   PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
      
XIX.   RECALL OF COUNCILPERSONS
      
XX.   THE INITIATIVE
      
XXI.   REFERENDUM
      
XXII.   IMPROVEMENT AND PAVING OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
      
XXIII.   MERIT SERVICE
      
XXIV.   ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES; PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO ISSUANCE AND
SALE OF BONDS
      
XXV.   ORDINANCES
      
XXVI.   FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
      
XXVII.   MISCELLANEOUS
      
XXVIII.   DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT
Editor’s note:
   Part I contains the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, adopted by the
electorate at an election held December 11, 1924, and including all amendments
thereto to November 8, 1983. Amendments subsequent to November 8, 1983, are
indicated in the history note following the particular section of the Charter
affected.
    Prior to November 8, 1983, the Charter had been amended on the following
dates: February 14, 1928 (Ord. 1377); July 21, 1931 (Ord. 1720); December 18,
1946 (Ord. 2379); January 31, 1964 (Ord. 5091); April 8, 1975; January 26, 1976
(Ord. 7292 and 7293); April 4, 1981. Material in brackets [ ] has been added
where necessary to correct obvious errors or to facilitate indexing, except
that obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation.
CHAPTER I: ORGANIZATION, BOUNDARIES, ANNEXATION OF ADJACENT TERRITORY
Section
   
1   Creation of municipality
   
2   Corporate boundaries
   
3   Annexation of adjacent territory; method and procedure of holding election
therefor
§ 1 CREATION OF MUNICIPALITY.
   All persons, inhabitants of the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
according to the boundaries and limits of said city as hereinafter set out, and
as the same may hereafter be extended by virtue of the provisions of this
Charter, or by virtue of the laws of the State of Texas applicable to such
matters, now or hereafter to be enacted by the legislature of the State of
Texas, be and they are hereby created and organized as a municipal corporation
and body politic, and as such subdivision of the State of Texas are
incorporated and shall hereafter be known and designated as the City of Fort
Worth, with such powers, rights, authority, duties, privileges and obligations
as are hereinafter set out and prescribed.
§ 2 CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
   The corporate boundaries of the City of Fort Worth are as set out and
defined in the Charter adopted in 1924 and as modified by ordinances of the
City of Fort Worth enacted subsequent thereto as found in the office of the
city secretary.
§ 3 ANNEXATION OF ADJACENT TERRITORY; METHOD AND PROCEDURE OF HOLDING ELECTION
THEREFOR.
   Territory adjoining and contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of
Fort Worth may be annexed to the said city in any one of the two (2) several
ways herein specified:
   (1)   In the event that an election to ascertain the sentiment of the
persons residing in such territory so seeking annexation be deemed necessary,
then the election shall be called and conducted in accordance with state law.
Such election may be conducted directly by the city or under contract by
election officials in the counties in which the territory is located. The
ballot to be used therefor shall contain the words “For Annexation” and
“Against Annexation,” and the voter shall mark the ballot as he may be for or
against the proposition. Returns of such election shall be made and canvassed
in accordance with state law, and in the event it is found that a majority of
all the votes cast at such election are favorable to such annexation, then and
thereupon the council may by ordinance declare such territory annexed to the
City of Fort Worth and an integral part of the same. In the event of
annexation, persons residing in such territory shall hereafter be entitled to
all the rights and privileges of other citizens of said city and be bound by
the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing other citizens of said
City of Fort Worth; and the council shall have power to agree and obligate
itself to the citizenship of such territory so seeking admission to apply to
the improvements of streets and public grounds in said territory a portion or
all of the funds raised by taxation for street improvement for a given number
of years, not to exceed five (5), insofar as the same may be collected from the
property situated in said territory, and may also have authority, if in the
judgment of said council, it should be just and equitable, to further agree and
obligate itself to apply to the improvement of the streets in said territory
during said years additional sums not to exceed fifty (50) per cent in any one
year of the amount that may be collected for such purpose from the property
situated in such territory.
   (2)   Additions to the territory of the City of Fort Worth may be made
pursuant to any laws that may be passed by the Texas Legislature relative to
the extension of the corporate limits of cities, and applicable to the City of
Fort Worth.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
CHAPTER II: POWERS OF THE CITY
Section
   
1   [Body politic and corporate; powers enumerated]
   
2   [Enumeration of powers not exclusive; powers under home rule amendment]
   
3   [Authority to establish and maintain airport]
   
4   [Powers as to building lines-Generally]
   
5   [Same-Additional powers]
   
6   [Exercise of powers conferred upon cities of over five thousand inhabitants
and powers conferred by home rule, Constitution and state law]
   
7   [Authority to acquire, maintain, operate public utility systems]
§ 1 [BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE; POWERS ENUMERATED].
   The inhabitants of the City of Fort Worth, as its limits now are, or may
hereafter be, shall be a body politic and corporate by name the City of Fort
Worth, and as such shall have perpetual succession; may use a corporate seal;
may sue and be sued; may acquire property in fee simple or lesser interest or
estate by purchase, gift, devise, appropriation, condemnation, lease or lease
with privilege of purchase, for any municipal purpose; may sell, lease, hold,
manage, encumber and control such property, and make any and all rules and
regulations by ordinance or resolution which may be required to carry out fully
all the provisions of any conveyance, deed or will in relation to any gift or
bequest, or the provisions of any lease by which it may acquire property; may
acquire, construct, own, lease and operate and regulate public utilities, may
assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purpose on all the
subjects or objects which the city may lawfully tax; may borrow money on the
faith and credit of the city by the issue or sale of bonds or notes of the
city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may
create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature
of public works and improvements; may levy and collect assessments for local
improvements; may license and regulate persons, corporations and associations
engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade; may define, prohibit,
abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals,
comfort, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and
all nuisances and causes thereof; may regulate the construction, height and the
material used in all buildings, and the maintenance and occupancy thereof; may
regulate and control the use, for whatever purposes, of the streets and other
public places; may create, establish, abolish and organize officers and fix the
salaries and compensations of all officers and employees; may make and enforce
local police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such
ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good
government and welfare of the city, and for the performance of the functions
thereof. The city shall have all powers that now are, or hereafter may be
granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas,
and all such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and
enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or when not prescribed
herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the
council.
§ 2 [ENUMERATION OF POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE; POWERS UNDER HOME RULE AMENDMENT].
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have
and may exercise all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the
State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to
enumerate. The City of Fort Worth shall have and exercise all the powers
conferred upon cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the
Constitution of the State of Texas and the Enabling Act relative thereto passed
by the thirty-third legislature of the State of Texas, found in the published
laws of said legislature, Regular Session, pages 307 to 317, and effective July
7th, 1913, and all other laws passed by the legislature of the State of Texas
relating thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by said legislature in
relation to such matters.
§ 3 [AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN AIRPORT].
   That power is hereby conferred on the City of Fort Worth to acquire or own
by lease, purchase, donation, bequest, eminent domain or otherwise all property
within or without the limits of the City of Fort Worth, that may be necessary
for the purpose of establishing, maintaining and operating an airport and
landing field and to fully provide for the accommodation of planes transporting
United States mail and other aerial machines and to make suitable charges
therefor. That the ownership, maintenance and operation by the City of Fort
Worth of such an airport shall be deemed a municipal purpose and the city shall
pass appropriate ordinances providing for the fees to be collected and other
charges to be made in the operation of such field and port.
§ 4 [POWERS AS TO BUILDING LINES-GENERALLY].
   That all of the powers granted by Chapter 276 of the General and Special
Laws of the Fortieth Legislature, known as Senate Bill No. 271 on page 415,
relating to the establishment of building lines in cities and providing for an
assessment therefor, be adopted and made a part of the Charter of the City of
Fort Worth.
§ 5 [SAME-ADDITIONAL POWERS].
   That in addition to the powers provided by the above and foregoing section,
the City of Fort Worth shall have the further power for the purpose of
promoting the public health[,] safety, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare, acting through its governing authorities, under the police
power, to provide by suitable ordinance building lines on any street or any
block of any street and to require their observance by suitable penalties.
§ 6 [EXERCISE OF POWERS CONFERRED UPON CITIES OF OVER FIVE THOUSAND INHABITANTS
AND POWERS CONFERRED BY HOME RULE, CONSTITUTION AND STATE LAW].
   The City of Fort Worth shall have and exercise all of the powers conferred
upon cities having a population of over five thousand (5,000) inhabitants and
all “home rule” cities that have been conferred upon such cities by the
Constitution, laws, and statutes of this state or which may hereafter be
enacted by the legislature or other law-making body of this state.
§ 7 [AUTHORITY TO ACQUIRE, MAINTAIN, OPERATE PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEMS].
   (a)   The City of Fort Worth shall have power to construct or to acquire by
purchase or condemnation and thereafter improve, repair, maintain, extend and
operate as a public utility, one or more systems of [for] the distribution of
natural gas, water, sewer, electric and steam heat utility companies and public
service companies such as cable television, taxicabs, transportation and
transit companies and all public utilities of every kind, together with all
appurtenances of every nature within or without the city necessary or
convenient to the operation thereof.
   (b)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions hereof, complete power
authority and discretion is vested in the City Council of the City of Fort
Worth. The Council, consistent with the provisions hereof, may fix all details
attendant upon the construction or acquisition and financing of said system or
systems, and to that end may authorize the execution of such contracts,
agreements, mortgages, deeds of trust, releases, franchises, obligations and
other instruments, as it may consider necessary, and may fix all details
thereof not herein specifically provided and required. The provisions hereof
shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this section. The powers
granted in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to all other powers
now possessed by said city, and shall not be considered as in substitution of
any other methods of procedure now available to, or which may hereafter be
available to the city. This section shall in itself be complete and independent
authority for the construction or acquisition of and payment for the utilities
herein authorized to be constructed, and the City authorities, in carrying out
the provisions hereof, shall not be subject to the restrictions and limitations
contained elsewhere in this Charter, and particularly shall not be subject to
the provisions of
Chapter 22 or Section 2 of Chapter 26 of said Charter.
CHAPTER III: THE CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
1   [Powers of city vested in] the City Council [;composition, terms]
   
2   [Election, powers, duties, term of mayor]
   
3   Compensation of the members of the City Council
   
4   Vacancies in the City Council; how filled.
   
5   Meetings of council and committees open to public; quorum; regulations of
proceedings; council to provide rules of procedure
   
6   Mayor pro tem; duties of
   
7   City secretary
   
8   Relating to City Councilpersons accepting different office and providing
for forfeiture of offices and positions of aspirants for compensated office
§ 1 [POWERS OF CITY VESTED IN] THE CITY COUNCIL [;COMPOSITION, TERMS].
   The powers of the city government shall be vested in a body to be known as
the City Council, composed of eleven (11) members, one of whom shall be the
mayor. Their terms of office shall be for a period of two (2) years and until
the election and qualification of their successors.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(II), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
Editor’s Note:
   Proposition 2 of Ord. 22081-02-2016, adopted 5-7- 2016 increased the number
of Councilmembers from nine (9) to eleven (11). This increase will not go into
effect until after the 2020 census.
§ 2 [ELECTION, POWERS, DUTIES, TERM OF MAYOR].
   The City Council shall be composed of eleven (11) places. The person elected
as councilperson, Place No. 1, shall be the presiding officer who shall be
known as the mayor of the City of Fort Worth. He shall have a vote on all
matters coming before the council, but no power of veto. He shall represent the
city on all ceremonial occasions and be known as the official head of the city
government. The mayor shall be elected at each biennial election and shall
serve for a period of two (2) years, or until the election and qualification of
his successor.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(II), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
Editor’s Note:
   Proposition 2 of Ord. 22081-02-2016, adopted 5-7- 2016 increased the number
of Councilmembers from nine (9) to eleven (11). This increase will not go into
effect until after the 2020 census.
§ 3 COMPENSATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Commencing on October 1, 2006, each member of the City Council, except the
mayor, shall receive as compensation for such member’s services the sum of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per annum and the mayor shall receive
as compensation for the mayor’s service, the sum of twenty-nine thousand
dollars ($29,000.00) per annum. In addition to the above, all necessary
expenses incurred by the City Council in performance of their official duties
shall be paid by the city. Nothing herein shall prohibit a council member from
waiving the right to all or any part of such compensation or payment of
expenses.
(Ord. 10272, § I(I), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989; Ord. 16797, § 1(I), 1-24-
2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 4 VACANCIES IN THE CITY COUNCIL; HOW FILLED.
   Vacancies in the City Council shall be filled by special elections from the
districts whose places have been vacated. Vacancies in the office of mayor
shall be filled under the provisions applicable to other council members except
that the district of the mayor shall be the city as a whole. These special
elections shall be held on the first available election date specified in the
Texas Election Code unless the council shall request, and receive, permission
from the governor to call an emergency special election. If vacancies should
occur within thirty (30) days of the special election date, the council may set
the election for the next date following the impending special election date or
it may request permission for an emergency special election from the governor.
   In the event any candidate for a vacancy fails to receive a majority of all
votes cast for all the candidates for such vacancy at such special election,
the mayor shall on the first day following the completion of the official count
of the ballots cast at said special election issue a call for a run-off
election pursuant to
Chapter IV, section 2, to be held in accordance with the Texas Election Code to
determine who shall be elected. Such new council members, when duly qualified
and elected, shall serve for the unexpired period of the terms of the council
members whose offices are being filled. However, no such elections shall be
held where said vacancy shall occur within a period of less than ninety (90)
days prior to a general election as specified in
Chapter IV, section 2. When a vacancy shall occur less than ninety (90) days
prior to the general election as specified in
Chapter IV, section 2, a majority of the remaining council members may appoint
a qualified person from the district whose place has been vacated to serve the
unexpired term.
   Should a vacancy occur in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem shall serve
until a special election shall be called under the rules pertaining to filling
vacancies among the other councilmembers. If members of the City Council seek
the office of mayor in such a special election, they shall first resign from
the City Council, and special elections, simultaneous to the mayoral election,
shall be held in their districts under the terms specified above.
(Ord. 10272, § I(II), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989; Ord. 16797, § 1(III), 1-24-
2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 5 MEETINGS OF COUNCIL AND COMMITTEES OPEN TO PUBLIC; QUORUM; REGULATIONS OF
PROCEEDINGS; COUNCIL TO PROVIDE RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The City Council shall hold a meeting within the city limits of Fort Worth
for the purpose of canvassing the election results. The elected members of the
new Council may take the oath of office at the same City Council meeting where
the election results are canvassed, but all elected members shall take the oath
of office no later than the next City Council meeting after the results are
canvassed. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any three (3)
Councilmembers. Such call shall be in writing and shall state the object of the
meeting, and no business shall be transacted at such meeting other than that
specified in the call. The Council shall meet at such times and places as may
be prescribed by ordinance or resolution but not less than forty-four (44)
regular and special meetings shall be held each calendar year.
   A quorum shall consist of two-thirds (2/3) of the members. All official
meetings of the Council and all sessions of the Committees of the Council shall
be public except as authorized by law. The ayes and nos shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances or resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the
proceedings of the Council, and every ordinance or resolution shall require on
final passage the affirmative vote of a majority of all of the remaining
members.
   No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the
consideration of his own official conduct, or where his financial interests are
involved, or unless excused by the Council for other valid reasons by majority
vote. The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, and may punish
its members for misconduct, and may compel the attendance of absent members.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(II), (V), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006; Ord. 22081-02-2016, §
2(II), (V), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
Editor’s Note:
   Proposition 2 of Ord. 22081-02-2016, adopted 5-7- 2016 increased the number
of Councilmembers from nine (9) to eleven (11). This increase will not go into
effect until after the 2020 census.
§ 6 MAYOR PRO TEM; DUTIES OF.
   The City Council shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tem, who shall
perform the duties of mayor in case of the absence or inability of the mayor to
perform the duties of his office, and shall for the time being be vested with
all the powers belonging to the mayor. In case of the absence of both the mayor
and the mayor pro tem, the remaining councilpersons shall elect one of their
members to act in the place of the mayor or mayor pro tem.
§ 7 CITY SECRETARY.
   The City Council shall appoint a city secretary and prescribe the duties and
compensation of said officer, and shall provide him with such assistance as it
may deem necessary. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the City
Council. During his term of office, the city secretary shall be a resident
citizen of the City of Fort Worth.
§ 8 RELATING TO CITY COUNCILPERSONS ACCEPTING DIFFERENT OFFICE AND PROVIDING
FOR FORFEITURE OF OFFICES AND POSITIONS OF ASPIRANTS FOR COMPENSATED OFFICE.
   No person elected to the City Council shall, during the term for which he/
she was elected, be appointed to any office or position in the service of the
city. If a member of the council shall become a candidate for nomination or
election to any public office, other than that of councilperson, he/she shall
forfeit his place in the council; but shall continue to hold the office until a
successor is duly qualified in cases in which such holdover is required by
state law.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(VI), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006; Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2
(XI), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
Editor's note:
   See Texas Local Government Code Chapter 150, Section 150.041, for state
legislation affecting the enforceability of this section.
CHAPTER IV: METHOD OF NOMINATING AND ELECTING MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
1   Councilpersons; eligibility
   
2   No primary election to determine nominations; councilpersons to be selected
in general election biennially
   
3   [Councilpersons to be elected from districts]
   
4   Residence of Councilmembers in Singlemember Districts
§ 1 COUNCILPERSONS; ELIGIBILITY.
   Only qualified voters under the laws of Texas, twenty-one (21) years of age
and over, who have continuously resided in the Council District for which he or
she seeks election for 180 days before the first allowed filing date for the
election, shall be eligible to the office of councilperson. The first allowed
filing date shall not be included in calculating the 180 days.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(VII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006; Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2
(VI), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
§ 2 NO PRIMARY ELECTION TO DETERMINE NOMINATIONS; COUNCILPERSONS TO BE SELECTED
IN GENERAL ELECTION BIENNIALLY.
   Primary elections to determine the selection of nominees for members of the
City Council shall not be resorted to. There shall be but one (1) election, and
that a general election, for the purpose of selecting members of the City
Council, the same to be held biennially, on the first available election date
in May specified in the Texas Election Code of odd-numbered years.
   Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to the
City Council shall file with the city secretary a sworn application for his or
her name to appear on the ballot, in accordance with the laws of Texas for
nonpartisan or independent candidates, and must accompany the application with
a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or, in lieu of the payment of a
filing fee, any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for mayor
may become a candidate by petition signed by qualified voters equaling at least
one-half of one (0.5) percent of the total vote received by all candidates for
mayor in the most recent mayoral general election, or by twenty-five (25)
qualified voters, whichever is the greater number. In lieu of the payment of a
filing fee, any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election
to the City Council, other than the office of mayor, may become a candidate by
petition signed by a number of qualified voters of the district from which the
candidate seeks election equal to at least one-half of one (0.5) percent of the
total vote received by all candidates for mayor in that district in the most
recent mayoral general election, or by twenty-five (25) qualified voters of the
district, whichever is the greater number. The signed petition shall be filed
with the city secretary, together with the candidate’s sworn application. Each
signer next to his signature shall indicate voter registration number, date of
signing, the signer’s printed name, and the street address of his place of
residence. Such petitions shall also meet all requirements established by the
laws of Texas for petitions which are filed with a candidate’s application for
a place on the ballot in an election of a home-rule city.
   The city secretary shall make up the official ballot from the names
presented to him. The order in which the names of such candidates are to appear
on the ballot shall be determined by a drawing to be held in the office of the
city secretary. The city secretary shall post a notice in his office, at least
three (3) days prior to the date on which the drawing is to be held, of the
time and place of the drawing, and shall also give personal notice to any
candidate who makes written request for such notice; and each candidate
involved in the drawing, or a representative designated by him, shall have a
right to be present and observe the drawing.
   The candidates receiving the majority of the votes cast for each place shall
be declared elected. If no candidate receives a majority, or if there is a tie
for any one (1) place, the mayor shall order a second election to be held on a
date in compliance with the Texas Election Code to fill that place. Only the
names of the candidates who tie for the highest number of votes cast for that
place, or the two (2) candidates who receive the highest number of votes with
neither having a majority of the votes cast for that place, shall be printed on
the ballot for such election. In the event of a tie vote at the second
election, the candidates who tie shall cast lots in the presence of the city
secretary to determine which one shall be declared elected, and said lots shall
be cast within five (5) days of the second election.
(Ord. 10272, § (III), (IV), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1999; Ord. 16797, § 1(IV),
1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 3 [COUNCILPERSONS TO BE ELECTED FROM DISTRICTS].
   With the exception of Place No. 1 to be held by the mayor as provided for in
section 2 of Chapter III of this Charter, the City Council shall provide by
ordinance for ten (10) single member districts so that with the exception of
the mayor, one (1) member of the City Council shall be elected from each of
such defined districts by the voters residing therein, and each candidate
therefrom shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall have continuously
resided in the Council District for which he or she seeks election for 180 days
before the first allowed filing date for the election. The first allowed filing
date shall not be included in calculating the 180 days.
   The City Council shall, as often as census data is available, determine as
nearly as practicable the population of the respective districts and shall, by
ordinance, revise the boundaries of any or all of said districts to maintain a
substantial equality of population in each, provided, however, that such
boundaries need not be described by reference to metes and bounds. Within sixty
(60) days after passage of this amendment, the City Council shall, by
ordinance, designate the original district limits.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(VIII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006; Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2
(II), (VI), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016; Ord. 25328-02- 2022, § 2, 2-8-2022,
approved 5-7-2022)
Editor’s Note:
   Proposition 2 of Ord. 22081-02-2016, adopted 5-7- 2016 increased the number
of Councilmembers from nine (9) to eleven (11). This increase will not go into
effect until after the 2020 census.
§ 4 RESIDENCE OF COUNCILMEMBERS IN SINGLEMEMBER DISTRICTS.
   During his term of office a Councilmember must continue to reside within the
limits of the district from which he was elected. Any Councilmember who shall
establish residence outside the district from which he was elected shall be
automatically considered to have resigned and the vacancy left by such
resignation shall be filled as provided by law.
CHAPTER V: THE CITY MANAGER
Section
   
1   [Appointment; qualifications; removal; absence or disability; compensation;
residency]
   
2   Powers and duties of the city manager[-Generally]
   
3   [Same-Proper administration of city affairs; appointment, removal of
directors and employees; adherence to civil service regulations]
   
4   Reserved
   
5   [Council, committees not to interfere with appointments, removals, etc.]
   
6   [Violation of section 5 constitutes official misconduct]
   
7   Investigations
§ 1 [APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL; ABSENCE OR DISABILITY; COMPENSATION;
RESIDENCY].
   The council shall appoint the city manager, who shall be the chief
administrative and executive officer of the city. He shall be chosen solely
upon the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience, and
ability, and without regard to political consideration. Qualifications being
equal, preference shall be given in the selection of a resident citizen of Fort
Worth for this position. No member of the council shall be chosen as city
manager. The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite fixed time, but
shall be removable at the will and pleasure of the council, by a vote of the
majority of the entire council. If removed after serving six (6) months, he may
demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of
the council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect; but
pending such hearing the council may suspend him from office. The action of the
council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final. In case of
the absence or disability of the city manager, the council may designate some
qualified person to perform the duties of the office. The city manager shall
receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council prior to the
appointment. During this term of office, the city manager shall be a resident
citizen within the City of Fort Worth.
§ 2 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER[-GENERALLY].
   The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows:
      (1)   In cooperation with the city attorney, to see that all laws and
ordinances are enforced.
      (2)   Except as otherwise herein provided, to appoint and remove all
heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the city;
all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone, and in the classified
civil service all appointments to be subject to the civil service provisions of
this Charter.
      (3)   To exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof
created by this Charter, or that may hereafter be created by the council,
except as hereinafter provided.
      (4)   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city
or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and
performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the
attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be to take such steps as
may be necessary to enforce the same.
      (5)   To attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part
in the discussion, but having no vote.
      (6)   To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may
deem necessary or expedient.
      (7)   To keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial
condition and needs of the city.
      (8)   To act as budget commissioner and as such prepare and submit to the
council the annual budget after receiving estimates made by the directors or
heads of the various departments of the city.
      (9)   To see to it that city lives within its budget.
      (10)   Either personally or by one or more assistant city managers
designated by the city manager, to execute all documents, contracts and legal
instruments on behalf of the city as provided by this Charter or by the
ordinances or resolutions of the council passed in pursuance thereof.
      (11)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter,
or by ordinance or resolution of the council.
§ 3 [SAME-PROPER ADMINISTRATION OF CITY AFFAIRS; APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL OF
DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES; ADHERENCE TO CIVIL SERVICE REGULATIONS].
   The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper
administration of all the city affairs placed in his hands, and shall to that
end appoint and employ all directors of departments and other employees not
otherwise provided for in this Charter or by ordinance. Appointments made by
him shall be on the basis of executive and administrative experience and
ability and of training, fitness and efficiency of such appointees in the work
which they are to administer. All such directors of departments shall be
immediately responsible to the city manager and may be removed by him at any
time. In case of removal after six (6) months’ service, if the director removed
so demands, a written statement shall be made by the city manager of the reason
of his removal, and the director shall, if he so demands, be given a public
hearing by the council before the order of removal is made final. The statement
of the manager and any written reply of the director thereto shall be filed as
a public record in the office of the secretary of the council.
   In filling positions coming within the classified service list, he shall do
so according to the rules and regulations that may be adopted by the civil
service board, if such are available. He shall have the right to discharge any
of the subordinate employees of his departments in accordance with the
provisions of the civil service sections of this Charter.
§ 4 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16797, § 1(IX), adopted Jan. 24, 2006, approved May 13, 2006, repealed
§ 4, which pertained to bond of city manager. See also the Charter Comparative
Table.
§ 5 [COUNCIL, COMMITTEES NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS, REMOVALS, ETC.]
   Neither the council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate or
attempt to dictate the appointment of any person to, or his removal from,
office or employment by the city manager or any of his subordinates, or in any
manner interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the
departments of administrative service vested in the manager by this Charter.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with
that part of the administrative service for which the city manager is
responsible solely through such manager, and neither the council nor any member
thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager in
said departments, either publicly or privately.
§ 6 [VIOLATION OF SECTION 5 CONSTITUTES OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT].
   Wilful violation of the foregoing provision of this Charter by any member of
the council shall constitute official misconduct, and shall authorize the
council, by a vote of two-thirds of its entire membership, to expel such
offending member from the council, and thereby create a vacancy in the place
held by such member.
§ 7 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   The council, the city manager, or any person or committee authorized
by either or both of them, shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of
any department or office of the city; to make investigations as to city
affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and
compel the production of books, papers and other evidence material to said
inquiry. The council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in
refusing to obey any such subpoenas or failure to produce books, papers and
other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the
manner provided by ordinance.
   (b)   Any hearing held as part of such an inquiry or investigation shall be
conducted by the City Council, city manager, or the person or committee
authorized by either or both of them, in accordance with written rules of
procedure to be adopted before commencement of the hearing. At such time as an
inquiry or investigation focuses on possible criminal activities of a
particular person, all due process rights guaranteed by the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of Texas shall be afforded to the person
being investigated.
(Ord. 10272, § I(V), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
CHAPTER VI: DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Section
   
1   [Appointment, qualifications, general duties, residence of director]
   
2   [Appointment of assistants; compensation]
   
2a   [Assistants to have all powers and duties of city attorney]
   
3   [Outside counsel]
   
4   [Term, removal, absence or disability of city attorney]
§ 1 [APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, GENERAL DUTIES, RESIDENCE OF DIRECTOR].
   There shall be a department of law, the director of which shall be the city
attorney, whose appointment shall be recommended by the city manager and
approved by the council and who is a competent practicing attorney, duly
licensed, and who shall have practiced law for at least five (5) years
immediately preceding his appointment. The city attorney shall serve as chief
legal advisor to the council, the city manager and all city departments,
offices and agencies, and the city attorney shall represent the city in all
legal proceedings, and draft, approve or file his written legal objections to
every ordinance before it is acted upon by the council, and prepare or endorse
his written approval or file his written legal objections to all documents,
contracts and legal instruments in which the city may have an interest, and
perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance. During his
term of office, the city attorney shall be a resident citizen within the City
of Fort Worth.
§ 2 [APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANTS; COMPENSATION].
   The city attorney shall serve as the director of the department of law, and
shall have power to appoint such assistants as may be deemed necessary to
assist in performing the duties of the applicant; such assistants to serve in
that capacity as long as their services are satisfactory to the city attorney.
The city attorney and assistants shall receive such compensation as may be
fixed by the council.
§ 2A [ASSISTANTS TO HAVE ALL POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY].
   All powers and duties imposed on the city attorney may be exercised and
performed by any assistant city attorney under his direction.
§ 3 [OUTSIDE COUNSEL].
   No extra outside counsel shall be retained to assist the city attorney or
his assistants, save and except in cases of extraordinary importance and
emergency, approved and adopted by the council. In such contingency, the
council shall fix in advance, as far as practicable, the compensation to be
allowed such extra or outside counsel by resolution spread upon the minutes.
§ 4 [TERM, REMOVAL, ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF CITY ATTORNEY].
   The city attorney shall not be appointed for a definite fixed time, but
shall be removable at the will and pleasure of the council by a vote of not
less than a majority of the entire council. If removed after serving six (6)
months, he may demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a
public meeting of the council prior to the date on which his final removal
shall take effect; but pending such hearing the council may suspend him from
office. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city attorney
shall be final. In case of the absence or disability of the city attorney, the
council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the
office.
CHAPTER VII: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
1   Municipal court; municipal court system
   
2   [Chapter provisions declared cumulative]
   
3   Appointment and removal of municipal judges
§ 1 MUNICIPAL COURT; MUNICIPAL COURT SYSTEM.
   There is hereby established and created a municipal court system for the
City of Fort Worth, which shall have jurisdiction and authority in cases
arising under ordinances of the city and applicable statutes of the State of
Texas.
§ 2 [CHAPTER PROVISIONS DECLARED CUMULATIVE].
   This chapter is hereby declared to be cumulative of any laws that may now or
hereafter be passed by the legislature regulating or increasing the
jurisdiction of the municipal courts in cities of the grade and size of the
City of Fort Worth.
§ 3 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF MUNICIPAL JUDGES.
   The chief judge and associate judges shall be selected and appointed by
majority vote of all the members of the city council to serve specified terms.
Initial appointment and reappointment to any term is at the sole discretion of
the city council.
   The chief judge and associate judges may be removed during their term of
office by a majority vote of all members of the city council. Removal may
include any one or more of the following grounds: dereliction of duty,
incompetency, incapacity to serve, misconduct or conduct discrediting the
position.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(VII), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
CHAPTER VIII: ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS TO BE CONTROLLED AND ADMINISTERED BY
THE CITY MANAGER
Section
   
1   Number of administrative departments to be controlled and administered by
the city manager
   
2   Duties of directors of departments
   
3   Responsibility of directors of departments
§ 1 NUMBER OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS TO BE CONTROLLED AND ADMINISTERED BY
THE CITY MANAGER.
   There is hereby created and placed under control of the city manager six (6)
administrative departments of the city government as follows:
      (1)   Department of finance;
      (2)   Department of police;
      (3)   Fire department;
      (4)   Department of public works;
      (5)   Department of public health;
      (6)   Water works department.
   The City Council shall have power to establish by ordinance such other
departments, divisions and offices as it deems necessary for the efficient
operation of the municipal government. The City Council may discontinue any
department or office established by ordinance and may prescribe, combine,
consolidate, distribute or abolish the functions and duties of departments,
divisions or offices. No administrative department, division or office created
by ordinance, and no consolidation as hereinbefore provided shall be
established or discontinued until the recommendation of the city manager
thereon shall have first been heard by the council.
   The directors of the departments appointed by the city manager shall be
immediately responsible to the city manager for the administration of their
departments, including the preparation of reports and recommendations
concerning their departments as required by the city manager.
§ 2 DUTIES OF DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS.
   A director for each of the above departments shall be appointed by the city
manager and shall serve until removed by the city manager, or until his
successor is appointed and has qualified; provided, that the city manager shall
assume the directorship of the department of finance, unless otherwise ordered
by the council. Each director shall have power to prescribe rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter or ordinance, for the conduct
of his department and the preservation of the records and property under his
control. Subject to the control and supervision of the city manager in all
matters, the director of a department shall manage his department.
§ 3 RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS.
   The directors of departments appointed by the city manager shall be
immediately responsible to the city manager for the administration of their
departments, and their advice in writing may be required by him on all matters
affecting their departments. They shall prepare departmental estimates, which
shall be open to public inspection, and they shall make all their reports and
recommendations concerning their departments at stated intervals, or when
requested by the city manager.
CHAPTER IX: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Section
   [
1   Authority of council to provide for department; duties]
[§ 1 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO PROVIDE FOR DEPARTMENT; DUTIES].
   The City Council is authorized to provide by ordinance for the creation of a
department of finance, which department shall be charged with the
administration of the financial affairs of the city, including the keeping and
supervision of all accounts, the custody and disbursement of city funds and
monies according to ordinances and regulations of the City Council, the
issuance of licenses and the collection of license fees, and such other duties
as the City Council may, by ordinance, require.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
CHAPTER X: THE BUDGET AND FINANCIAL PROCEDURE RELATING THERETO
Section
   
1   Fiscal year and annual budget estimate; budget message and budget format
   
2   Annual budget
   
3   Transfer of appropriations
   
4   Appropriation of excess revenue
   
4a   Reduction of Expenditures
   
5   Expenditures only pursuant to appropriations
   
6   Accounts of appropriations
   
7   Payment of claims
   
8   Money Certified in Treasury
   
9   Money deemed in treasury
   
10   Obligations; when void
   
11   Independent audit
   
12   Sinking fund commission
§ 1 FISCAL YEAR AND ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATE; BUDGET MESSAGE AND BUDGET FORMAT.
   (a)   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October
and end on the last day of September. On or before the fifteenth day of August
of each year, the manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget for the
ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message.
   (b)   The manager’s budget message shall explain the budget both in fiscal
terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed
financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the
important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current
year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the
reasons for such changes, and include such other material as the manager deems
desirable.
   (c)   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds
and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or
this charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or the
council may require. In organizing the budget the manager shall utilize the
most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization
unit, program, purpose or activity, and object. It shall begin with a clear
general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income,
indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged
as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures
of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding
fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections:
      (1)   Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing
fiscal year, detailed by departments, in terms of their respective work
programs, and the method of financing such expenditures;
      (2)   Proposed capital improvement expenditures during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by purpose and the proposed method of financing each such
capital expenditure;
      (3)   Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of
each utility owned or enterprise fund operated by the city and the proposed
method of its disposition; budgets for each utility or enterprise fund giving
detailed income and expenditure information shall be included; and
      (4)   Detailed schedules indicating the City’s debt position and debt
service requirements.
   The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
§ 2 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   Public hearings on the manager’s proposed budget shall be held and notice of
such hearings shall be provided in accordance with applicable state law;
however, no less than one (1) public hearing shall be held on the budget
following notice of such hearing. The budget shall not be adopted at the same
meeting as the public hearing. The annual appropriations ordinance providing
funding for the proposed budget, along with a corresponding ad valorem tax levy
ordinance shall be considered by the City Council at the same meeting the City
Council considers approving the budget. Upon approval of the budget, the
caption of the appropriations ordinance shall be published once, and the
caption and penalty of the ad valorem tax levy ordinance shall be published
twice in the City’s official newspaper. The final approved budget and the full
text of each ordinance shall be posted on the city’s website and filed in the
city secretary’s office and made available for public inspection. The budget
will become effective upon approval by City Council. The appropriations
ordinance and ad valorem tax levy ordinance shall become effective upon
publication in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(VIII), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
§ 3 TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   At any time during the fiscal year the manager may transfer part or all of
any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department,
division or section upon compliance with such conditions as the City Council
may establish by ordinance.
   Upon written request by the manager, the council may by ordinance transfer
part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department to
another. No such transfers shall be made of revenues or earnings of any non-tax
supported public utility to any other purpose. The provisions of this section,
as amended, shall take effect on January 1, 1984.
§ 4 APPROPRIATION OF EXCESS REVENUE.
   If at any time during the fiscal year the manager certifies that there are
available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the
budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the
year up to the amount of the excess.
§ 4a REDUCTION OF EXPENDITURES.
   If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager
that revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated,
he shall so report to the council without delay. The report shall indicate the
estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action already taken by the
manager, and any recommendations as to other steps to be taken. The council
shall then take such action as it deems necessary.
§ 5 EXPENDITURES ONLY PURSUANT TO APPROPRIATIONS.
   No expenditure shall be made from the city treasury, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of city funds be incurred, except in pursuance
of appropriations made by the council. At the close of each fiscal year the
unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the fund from which
it was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriations.
§ 6 ACCOUNTS OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Accounts shall be kept for each item of appropriation made by the council,
and every warrant on the city treasury shall state specifically against which
of such items the warrant is drawn. Each such account shall show in detail the
appropriations made thereto by the council, the amount drawn thereon, the
unpaid obligations charged against it, and the unencumbered balance to the
credit thereof.
§ 7 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
   No claim against the city shall be paid, unless it is evidenced by a
purchase order approved by the head of the department or office for which the
indebtedness was incurred; and each director or officer and his surety shall be
liable to the city for all loss or damage sustained by the city by reason of
his negligent or corrupt approval of any such claim. The controller of accounts
shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims and demands against the
city, and shall issue no warrant for payment unless he finds that the claim is
in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly and
legally due and payable; that an appropriation has been made therefor which has
not been exhausted, or that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized;
and that there is money in the city treasury to make payment. He may
investigate any claim and for that purpose may summon before him any officer,
agent or person, and examine him upon oath or affirmation relative thereto,
which oath or affirmation he may administer. If the controller of accounts
issues a warrant on the treasury authorizing payment of any item for which no
appropriation has been made, or for the payment of which there is not a
sufficient balance in the proper appropriation, or which is otherwise contrary
to law or ordinance, he and his sureties shall be individually liable to the
city for the amount thereof.
§ 8 MONEY CERTIFIED IN TREASURY.
   No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of
money shall be entered into, nor shall any ordinance, resolution or order for
the expenditure of money, be passed by the Council, or be authorized by any
officer of the City, except in the cases hereinafter specified, unless the
Director of Finance first certifies to the Council, or to the proper officer as
the case may be, that the money required for such contract, agreement,
obligation or expenditure is in the Treasury and not appropriated for any other
purpose, which certificate shall be filed and immediately recorded. The sum so
certified shall not thereafter be considered unappropriated until the City is
discharged from the contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 9 MONEY DEEMED IN TREASURY.
   All monies actually in the treasury to the credit of the fund from which
they are to be drawn, all monies credited to the fund from pooled cash in the
treasurer’s group of accounts, and all monies applicable to the payment of the
obligation and appropriation involved that are anticipated to come in the
treasury before the maturity of such contract, agreement or obligation, from
taxes or assessments, or from sales of service products, or by-products, or
from any city undertaking, fees, charges, accounts and bills receivable, or
other credits in process of collection, and all monies applicable to the
payment of such obligation or appropriation, which are to be paid into the city
treasury prior to the maturity thereof, arising from the sale or lease of lands
or other property, and monies to be derived from lawfully authorized bonds sold
and in the process of delivery, shall, for the purpose of such certificate, be
deemed in the treasury to the credit of the appropriate fund and subject to
such certification.
§ 10 OBLIGATIONS; WHEN VOID.
   All contracts, agreements or other obligations entered into, all ordinances
passed, and resolutions and orders adopted, contrary to the preceding sections,
shall be void, and no person whatever shall have any claim or demand against
the city thereunder, nor shall the council, or any officer of the city, waive
or qualify the limits fixed by any ordinance, resolution or order, as provided
in
section 9 of this chapter of the Charter, or fasten upon the city any liability
whatever, in excess of such limits, or relive any party from an exact
compliance with his contract under such ordinance, resolution or order;
provided, that this section shall not apply in case of public disaster calling
for extraordinary emergency expenditure.
§ 11 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   The council shall cause an independent audit to be made of the books of
account, records and transactions of all the administrative departments of the
city at least once yearly. Such audits, during such fiscal year, shall be made
by one or more certified public accountants who, for the three (3) years next
preceding, having held a certificate issued by the state board of accountancy
of the State of Texas, or by a state maintaining an equal standard of
professional requirements, which entitles the holder of such certificate to a
Texas certificate. The auditor or auditors to make the said audit shall be
selected by the council, and shall be responsible to the council. The duties of
the auditor or auditors so appointed shall consist of performing procedures to
obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in financial statements
and expressing an opinion as to whether the financial statements are presented
fairly in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The report
of such auditor or auditors for the fiscal year shall be furnished to each
member of the council, the city manager and to each citizen who may apply
therefor. The original report of the said auditors shall be kept among the
permanent records of the city.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 12 SINKING FUND COMMISSION.
   [Repealed]
CHAPTER XI: DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a department of police.
CHAPTER XII: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a fire department.
CHAPTER XIII: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a department of public works, which department shall be in lieu
of the department of engineering formerly provided for in
Chapter XIII of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth.
CHAPTER XIV: WATER WORKS DEPARTMENT
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a water works department, which department shall have
jurisdiction and control over the water and sanitary sewerage systems of the
City of Fort Worth.
CHAPTER XV: [REPEALED BY ORD. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, APPROVED 5-7-2022]
CHAPTER XVI: RESERVED
CHAPTER XVII: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a department of public libraries.
CHAPTER XVIII: PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Section
   [
1   Establishment and regulation]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION].
   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and
regulation of a park and recreation department.
CHAPTER XIX: RECALL OF COUNCILPERSONS
Section
   
1   Recall of councilpersons; procedure; election of successors
   
2   [Failure, refusal of council to order election]
§ 1 RECALL OF COUNCILPERSONS; PROCEDURE; ELECTION OF SUCCESSORS.
   Any councilperson of this city may be recalled and removed from office by
the electors qualified to vote for a successor of such incumbent as herein
provided. The procedure to remove councilpersons shall be as follows:
   A petition signed by the qualified voters entitled to vote for a successor
to the councilperson sought to be removed, equal in number to at least twenty
(20) percentum of the entire number of persons entitled to vote for a successor
to said councilperson at said time, demanding the recall of said councilperson
shall be filed with the city secretary, provided that such petition shall
contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought. The
signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one paper, but each
signer shall add to his signature his place of residence, giving the street and
number. One of the signers to each of such papers shall make oath before an
officer competent to administer oaths that each signature is that of the person
whose name it purports to be. Within twenty-five (25) days from the filing of
such petition, the city secretary shall examine the same and from the list of
qualified voters ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the
requisite number of qualified voters, and, if necessary, the council shall
allow him extra help for that purpose, and he shall attach to said petition a
certificate showing the result of such examination. If, by the secretary’s
certificate, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within
ten (10) days from the date of said certificate. The secretary shall within
twenty-five (25) days after such amendment is filed, if any is so filed with
him, make like examination of the said amended petition, and if his certificate
shall show same to be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing
same without prejudice, however, to the filing of a new petition based upon new
and different grounds, but not upon the same grounds.
   If the petition be found sufficient, the secretary shall submit the same to
the City Council without delay. If an election is to be held within the city
for any other purpose within sixty (60) days from the date of said certificate,
then the said recall election shall be held on the same day. If the
councilperson in question resigns, no election shall be necessary and the
vacancy shall be filled as in other cases of vacancies.
   The provisions regulating examination, certification and amendment of
initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is
certified by the city secretary to be sufficient and the councilperson whose
removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after the certification
to the council, the council shall order and hold a recall election in the
affected district. Such election shall be held on the first available election
date specified pursuant to Article 2.01b of the Texas Election Code unless the
council shall request, and receive, permission from the governor to call an
emergency special election. If a recall petition should be certified within
thirty (30) days of an election date, the council may set the election for the
next date following the impending special election date or it may request
permission for an emergency special election date from the governor.
   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements:
      (1)   With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question
shall be submitted “Shall (name of councilperson) be removed from the office of
City Councilperson?”
      (2)   Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two
(2) following positions, one above the other, in the order indicated:
         “For the recall of (name of councilperson).”
         “Against the recall of (name of councilperson).”
   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against
removal of the councilperson named on the ballot, he/she shall continue in
office. If the majority of the votes cast at such election be for the removal
of the councilperson named on the ballot, the council shall immediately declare
his/her office vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter for the filling of vacancies. A councilperson thus
removed shall not be a candidate to succeed himself in an election called to
fill the vacancy thereby created.
   No recall petition shall be filed against a councilperson within six (6)
months after he takes office, and no councilperson shall be subject to more
than two (2) recall elections during a term of office.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 2 [FAILURE, REFUSAL OF COUNCIL TO ORDER ELECTION].
   Should the council fail or refuse to order an election as herein provided
for the recall of a councilperson, when all the requirements for such election
have been complied with by the petitioning citizens, in conformity with this
chapter of the Charter, then it shall be the duty of any one of the district
judges of Tarrant County, Texas, upon proper application being made therefor,
to order such election and to enforce the carrying into effect of the
provisions of this chapter of the Charter.
CHAPTER XX: THE INITIATIVE
Section
   
1   Power to initiate ordinances
   
2   Preparation of initiative petitions
   
3   Filing of petitions
   
4   Submission of petition to council
   
5   Election on initiated measures
   
6   Initiative ballots
   
7   Number of measures to be initiated; initiated ordinances subject to
amendment or repeal by council
§ 1 POWER TO INITIATE ORDINANCES.
   The qualified voters of this city shall have the right, at their option, to
propose ordinances, not in conflict with this Charter, the Constitution or the
laws of the State of Texas, and to adopt the same at the polls, such power
being known as the initiative. A petition, meeting the requirements hereinafter
provided and requesting the council to pass an ordinance, therein set forth or
designated, shall be termed an initiative petition, and shall be acted upon as
hereinafter provided.
§ 2 PREPARATION OF INITIATIVE PETITIONS.
   Signatures to initiative petitions need not all be on one paper, but the
circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit substantially as
follows: That each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of
the person whose name it purports to be and was made by said person in his
presence. With each signature shall be stated the place of residence of the
signer, giving the street and number, or other description sufficient to
identify the place. Each signature shall be in ink or with indelible pencil.
All such papers pertaining to any one measure shall have written or printed
thereon the names and addresses of at least five (5) registered voters who
shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and shall constitute a
committee of the petitioners for the purposes hereinafter named. All such
papers shall be filed in the office of the city secretary as one instrument.
§ 3 FILING OF PETITIONS.
   Within twenty-five (25) days after the filing of the petition, the city
secretary shall ascertain by examination the number of registered voters whose
signatures are appended thereto, and whether this number is at least twenty
(20) per cent of the total number of registered voters as shown by the
registration books, and he shall attach to said petition his certificate
showing the result of said examination. If by the secretary’s certificate, of
which notice in writing shall be given to one or more of the persons
designated, the petition is shown to be insufficient it may be amended within
ten (10) days from the date of said certificate by filing supplementary
petition papers with additional signatures. The secretary shall, within twenty-
five (25) days after such amendment, make examination of the amended petition,
and if his certificate shall show to be insufficient, the secretary shall file
the petition in his office and shall notify each member of the committee to
that effect. The final finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not
prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose; but no new
petition covering the same ordinance in substance shall be filed until at least
six (6) months have elapsed.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 4 SUBMISSION OF PETITION TO COUNCIL.
   If the petition shall be found to be sufficient, the secretary shall so
certify and submit the proposed measure to the council at its next meeting.
Upon receiving the proposed measure the council shall at once proceed to
consider it and shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from
the date it is filed with them.
§ 5 ELECTION ON INITIATED MEASURES.
   If the council shall fail to pass the proposed measure, or shall pass it in
a form different from that set forth in the petition, then the measure shall,
if demanded in writing by the committee, be submitted by the council to the
vote of the electors at the next election occurring in the city; provided, that
the City Council shall, if in their judgment the public interests demand it,
order an election to be held at an earlier date to be fixed by the council.
§ 6 INITIATIVE BALLOTS.
   The ballot used in voting upon an initiated ordinance shall state the
caption of the ordinance and below the caption shall set forth on separate
lines the words, “For the Ordinance” and “Against the Ordinance.”
   Where an initiated ordinance and an alternative ordinance proposed by the
council are submitted, the ballot shall state the captions of each ordinance,
clearly designating them “Ordinance No. 1" and “Ordinance No. 2,” respectively,
and shall set forth below the captions on separate lines the words “For
Ordinance No. 1,” “For Ordinance No. 2,”. Where an initiated ordinance and an
alternative ordinance are submitted each voter shall vote “For” only one
ordinance. Where an initiated ordinance and an alternative ordinance are
submitted to the voters, the measure that receives the highest number of
favorable votes shall prevail in that election.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(IX), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
§ 7 NUMBER OF MEASURES TO BE INITIATED; INITIATED ORDINANCES SUBJECT TO
AMENDMENT OR REPEAL BY COUNCIL.
   Any number of proposed measures may be voted upon at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Initiated ordinances, adopted
by the electors, shall be published and may be amended or repealed by the
council as in the case of other ordinances; but not until two years after such
ordinance or ordinances shall become effective.
CHAPTER XXI: REFERENDUM
Section
   
1   [Submission of ordinance to voters prior to taking effect or within thirty
days of passage; section not applicable to routine or emergency measures,
general appropriation ordinance or bond ordinances]
   
2   [Referendum petition]
   
3   [Alteration or amendment or proposed ordinance]
   
4   Ordinances passed by referendum subject to amendment or repeal by council
after six months
   
5   [Referendum relative to purchases and sales of public property by city]
§ 1 [SUBMISSION OF ORDINANCE TO VOTERS PRIOR TO TAKING EFFECT OR WITHIN THIRTY
DAYS OF PASSAGE; SECTION NOT APPLICABLE TO ROUTINE OR EMERGENCY MEASURES,
GENERAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE OR BOND ORDINANCES.]
   If prior to the date when an ordinance of a general nature passed by the
council shall take effect, or within thirty (30) days after the passage of
same, a referendum vote should be demanded on same, as hereafter provided, such
ordinance shall be submitted to the legal voters of the City of Fort Worth, and
the same shall not be effective and valid until the said ordinance shall have
been approved by a majority of those voting thereon; provided, that this
section shall not apply to mere matters of routine, or emergency measures
passed on the ground of urgent public need for the preservation of peace,
health, safety or property, by a vote of not less than three-fourths of the
City Council, nor to the general appropriation ordinance or bond ordinances.
§ 2 [REFERENDUM PETITION.]
   Whenever there shall be presented to the City Council a petition or
petitions, signed by twenty (20) per cent of the registered and qualified legal
voters of said city, demanding that an ordinance passed by the council, and set
forth in said petition or petitions, be submitted to a vote of the qualified
electors of the city, it shall be the duty of the council to submit such
proposed ordinance to a vote of the qualified electors of said city at the next
election held thereafter by said city. The signatures to said petition need not
all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall add to his signature his
place of residence, giving the street and number. All signatures must be made
in ink or with indelible pencil. One of the signers of said petition shall make
oath before a duly qualified officer that the statements therein are true and
that each signature to said petition is a genuine signature of the person whose
name it purports to be and was signed in his presence by such person; provided,
that any petition intended to require a submission to referendum of an
ordinance enacted by the City Council shall be presented to the council within
thirty (30) days after the enactment of such ordinance, and not thereafter. The
City Council may, if in its judgment the public interest so demands, provide
for such referendum election to be held at an earlier date than that of the
next ensuing election, in which event the said date shall be fixed by the
council.
§ 3 [ALTERATION OR AMENDMENT OR PROPOSED ORDINANCE.]
   If the City Council shall alter or amend said proposed ordinance (as it may
do), and such amended ordinance should not be satisfactory to the persons
demanding the referendum, then the said amended ordinance shall be, if demanded
in writing by a committee of five (5) signers, to be designated in the
petitions as the committee to act for the said petitioners, submitted to a vote
of the people at the next election ensuing in the city, unless a different date
be set by the council. Or if said ordinance should not be amended or altered by
the City Council, the same course shall be taken in respect thereto as in the
case of amended ordinances.
   The ballots used in such election shall contain the words,-“For the
Ordinance Passed by the City Council on a certain date” (stating the nature of
the ordinance), and “Against the said Ordinance.” If a majority of the votes
cast shall be in favor of the adoption of said ordinance, the said ordinance as
passed shall be valid and effective, as other ordinances of the city, upon
proper publication if required. If a majority of the votes cast as [at] such
election be against the said ordinance it shall not be valid and effective.
§ 4 ORDINANCES PASSED BY REFERENDUM SUBJECT TO AMENDMENT OR REPEAL BY COUNCIL
AFTER SIX MONTHS.
   Referendum ordinances adopted by the electors shall be published and may be
amended or repealed by the council as in the case of other ordinances, but not
until six (6) months after such ordinance shall become effective.
§ 5 [REFERENDUM RELATIVE TO PURCHASES AND SALES OF PUBLIC PROPERTY BY CITY.]
   The City of Fort Worth may take, hold and purchase such personal property,
chattels, animate and inanimate, lands and real property as may be needed for
the corporate purposes of said city, whether in or out of the corporate limits
of the city, and may sell, lease, alienate, exchange or encumber any real
estate or personal property owned or acquired by it; provided, however, that no
sale shall be made of any public property owned by said city whose value
exceeds one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00), without first
making such intention known by means of publication in the official newspaper
of the city at least once and by posting and maintaining notice online for four
(4) consecutive weeks immediately preceding the intended date of sale, during
which time it shall be lawful for qualified voters, who shall not be fewer than
ten (10) percent of the number of voters who voted in the most recent municipal
election for mayor to petition the City Council for a referendum, in which
event the matter of such sale shall be referred to the people at an election to
be held for that purpose, at the time and in the way and manner to be
prescribed by the City Council of said city, and in the event a majority of the
votes cast at such election is in favor of such proposition, then the sale
shall be made; otherwise, such sale shall not take place.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(X), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006; Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-
8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
CHAPTER XXII: IMPROVEMENT AND PAVING OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
Section
   
1   Improvement, definition of
   
2   Highway, definitions of
   
3   Highways; improvement of
   
4   Pavement improvement of highway, sidewalks and curbs; contracts; payment;
lien; sale; deed
   
5   Improvement of highways; power to order; procedure; specifications of
material; bond of contractor; advertisement for bids; power to accept or
reject; no change of bids
   
6   Improvements-Contracts; signature by the city manager or his or her
designee
   
7   Improvements-Limit of cost; assessment; deferred payments; interest;
attorney’s fees
   
8   Improvement-Lists of owners; notice to owners; protests; procedures
   
9   Improvements-Ordinance fixing lien; partial payments; interest; release of
lien; personal liability; joint ownership; sales under lien; ordinance; notice
of lien; errors; effect of
   
10   Improvements-Suit by owner; fifteen days limitation; precedence in courts;
defendants; suspension of improvements
   
11   Improvements-Omission of property from improvement; effect of
   
12   Improvements-On one side of highway; assessment of cost
   
13   Improvements-Correction of errors; invalid assessments; procedure to
correct; reassessment
   
14   Improvements-Petition of sixty per cent of property owners; procedure;
partial payments; interest; payment by city; assignment of deferred payments;
street improvement fund
   
15   Improvements-Certificates, form of; executed by mayor; street improvement
fund
   
16   Impoundments-Validation of old contracts
   
17   [Improvements-Alternative method]
§ 1 IMPROVEMENT, DEFINITION OF.
   The term “improvement,” when used in this Charter shall include the
improvement of any street, avenue, alley, highway, public place or square, or
portion thereof, in the city by filling, grading, raising, paving, repairing or
otherwise improving the same in a permanent manner, or the construction or
reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and other necessary
appurtenances, including drains and culverts, and also the laying out, opening,
narrowing, straightening or otherwise establishing, defining or locating
streets, alleys, avenues, public places, squares or sidewalks. Said term shall
also include any other permanent street improvement for a public benefit.
§ 2 HIGHWAY, DEFINITIONS OF.
   The term “highway,” when used herein, shall include any street, alley,
highway, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels and
causeways, in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
§ 3 HIGHWAYS; IMPROVEMENT OF.
   The City Council shall have power to order the improvement of any highway or
highways, or part thereof, in the city, and to prescribe the nature and extent
of the improvements, and shall have power to cause any of such improvements to
be made separately or together.
§ 4 PAVEMENT IMPROVEMENT OF HIGHWAY, SIDEWALKS AND CURBS; CONTRACTS; PAYMENT;
LIEN; SALE; DEED.
   Subject to the terms hereof, the cost of such improvement may be paid wholly
by the city or partly by the city and partly by owners of property abutting on
such improvements and benefited thereby. But the whole cost of constructing any
sidewalk or curb may be required to be paid by the owners of such abutting
property, and the owner of any railroad or street railroad having any track or
tracks, switch or turn-out in a highway ordered to be improved may be required
to pay the whole cost of such improvement between the rails and tracks of said
railroad or switch or turn-out, and two (2) feet on the outside thereof. The
portion of the cost of such improvement payable by the owner of such railroad
or street railroad, and all costs of collection, may be a special tax against
and secured by lien upon the roadbed, ties, rails, fixtures, rights, and
franchises of such railroad or street railroad and the owner thereof. After the
execution of a contract by the city for any such improvement, the City Council
may, by ordinance, levy a special assessment upon the roadbed, ties, rails,
fixtures, rights and franchises of such railroads or street railroads for the
portions of said cost payable by the owners thereof, which assessment shall be
a lien on such property from the time of levy, prior and superior to all
encumbrances thereon, except lawful taxes. Such assessment shall become due and
delinquent as shall be specified by said ordinance, and if not paid as therein
provided, shall be enforced as in the case of the collection of taxes under
this Charter, by the advertisement and sale of the property rights and
franchises levied on. The officer making said sale shall execute to the
purchaser a deed similar to the one executed when property is sold for ad
valorem taxes, and the recital of such deed that all legal prerequisites to the
validity of said sale have been complied which shall be prima facie evidence of
the truth thereof, and so accepted without further proof. Such tax and lien may
also be enforced by suit in any court having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2, 2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 5 IMPROVEMENT OF HIGHWAYS; POWER TO ORDER; PROCEDURE; SPECIFICATIONS OF
MATERIAL; BOND OF CONTRACTOR; ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS; POWER TO ACCEPT OR
REJECT; NO CHANGE OF BIDS.
   The City Council shall have the power by resolution to order the making of
such public improvements, or any of them, by majority vote, without notice, and
the passage of such resolution shall be conclusive of the public necessity and
benefits thereof. The resolution shall generally set out the nature and extent
of the improvements to be made, the section or sections of the highway or
highways to be improved, and the material or materials to be used, and the
method or methods of paying the cost. The resolution may specify different or
alternative materials and different or alternative methods for the construction
of the improvement, and the payment of its cost; upon passage of such
resolution, the director of public works shall forthwith prepare
specifications, subject to approval of the City Council, for the improvement,
embracing the different or alternative materials or methods which may be
prescribed by said resolution, for the construction of said improvement or
payment of its cost; and the character of bond or bonds, if any required of the
successful bidder. Such specifications shall be submitted to the City Council,
and after being corrected, in event correction is necessary, and the same is
satisfactory to the council, same shall be approved by the City Council. The
City Council shall have power to require of the contractor to whom the work may
be let, a bond or bonds for the faithful performance of the contract, and for
the repair, or reconstruction, in whole or in part, of the improvement within
three (3) years after its completion, if necessitated within that time by any
defective material, plans, methods, or processes, employed in the construction
of such improvement, and containing such other provisions as the City Council
may require. Such bond or bonds shall be executed by the contractor with a good
and solvent corporate surety thereon, authorized to do business in Texas, and
acceptable to the City Council, or with two (2) good, solvent and acceptable
personal sureties, if the council shall so elect.
   When the specifications have been adopted by the City Council, the city
secretary, or other officer designated by the council, shall advertise for
sealed bids for the construction of said improvements in accordance with the
specifications. Said advertisement shall be published one (1) or more times in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and shall state the times
prescribed by the council for receiving bids, which shall be not less than ten
(10) days from the first publication of said advertisement. Bids shall be filed
and opened by the City Manager or his or her designee. Said council may accept
such bid or bids, as it may deem most beneficial to the city and the owner of
the property abutting the proposed improvement, or may reject any and all bids,
and may accept different bids for parts of the improvement and accept such bid
or bids on different plans or methods, or for different materials, as it may
deem best. No bid shall be amended, revised or changed after being filed.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(XI), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 6 IMPROVEMENTS-CONTRACTS; SIGNATURE BY THE CITY MANAGER OR HIS OR HER
DESIGNEE.
   The bids having been accepted by the City Council, the city shall enter into
contract with the contractor, to whom the work is let, for its performance.
Such contract shall be signed by the city manager or his or her designee and
attested by the corporate seal affixed by the city secretary, or other officer
designated by the council, and shall be approved as to form by the City
Council.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(XII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 7 IMPROVEMENTS-LIMIT OF COST; ASSESSMENT; DEFERRED PAYMENTS; INTEREST;
ATTORNEY’S FEES.
   Exclusive of the cost of such improvement to be paid by railroads and street
railroads, as herein provided, the city, acting by the City Council, shall have
the power to assess the whole cost of constructing and reconstructing sidewalks
and curbs and other improvements against the owners of property abutting on the
highway or highways, or sections thereof, to be improved, who are especially
benefited thereby. But no part of such cost shall be assessed against any owner
of his property in excess of the special benefits thereto in enhanced value
thereof arising from the improvement, nor until after the notice and hearing
hereinafter provided for. The proportion of the cost assessed against any
property, or its owner, shall be in such proportion as the frontage of property
of each owner is to the whole frontage of property to be improved, and shall be
in accordance with the front foot rule or plan, unless, in the opinion of the
City Council, such rule would operate unjustly in particular cases, in which
event the City Council shall adopt such rule of apportionment as will effect
substantial equality and justice between property owners, having in view
benefits received and burdens imposed on such owner. The cost of paving street
intersections and public alleys shall be borne by the city.
   When the payment of any part of the cost of improvement assessed against any
property owners is deferred, the City Council shall have power to provide that
such payments shall bear interest at not to exceed eight (8) per cent per
annum, and shall have power to include in any assessment against such owners,
or their property, cost of collection and a reasonable attorney’s fees, when
such costs and fees are incurred.
§ 8 IMPROVEMENT-LISTS OF OWNERS; NOTICE TO OWNERS; PROTESTS; PROCEDURES.
   When the contract or contracts for improvements have been executed and
approved, if any part of the cost is to be assessed against property, or its
owner or owners, the director of public works shall at once prepare a statement
containing the names of persons, firms or corporations or estates owning
property abutting on the highway, or section thereof, to be improved and the
number of front feet owned by each, with such description by lot or block
number, or otherwise, sufficient to identify the same, and also containing an
estimate of the total cost of the proposed improvement, the cost per front foot
of abutting property. Said statement shall be examined by the City Council and
any errors therein corrected, but no error or omission shall invalidate any
assessment made thereunder. When said statement has been approved by the
council, it shall then determine and declare the necessity of assessing any
part of the cost of proposed improvements against such owners and their
property by resolution directing notice to be given to such owners and fixing
the time and place of a hearing to be given them. Such notice shall be signed
by the city secretary, or other officer designated by the council, and shall
state the time and place of hearing, the general nature of improvement
proposed, the highway or section thereof to be improved and the total amount
and amount per foot proposed to be assessed against owner and his property.
   Such notice shall be served by publishing same for three times, the first
being at least twenty-one days before the date of hearing, in the city’s
official newspaper and by mailing a copy thereof by letter deposited in the
post office of said city directed to the address of each owner, if known, but
if not known, then to the address of his agent or attorney, if known. Said
letters shall be posted at least fourteen (14) days before the day of said
hearing. Said notice and letter shall contain all the information required by
law. On the day fixed for said hearing or any time thereafter, before any
assessment is made, any person, firm, corporation or estate owning or having
any interest in any property proposed to be assessed for any part of the cost
of such improvement or against whom any personal charge is proposed, shall have
the right to appear before the City Council in person, or by attorney or agent,
and shall be entitled to a hearing as to all matters affecting said assessment
or personal liability, or the benefits of said improvement, if any, to property
proposed to be assessed and any objection to such assessment, or to the making
of such improvement or any invalidity or irregularity in the proceedings with
reference thereto, or any other objection. All objections shall be filed in
writing, and thereafter the opportunity shall be given to persons filing
objections to subpoena witnesses and produce testimony. Said hearing may be
adjourned from time to time until completed without further notice. The City
Council shall have power to inquire into and determine all facts necessary to
the adjudication of objections and the ascertainment of special benefits to
such owners by means of such improvements and shall render such judgment in
each case as shall be just and proper. Objections to the regularity of any
proceedings, or the validity of any assessment or charge of personal liability
against any person or property, shall be waived unless presented at the time
and in the manner herein specified.
§ 9 IMPROVEMENTS-ORDINANCE FIXING LIEN; PARTIAL PAYMENTS; INTEREST; RELEASE OF
LIEN; PERSONAL LIABILITY; JOINT OWNERSHIP; SALES UNDER LIEN; ORDINANCE; NOTICE
OF LIEN; ERRORS; EFFECT OF.
   When said hearing has been concluded, the City Council shall by ordinance,
which shall take effect from its passage, without publication or other
prerequisites, assess against the several owners of property, and their
property abutting on the highway or section thereof, ordered to be improved,
such part of the cost of improvement as said council may have adjudged against
them. Said ordinance shall fix a lien upon said property and declare the
respective owners thereof to be personally liable for the amounts assessed
against them, and shall state the time and terms of payment of such amounts.
The said ordinance shall prescribe the rate of interest upon deferred payments,
not exceeding the maximum set by law, and shall provide that failure to pay any
installment when due shall mature all of said deferred payments. But any owner
shall have the right to discharge any installment before maturity by the
payment of same with accrued interest to date of payment. The lien and charge
of personal liability above referred to shall secure and include all costs of
collection, including a reasonable attorney’s fee, when incurred. Upon payment
in full of any assessment against any such property, the city shall, acting by
its mayor, execute a release which shall discharge the lien thereof.
   More than one parcel or lot of land, the property of one owner, or owned
jointly by two (2) or more owners, may be assessed together without
invalidating said assessment or the lien thereof, or any claim of personal
liability. The cost of such improvement assessed against any property, or its
owner, together with interest as set by the City Council and costs of
collection, including reasonable attorney’s fees, when incurred, shall
constitute a personal claim against such property owner and be secured by lien
on such property superior to all other liens, claims or titles, except lawful
taxes, and such liability and lien may be enforced in any court having
jurisdiction, or by sale of such property by the officer, and in any manner, as
far as applicable, sales are authorized to be made for nonpayment of city
taxes, but it shall not be necessary to sell at the same time as for delinquent
taxes. The recital in any deed made in pursuance to such sales that all legal
prerequisites to the validity thereof have been complied with, shall be prima
facie evidence thereof, and without further proof shall be presumed to be true.
   The City Council may by resolution make such rules and regulations as may be
deemed proper to enforce collection of such assessments. Any error or omission
in any proceeding herein provided for shall be corrected by the council, and
shall not invalidate the said proceedings. The passage of such ordinance making
said assessment shall be notice to all persons of the lien created thereby.
§ 10 IMPROVEMENTS-SUIT BY OWNER; FIFTEEN DAYS LIMITATION; PRECEDENCE IN COURTS;
DEFENDANTS; SUSPENSION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Any person interested in any property assessed for such improvements, or
against whom any charge of personal liability may have been fixed, may, within
fifteen (15) days from the conclusion of the hearing above referred to, but not
thereafter, institute suit in any court having jurisdiction for the purpose, on
any ground, of testing the validity of said assessment or personal liability,
and the validity of any proceeding had with reference thereto; but is said
action be not brought within said period of fifteen (15) days, then said
persons, their heirs, successors, assigns, or personal representative, shall be
forever barred from asserting any defect in such proceedings or any invalidity
in said assessment or charge of personal liability, in any action in which the
same may thereafter be brought into question.
   The said city and the contractor to whom the work of improvement may have
been let, shall be made parties defendant to any suit brought under this
section. When any suit has been brought under the terms of this section, the
performance of any work may be suspended at the election of the city or the
contractor until said suit is finally determined, provided that any writ of
error or appeal from the judgment of the court in which said suit was brought
shall be perfected within thirty (30) days from the adjournment of the term of
the court of original jurisdiction at which final judgment shall thereafter be
taken or sued out, but any such suit shall be entitled to precedence in all
courts in this state, and any party may move in any court of an early hearing,
and such cases shall, in all courts, be entitled to be advanced on the docket
and speedily determined.
§ 11 IMPROVEMENTS-OMISSION OF PROPERTY FROM IMPROVEMENT; EFFECT OF.
   When the City Council has reason to believe that the owner of any property
may successfully claim the same as exempt from assessment, the council may
order that the improvement shall not be made in front of said property, unless
the owner shall first satisfactorily secure the payment of the amount which
would be assessed against the same, were it not exempt. When any part of the
cost of improvement is to be paid by such property owners or assessed against
their property and the contractor is required to look to such property or its
owners for the proportion of the cost assessed against them, and the city is
relieved from the payment of such cost, the contractor may or may not be
required to construct improvements in front of property which is exempt from
the enforcement of a lien for such cost. The omission of improvements in front
of such property on a highway or section thereof ordered to be improved, shall
not invalidate or affect any assessment against any other property located on
such highway, or section thereof, or charge of personal liability against the
owner thereof.
§ 12 IMPROVEMENTS-ON ONE SIDE OF HIGHWAY; ASSESSMENT OF COST.
   The City Council shall have power to order improvements made on only one
side of a highway or section thereof, and may assess part of the cost against
property and its owners abutting on said improvement as herein provided.
§ 13 IMPROVEMENTS-CORRECTION OF ERRORS; INVALID ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE TO
CORRECT; REASSESSMENT.
   If any error shall occur in any proceeding provided for by this chapter of
the Charter, it shall be the duty of the City Council to correct the same, and
whenever it shall be finally determined in any suit that any assessment or
charge of liability against any property, or its owner, is invalid or
unenforceable, for any reason, then it shall be the duty of the City Council at
once to reassess against said property and its owner such proportion of the
cost of improvement as may be proper, lawful and just, and the City Council
shall have power, and it shall be its duty, by ordinance or resolution, to
adopt such rules and regulations for a hearing to said owners before the
reassessment as may be necessary legally to bind such owners and property by
reassessment, and shall have power to adopt all other rules and regulations
requisite to such reassessment, or fixing a charge of personal liability
against such owners.
§ 14 IMPROVEMENTS-PETITION OF SIXTY PER CENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS; PROCEDURE;
PARTIAL PAYMENTS; INTEREST; PAYMENT BY CITY; ASSIGNMENT OF DEFERRED PAYMENTS;
STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   Whenever the owners of sixty (60) per cent of the front feet of property
abutting on any highway, or part or section thereof, in the city shall, in
writing, petition the City Council for the improvement thereof, and shall in
the petition agree to pay the cost of such improvement in front of their
respective properties, exclusive of any costs payable under the terms of this
Charter, by owners of railroads or street railroads, and shall generally
designate the nature and extent of the proposed improvement, the City Council
must order the making of said improvement; provided, only, that the City
Council shall be satisfied from the said petition, or other evidence before it,
that the payment of at least one-half of the total cost of improvement,
exclusive of cost to be paid by owners or railroads and street railroads, can
be secured by assessment against abutting property and its owner, or in some
other manner. When such petition has been filed and approved, the procedure of
the said council, the city and its officers, with respect to such improvement
and fixing, and assessing, apportioning and collecting the cost thereof, shall,
in all things be in compliance with the preceding and succeeding sections of
this chapter of the Charter, and the provisions thereof which shall apply in
all respects to proceedings under this section, except as in this section
otherwise provided. Where improvements are made under the terms of this
section, the work shall not begin until at least sixty (60) per cent of the
estimated cost thereof, exclusive of the amount to be paid by railroads or
street railroads has been assessed against the property abutting on the
proposed improvement, or against the owners thereof. When improvements are made
under the terms of this section, the proportion of the cost thereof assessed
against the owners of property, and their property shall be payable by them to
the city, or its assigns, in five (5) or more equal installments, the first of
which shall be due thirty (30) days after the completion and acceptance of the
improvement by the city, and the remainder in annual installments thereafter.
Deferred payments shall bear interest at not to exceed eight (8) per cent per
annum as may be fixed by the City Council, and default in the payment of any
installment of principal or interest, when due, shall, at the option of said
city, or its assigns, mature all unpaid installments, which shall, in such
event, without notice, become collectible.
   During the progress of and when improvements are completed under this
section, the city may pay to the contractor making same, the whole agreed cost
thereof, except amounts payable by the owner of railroads and street railroads,
under the terms of this chapter. But upon such payment by the city, the
contractor shall endorse and assign to the city, without recourse, all notes,
contracts, liens or other securities or obligations given to said contractor by
owners of abutting property to secure the payment of the cost of such
improvements. The owners of property against whom and whose property, however,
two-thirds of said cost shall have been assessed, shall pay the same to the
city or its assigns, in installments, as above set forth. But such owner shall
have the privilege of discharging said installments before maturity by paying
same with accrued interest to date of payment. Payments so made to the city, or
the proceeds of said assessments, if sold by the city, shall become part of the
permanent street improvement fund and be sacredly preserved therein, and shall
not be used in any manner except to make other permanent street improvements,
where the cost or part thereof is assessed against abutting property or its
owners.
§ 15 IMPROVEMENTS-CERTIFICATES, FORM OF; EXECUTED BY MAYOR; STREET IMPROVEMENT
FUND.
   The City Council may also authorize the issuance by the city of assignable
certificates against abutting property owners or against persons, firms,
corporations or estates using or occupying highways. Such certificates shall be
payable to the contractor, or to the city, should the city pay the whole cost
of improvements, as set out in Section 14, and the City Council shall fix the
form and terms of such certificates. The recital in such certificates that
proceedings with reference to such improvements have been made in compliance
with the terms thereof, and that all prerequisites to the fixing of the lien
and charge of personal liability evidenced by such certificates have been
performed, shall be prima facie of the facts so recited, and no other proof
thereof shall be required, but in all courts the said proceedings and
prerequisites shall, without further proof, be presumed to have been had and
performed. Such certificates shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the
city secretary, or such other officer as may be designated by the City Council,
with the corporate seal. Such certificate, when payable to the city, may be
sold by it as may be provided by the City Council, and the proceeds of said
sale shall become part of the permanent street improvement fund.
§ 16 IMPOUNDMENTS-VALIDATION OF OLD CONTRACTS.
   The City of Fort Worth having heretofore entered into contracts for the
pavement of streets or begun proceedings looking thereto, all provisions of the
preceding Charter and ordinances of the City of Fort Worth providing for the
construction of such improvements or assessment of the cost thereof against
owners of abutting property and their property, or the enforcement of such
assessment shall remain in full force for the purpose of effecting the
construction of the said improvements and assessing and collecting the cost
thereof, and all contracts entered into by the City of Fort Worth heretofore
for the same are hereby validated.
§ 17 [IMPROVEMENTS-ALTERNATIVE METHOD.]
   That all of the powers conferred by the act of the first called session of
the Fortieth Legislature, authorizing cities to improve streets and alleys and
make assessments for same, known as Chapter 106, and found on page 489 of said
Session Laws, be adopted as an alternative method, the provisions of which act,
or any one of them may be exercised by the City Council or other governing
authority whenever it is deemed advisable so to do.
CHAPTER XXIII: MERIT SERVICE
Section
   [
1   Establishment, regulation and maintenance]
[§ 1 ESTABLISHMENT, REGULATION AND MAINTENANCE.]
   Consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, the City Council
shall provide by ordinance for the establishment, regulation and maintenance of
a merit system, governing personnel policies, grievances and other procedures
and practices necessary to the effective administration of employees of the
City of Fort Worth.
CHAPTER XXIV: ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES; PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO
ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS
Section
   
1   Property subject to taxation
   
2   Levy and collection
   
3   [Repealed by Ord. 16797, § 1(XIII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006]
   
4   State law on assessment and collections applicable
   
5   Tax liens; seizure and sale for taxes; sale of personal property
   
6   Further powers of the City Council
   
7   Tax suits; delinquent taxes; limitations
   
8   [Repealed by Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989]
   
9   Delinquent taxes; appropriation of
   
10   Surplus funds; use of
   
11   Franchise; taxation of
   
12   Execution and garnishment; city not subject to
   
13   [Repealed by Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989]
   
14   Rate of taxation; real and personal property defined
   
15   [Repealed by Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989]
   
16   No rebates to be allowed on payment of city taxes; right to borrow funds
in anticipation of taxes
   
17   Occupation taxes; limit of; license fees; definition of
   
18   Issuance and sale of bonds.
   
19, 20   [Repealed]
   
21   Tax attorney; appointment and duties; corporation counsel may act.
   
22—35   [Repealed by Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989]
§ 1 PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAXATION.
   All property, real, personal or mixed, lying and being within the corporate
limits of the city on the first day of January, shall be subject to taxation,
excepting such property as may be exempt from taxation under the Constitution,
and the laws of the State of Texas. It shall be the duty of the tax assessor
and collector, in accordance with deadlines specified under state law, to make
and return to the City Council a full and complete list and assessment of all
property, both real and personal, held, owned or situated in the city on the
first day of January of each year and not exempt from municipal taxation.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-16-1989; Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2,
2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 2 LEVY AND COLLECTION.
   The City Council shall have full power to provide by ordinance for the
prompt collection of taxes assessed, levied and imposed under the Charter, and
is hereby authorized to enforce the collection of same against all property
subject to taxation and the owners thereof as provided by law. Unless otherwise
provided by ordinance and the Charter, all property in the city liable to
taxation shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the general
laws of the state insofar as applicable.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 3 [REPEALED BY ORD. 16797, § 1(XIII), 1-24-2006, APPROVED 5-13-2006].
§ 4 STATE LAW ON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTIONS APPLICABLE.
   Unless otherwise provided by this Charter and by ordinances passed
thereunder, all property in such city liable to taxation shall be assessed and
all taxes thereon collected in accordance with the provisions of general laws
of the state, insofar as applicable.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 5 TAX LIENS; SEIZURE AND SALE FOR TAXES; SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   In all cases where any dealer in goods or merchandise of any kind subject to
either ad valorem or occupation taxes, or both, under the provisions of this
Charter, shall, after the rendition of said goods, wares or merchandise for
taxation, or after becoming liable for any occupation tax, become or be
adjudged bankrupt, or make an assignment of said goods, wares or merchandise,
or sell out or transfer the same in bulk, then the assessor and collector of
taxes shall at once present to the trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, assignee or
vendee of said dealer for payment, a statement of the amount due for said
occupation or ad valorem taxes by said dealer, and in case of the failure of
the said trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, assignee or vendee to at once pay the
amount of said taxes, the said assessor and collector shall, by virtue of his
assessment roll, levy upon, seize and sell from the said goods, wares or
merchandise, enough to satisfy the amount of said taxes, interest and costs,
such sale to be conducted in the manner now prescribed for the personal
property under execution; and said taxes, until paid, shall be and constitute a
prior lien on all said merchandise, goods and wares in default of the payment
of said taxes; and whenever any goods, wares or merchandise shall be levied
upon or seized under any writ of attachment or execution, upon which the said
city has a claim for ad valorem or occupation taxes unpaid, said assessor and
collector shall present for payment to the officer levying said writ of
attachment or execution the amount due for taxes, interest and costs on said
goods, wares or merchandise, and in case of failure of said officers or of the
plaintiff in said writ to at once pay the amount of said taxes, said assessor
and collector shall proceed to levy upon, seize and sell enough of said goods,
wares or merchandise to satisfy the amount of said taxes, interest and costs as
hereinabove provided.
§ 6 FURTHER POWERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Unless otherwise provided by the Constitution or general laws of the state,
the City Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to do the following:
   (a)   To provide for the levying, assessment and collection of such taxes as
the council may determine;
   (b)   To provide for the prompt collection of all taxes assessed, levied and
imposed under this Charter;
   (c)   To sell or cause to be sold real as well as personal or mixed property
upon which taxes are delinquent and unpaid;
   (d)   To regulate the manner of making out tax lists or inventories and
appraisements of property therein and to prescribe the oath that shall be
administered on such rendition of property;
   (e)   To prescribe how and when property shall be rendered;
   (f)   To prescribe the number and form of assessment rolls;
   (g)   To fix the powers and duties of the tax assessor and collector;
   (h)   To prescribe the date the taxes must be paid and to prescribe the
amount of penalty, interest, attorney’s fees and costs which are owed on
delinquent taxes;
   (i)   To adopt such other measures as the council deems advisable to secure
the assessment of all property within the corporate limits of the City, and to
collect the taxes thereon; and
   (j)   To have and exercise all other powers and authority now conferred or
that may hereafter be conferred upon cities by the general laws of the State of
Texas.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 7 TAX SUITS; DELINQUENT TAXES; LIMITATIONS.
   All taxes due by property owners on any and all property in the City of Fort
Worth, as appears on the tax rolls of said city, may be collected by suit for
delinquency and by foreclosure of the lien thereon in any court having
jurisdiction of the same, and any person who shall purchase property encumbered
with a lien for taxes, shall be deemed as to such taxes, a delinquent taxpayer,
and such purchaser takes the property charged with the lien, and he cannot
interpose any defense which his vendor might not have interposed had he
continued to be the owner thereof. And no delinquent taxpayer shall have the
right to plead in any court, or in any manner rely upon any statute of
limitation by way of defense against the payment of any taxes or assessments
due from him or from her to the City of Fort Worth.
§ 8 [REPEALED BY ORD. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, APPROVED 5-6-1989].
§ 9 DELINQUENT TAXES; APPROPRIATION OF.
   The City Council of said city is authorized to appropriate all delinquent
taxes against which no demands are outstanding, and after the purposes for
which said taxes were levied have been fulfilled and satisfied, to any proper
municipal purpose, and the City Council is empowered at the end of each fiscal
year thereafter to declare such residue of said delinquent taxes a surplus and
to direct that the same, when collected, be carried in bulk, as a surplus
account, subject to appropriation by the council for proper municipal purposes,
under the provisions of this Charter.
§ 10 SURPLUS FUNDS; USE OF.
   At the end of each fiscal year, if any amount shall have accrued from
taxation or revenue received from dividends or stocks or surplus receipts or
earnings from any source, which are now or will be hereafter pledged to be
applied to interest and sinking fund for the protection of all classes of
outstanding bonds, or to be hereinafter issued, to exceed two (2) per cent for
sinking fund, then in that event, the surplus, if any, over and above the two
(2) per cent sinking fund, can be used for the purpose of making general
improvements, or otherwise, as the council may determine.
§ 11 FRANCHISE; TAXATION OF.
   All rights, privileges and franchises, heretofore or hereafter granted to be
held by any person, firm or corporation, in the streets, alleys, highways or
public grounds or places in said city, shall be subject to taxation by said
city separately from and in addition to the other assets of such person, firm
or corporation, and the council may require the rendition and assessment
thereof accordingly.
§ 12 EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT; CITY NOT SUBJECT TO.
   The property, real and personal, belonging to said city, shall not be liable
to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution, or cost bill. Nor shall
the funds belonging to said city in the hands of any person be liable to
garnishment; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt
it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand due or owing to any person.
Nor shall the city, or any of its officials or agents, be required to answer
any writ of garnishment on any account whatever.
§ 13 [REPEALED BY ORD. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, APPROVED 5-6-1989].
§ 14 RATE OF TAXATION; REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY DEFINED.
   The City Council shall have power to levy for general purposes an annual ad
valorem tax on all real, personal and mixed property within the territorial
limits of the City of Fort Worth, not exempt from taxation by the Constitution
and laws of the State of Texas, based upon the fair cash value thereof, to the
extent of the constitutional limit now permitted by the Constitution of the
State of Texas to cities of over five thousand (5,000) population, the same
being two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00)
of valuation, and which said tax shall embrace all taxes for municipal purposes
as provided in this Charter. The meaning of the term “real property,” as used
in this chapter shall be construed to mean lots, lands, and all buildings or
machinery and structures of every kind located upon or affixed to the same; and
the meaning of the term “personal property,” as used in this chapter, shall be
construed to include all household furniture, money, goods, chattels and
capital, and all franchises subject to taxation under this chapter of the
Charter, all stocks of corporations, money or otherwise, and generally all
property which is not real, including all buildings and improvements, machinery
and fixtures of every kind upon lots and lands not owned by the owner of the
said improvements.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(XIV), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 15 [REPEALED BY ORD. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, APPROVED 5-6-1989].
§ 16 NO REBATES TO BE ALLOWED ON PAYMENT OF CITY TAXES; RIGHT TO BORROW FUNDS
IN ANTICIPATION OF TAXES.
   The City Council shall not allow any rebate on the payment of city taxes in
order to accelerate payment of same. If, however, the taxes are slow coming in
and the council should find itself with insufficient funds after the beginning
of the fiscal year to provide for the budget appropriations temporarily, then
the council shall have the right to make short term notes and borrow a
sufficient amount of money, at the lowest rate of interest obtainable, for the
short period of time that may elapse until the tax payments shall be adequate
to meet the budget appropriations; said loan to be retired out of the tax
collections as soon as practicable.
§ 17 OCCUPATION TAXES; LIMIT OF; LICENSE FEES; DEFINITION OF.
   The City Council shall have the power to levy an occupation tax upon every
occupation, profession, calling and vocation upon which an occupation tax is
laid by the State of Texas; provided, however, that such occupation tax shall
not exceed one-half of the amount exacted and required by the State of Texas.
This tax shall be collected by the assessor and collector of city taxes and
shall be paid by every person or persons, association of persons, firms or
corporation which, under the laws of the State of Texas, are required to pay
occupation taxes in the state. Provided, further, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the city, in the use of its police power, from prescribing
license fees or police tax necessary and proper to enable the city to exercise
proper police surveillance over all persons, firms or corporations, or calling
subject to same.
§ 18 ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS.
   The City Council shall have authority to provide for the issuance and sale
of bonds for permanent improvements and for any other legitimate municipal
purpose as may be determined by the City Council. Such bonds shall be issued
and sold in accordance with the requirements of state law and in such manner as
the City Council may by ordinance determine.
§§ 19, 20 [REPEALED].
§ 21 TAX ATTORNEY; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES; CORPORATION COUNSEL MAY ACT.
   The City Council shall have the power, should it deem fit to do so, to
appoint a special attorney for the tax department of said city to be known as
the “tax attorney,” whose duty it shall be, under the supervision of the city
attorney, to press for collection and payment all unpaid and delinquent taxes
due the City of Fort Worth and to prosecute suits thereon in courts of
competent jurisdiction, whenever instructed so to do; or the City Council shall
have the power to require the performance of such work by the corporation
counsel, the prosecuting attorney, or other assistant to the corporation
counsel.
§§ 22—35 [REPEALED BY ORD. 10272, § I(VI), 3-16-1989, APPROVED 5-6-1989].
CHAPTER XXV: ORDINANCES
Section
   
1   Ordinances, rules and regulations existing at the time this Charter goes
into effect validated
   
2   Ordinances-Passage and publication; procedure; digest and revision;
franchises and easements; publication of
   
3   Ordinances-Publication in book form; certified copies; admissibility as
evidence
   
4   Ordinances-Approval of mayor not necessary
   
5   Ordinances-Revision and publication
   
6   Enacting clause
   
7   Ordinances to contain only one subject
§ 1 ORDINANCES, RULES AND REGULATIONS EXISTING AT THE TIME THIS CHARTER GOES
INTO EFFECT VALIDATED.
   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Fort Worth
heretofore ordained, passed or enacted that are in force at the time this
Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict therewith, shall
remain in full force and vigor, until altered, amended or repealed by the City
Council after this Charter takes effect. Provided, that said ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations have become in effect by the terms of the
Charter under which the same were enacted, and provided, further, that the same
were valid and authorized by said Charter.
§ 2 ORDINANCES-PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION; PROCEDURE; DIGEST AND REVISION;
FRANCHISES AND EASEMENTS; PUBLICATION OF.
   It shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it be read
more than one (1) time or considered at more than one (1) session of the
Council; but this provision shall not apply to the appropriation and budget
ordinance, which shall be controlled by the provisions relative thereto in
other portions of this Charter. Every ordinance imposing a fine, penalty or
forfeiture for the violation of its provisions shall, after the passage
thereof, be published twice in the official newspaper of the City or in lieu
thereof a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the
ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof may be published twice in the
official newspaper of the City, before such ordinance shall take effect. All
ordinances granting or confirming a franchise or easement over, across or upon
the streets, highways or public places of the City, shall be accepted in
writing by the grantees, and before taking effect a summary shall be published
once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks within a period of thirty (30) days
after its passage in the official newspaper of the City. But the time for
publication of any ordinance of the City may be extended beyond the period
herein provided by express provision to that effect, in which event such
ordinance shall not take effect until after the time therein expressly
prescribed. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from and
after their passage, unless otherwise therein expressly provided. No
publication of any ordinance shall be required excepting those imposing a fine,
penalty or forfeiture, or those granting a public easement or franchise, or the
general appropriation ordinance, as provided for in the Chapter of this Charter
dealing with the appropriation ordinance.
   Revised or digested ordinances published in pamphlet form by authority of
the City Council shall not be required to be published in any newspaper, and
the publication in pamphlet form of such ordinance shall be held and taken as
sufficient publication, notwithstanding such ordinance may impose a fine,
penalty or forfeiture, or should contain a grant of easement or public
franchise.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(XV), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 3 ORDINANCES-PUBLICATION IN BOOK FORM; CERTIFIED COPIES; ADMISSIBILITY AS
EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances of the City of Fort Worth, published or complied in book or
pamphlet form by the City shall be presumed to have been by and with the
authority of said City, and shall be admitted as evidence in all courts, state
and federal, without further proof beyond the production of said printed book
or pamphlet; and provided, further, that copies of ordinances, resolutions,
minutes and proceedings of the City Council, or prior governing bodies of the
City of Fort Worth, certified by the city secretary to be true copies of the
originals, with the seal of the city affixed thereon, shall also be admitted in
evidence without further proof in all said courts.
§ 4 ORDINANCES-APPROVAL OF MAYOR NOT NECESSARY.
   The final passage of an ordinance by the council and the publication of the
same when so required shall be all that is necessary to make such ordinances
valid and effective. The approval or signature of the mayor shall not be
necessary.
§ 5 ORDINANCES-REVISION AND PUBLICATION.
   It shall be the duty of the City Council, as soon as practicable after the
adoption of this Charter, to provide for a revision, codification and
publication of all the ordinances in force at that time in the city, and
thereafter provide for a similar revision and publication as often as they may
deem advisable.
§ 6 ENACTING CLAUSE.
   Every ordinance passed by the City Council shall begin with the following
heading: “Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Fort Worth.”
§ 7 ORDINANCES TO CONTAIN ONLY ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances and resolutions, except ordinances making appropriations,
shall be confined to one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in the
title. The ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of
appropriations.
CHAPTER XXVI: FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
   
1   Power of City Council to fix and regulate the rates, tolls and charges of
all public utilities in the city
   
2   Certain extensions may be granted by council
   
3   Franchise ordinances submitted to vote at expense of beneficiaries
   
4   Franchises and privileges; definition of as applied to public streets and
highways; power of council to regulate
   
5   Franchises subject to control by city; no exclusive franchise granted
   
6   Council to pass ordinance requiring all public service corporations to file
annual report
§ 1 POWER OF CITY COUNCIL TO FIX AND REGULATE THE RATES, TOLLS AND CHARGES OF
ALL PUBLIC UTILITIES IN THE CITY.
   The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix and regulate the
price of water, gas, electric lights, electric power and steam heat, and to
regulate and fix the fares, tolls and charges of local telephone service and
charges of street railways and of all public buses, carriages, hacks and
vehicles of every kind, whether transporting passengers, freight or baggage,
and generally to fix and regulate the rates, tolls and charges of all public
utilities of every kind operating within the corporate limits of the City of
Fort Worth.
§ 2 CERTAIN EXTENSIONS MAY BE GRANTED BY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the right to grant unto any steam, street or
interurban railway company the right for extensions, connections, branches or
changes of or with the lines or tracks of any such companies on any of the
streets or alleys of said city for a distance of not to exceed one mile in
length, and unto any electric or motor interurban line the right to enter and
operate on the streets of said city over the tracks of some other railway line,
upon such terms and conditions as they may prescribe; provided, that all
ordinances granting such rights shall run coexistent with the life of the
franchise under which said lines or railway are operated.
§ 3 FRANCHISE ORDINANCES SUBMITTED TO VOTE AT EXPENSE OF BENEFICIARIES.
   All propositions for public utilities, or ordinances granting franchise
rights, which are to be submitted to a referendum vote, shall be published by
title, and in full, at least once a week for four consecutive weeks immediately
preceding said election in at least two (2) newspapers published in the City of
Fort Worth, and the City Council may require that any and all expenses
occasioned by said referendum vote shall be paid by the person or persons or
corporations applying for the franchise.
§ 4 FRANCHISES AND PRIVILEGES; DEFINITION OF AS APPLIED TO PUBLIC STREETS AND
HIGHWAYS; POWER OF COUNCIL TO REGULATE.
   The right to use the public streets, highways, alleys and thoroughfares of
this city, which necessitates the digging up, or displacement thereof, for the
installation of equipment, appliances or appurtenances, either on, above or
below the surface of the same, to make the intended use thereof practicable,
shall be deemed and considered a “franchise,” granting of which shall be
governed and controlled in the manner herein provided.
   The use of the said public streets, highways, alleys and thoroughfares of
this city, which does not require the digging up or similar interference with
said streets, alleys or highways for the installation of equipment, appliances
or appurtenances, to make the intended use possible, shall be treated and
considered as a “privilege,” subject to the control and disposition of the City
Council, and such privilege over and upon the said public streets, alleys,
highways and thoroughfares of the city shall not be granted to any person or
corporation excepting when public necessity and convenience may require such
use and when given by ordinance passed by a two-thirds vote of the City
Council.
§ 5 FRANCHISES SUBJECT TO CONTROL BY CITY; NO EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments of public utility franchises,
whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the
right of the city:
   (a)   To require proper and adequate extensions of plant and service, and
the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practicable standard
of efficiency;
   (b)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   (c)   To prescribe the form of accounts and at reasonable times to examine
and audit the accounts and other records of such public utilities;
   (d)   To impose other reasonable regulations conducive to the safety,
welfare and accommodation of the public.
   Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of this Charter, whether such terms and conditions are
specifically mentioned in the franchise or not. No exclusive franchise or
extension or renewal thereof shall ever be granted.
§ 6 COUNCIL TO PASS ORDINANCE REQUIRING ALL PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS TO FILE
ANNUAL REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass an ordinance requiring all
public service corporations operating within the corporate limits of the city
to file a sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of the said
business for the current year, how expended, how much therefor for betterments
or improvements, the rate of tolls or charges for services rendered to the
public, and any other facts or information that the council may deem pertinent
for its use in intelligently passing upon any questions that may arise between
the city and the said public service corporations; said reports to be filed
with the city secretary, and preserved for the use of the City Council.
CHAPTER XXVII: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
1   Succession of rights; suits, claims, etc., of old corporation vested in new
corporation
   
2   Officers under old Charter to hold until expiration of term and
qualification of successors
   
3   City plan commission
   
3a   [Approval of plans, plats, etc., lying within five miles of city limits]
   
4   Art commission; authorizing creation of same by ordinance of council
   
5   Citizens given preference in the letting of contracts and in employment
   
6   [Repealed by Ord. 16797, § 1(XVI), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006]
   
7   [Repealed by Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(XI), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016]
   
8   [Repealed by Ord. 16797, § 1(XVII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006]
   
9   Council to provide construction codes; supervision and inspection of
buildings; power to condemn and remove buildings dangerous to the health,
safety and welfare of the public and assessment costs
   
10   Water supply; right to acquire same either in or out of the corporate
limits
   
11   Power of City Council to provide funds in cases of extraordinary public
disaster or calamity
   
12   Franks, free ticket and passes prohibited
   
13   Competitive bidding for contracts; approval of contracts by City Council
   
14   Change orders, alterations or modifications of contracts
   
15   Power to appoint boards or commissions of citizens
   
16   Officers or employees of the city not to have financial interest in any
contracts of the city
   
17   Contracts for official advertising; official newspaper
   
18   Official newspaper; rates of advertising
   
19   Contingent fund
   
20   Public work and improvements constructed by city forces
   
21   Providing public notice by electronic and web based publications where
allowed by state law
   
22   Rate of taxation not to exceed one dollar ninety cents per one hundred
dollars valuation of taxable property; subject to be increased to two dollars
fifty cents per one hundred dollars of valuation, provided such increase be
voted by the electorate in elections held to determine same from time to time
   
23   [Repealed]
   
24   No property of any kind exempt from local improvement taxes
   
25   Notice of claim of damages as prerequisite to suit
   
26   Elections; council to provide for holding same; counting returns and
declaring result
   
27   Oath of office
   
28   [Repealed]
   
29   Budget estimates to be furnished city manager by all departments not under
his immediate direction by the fifteenth day of August of each year
   
30   Right of council to create a temporary loan to supplement the revenues of
the city required to conduct the city’s affairs to the end of the fiscal year,
where the taxes contemplated in fixing the budget estimates should fall below
such estimates
   
31   Zoning ordinances; power to pass
   
31A   [State law authorizing passage of zoning regulations adopted]
   
32   Enumeration of powers herein not exclusive of other powers
   
33   Charter to become effective notwithstanding some section or portion
thereof should be held invalid
   
34   When Charter takes effect
   
35   Authority of council to fix boundary limits without consent of inhabitants
of territory annexed; procedure, etc
   
36   [Employee’s retirement fund]
§ 1 SUCCESSION OF RIGHTS; SUITS, CLAIMS, ETC., OF OLD CORPORATION VESTED IN NEW
CORPORATION.
   All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures and all other rights, claims and
demands, which have accrued under the laws heretofore in force governing the
City of Fort Worth, shall belong to and be vested in and shall be prosecuted by
and for the use and benefit of the corporation hereby created, and shall not in
anywise be diminished, affected or prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect
of this Charter.
§ 2 OFFICERS UNDER OLD CHARTER TO HOLD UNTIL EXPIRATION OF TERM AND
QUALIFICATION OF SUCCESSORS.
   The present city commission of Fort Worth, and all the officers of said
city, elected by popular vote under the provisions of the preceding Charter,
shall continue to serve and hold their respective offices until their
respective terms of office shall have expired, and until their successors have
been duly elected and qualified.
§ 3 CITY PLAN COMMISSION.
   The City Council shall by ordinance provide for the creation of a city plan
commission, and provide for not less than seven (7) as the number of members
composing the same, their tenure of office, the scope of activities of said
commission, and making provision for the maintenance and upkeep of the same.
§ 3a [APPROVAL OF PLANS, PLATS, ETC., LYING WITHIN FIVE MILES OF CITY LIMITS.]
   That all of the provisions of Chapter 231 of the General and Special Laws of
the State of Texas, found on page 342 of the General and Special Laws of the
State of Texas passed by the Fortieth Legislature at the regular session
thereof, and known as Senate Bill No. 277, being an act to provide for the
approval by municipal authorities before filing of plans, plats or replats or
land lying in or within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of cities having
a population of twenty-five thousand (25,000) persons or over, be and the same
are hereby adopted.
§ 4 ART COMMISSION; AUTHORIZING CREATION OF SAME BY ORDINANCE OF COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall by ordinance provide for the creation of an art
commission, and provide for the number of members composing the same, their
tenure of office, the scope of activities of said commission, and making
provision for the maintenance and upkeep of the same.
§ 5 CITIZENS GIVEN PREFERENCE IN THE LETTING OF CONTRACTS AND IN EMPLOYMENT
[REPEALED].
§ 6 [REPEALED BY ORD. 16797, § 1(XVI), 1-24-2006, APPROVED 5-13-2006].
§ 7 [REPEALED BY ORD. 22081-02-2016, § 2(XI), 2-2-2016, APPROVED 5-7-2016].
§ 8 [REPEALED BY ORD. 16797, § 1(XVII), 1-24-2006, APPROVED 5-13-2006].
§ 9 COUNCIL TO PROVIDE CONSTRUCTION CODES; SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION OF
BUILDINGS; POWER TO CONDEMN AND REMOVE BUILDINGS DANGEROUS TO THE HEALTH,
SAFETY AND WELFARE OF THE PUBLIC AND ASSESSMENT COSTS.
   The City Council shall pass ordinances as permitted by law for the
employment of all necessary construction codes, and providing for the
inspection and supervision for all structures and buildings within the city and
for the inspection and condemnation of hazardous buildings and structures and
for the removal thereof and the assessment of costs thereof. The city shall
have full power to condemn all dangerous buildings or obstruction of every
kind, and shall provide regulations therefor by ordinance.
§ 10 WATER SUPPLY; RIGHT TO ACQUIRE SAME EITHER IN OR OUT OF THE CORPORATE
LIMITS.
   The City Council is hereby vested with authority to purchase, lease or
otherwise acquire all lands and personal property, whether situated inside or
outside of the city, necessary or requisite for creating and preserving an
adequate water supply or extending the same for said city, and to carry and
transport such water to consumers and the inhabitants thereof for domestic,
business, manufacturing or other purposes.
§ 11 POWER OF CITY COUNCIL TO PROVIDE FUNDS IN CASES OF EXTRAORDINARY PUBLIC
DISASTER OR CALAMITY.
   In cases of extraordinary public disaster or calamity necessitating the
expenditure of funds beyond those contemplated by the appropriation budget, the
City Council shall have the power to obtain the necessary funds to meet such
unexpected contingencies in whatever way and manner they deem most advisable,
and the limitations prescribed in other portions of this Charter prohibiting a
greater expenditure than that provided for by the appropriation budget shall
not apply in this character of cases.
§ 12 FRANKS, FREE TICKET AND PASSES PROHIBITED.
   No councilperson or other officer or employee of the city shall accept any
frank, free ticket, pass or service directly or indirectly, from any person,
firm or corporation operating a public service utility within the city upon
terms more favorable than are granted to the public generally. Violation of the
provisions of this section shall be made a misdemeanor by proper ordinance.
§ 13 COMPETITIVE BIDDING FOR CONTRACTS; APPROVAL OF CONTRACTS BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   All city contracts calling for or requiring the expenditure or payment
of an amount required by state law to be submitted to competitive bids must be
submitted to competitive bids in accordance with state law. The city shall have
the right to reject any and all bids. Any contract submitted to competitive
bids shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, quality considered.
   (b)   The City Council shall by ordinance establish rules by which a
contract may be signed by the city manager without City Council approval;
provided, however, that a contract which is required to be bid and which is let
to other than the lowest bidder shall be first approved by the City Council.
All contracts other than those prescribed by ordinance which allow the city
manager to sign same without City Council approval shall be approved by the
City Council and shall not be binding upon the city unless or until so
approved.
   The provisions of this section, as amended, shall take effect on January 1,
1984.
§ 14 CHANGE ORDERS, ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRACTS.
   (a)   When it becomes necessary to make changes in the plans or
specifications after performance of a contract for public works has been
commenced, or it becomes necessary to decrease or increase the quantity of work
to be performed, such change, alteration, or modification shall be made only
when a change order therefor is authorized by the City Council upon the written
recommendation of the city manager. Provided, however, that the City Council
may by ordinance establish rules by which a change order may be executed by the
city manager without the requirement of City Council authorization.
   (b)   No such change, alteration or modification of a contract shall be
valid unless the price to be paid for the work has been agreed upon in writing
and signed by the contractor and the city manager upon authorization of the
City Council, where required.
   (c)   The total contract price shall not be increased unless due provision
has been made to provide for the payment of such added cost by appropriating
available funds for that purpose.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VII), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 15 POWER TO APPOINT BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS OF CITIZENS.
   The City Council may, at the request of the city manager, or upon their own
motion, appoint boards or commissions to be composed of such number of citizens
as the council may deem expedient to act in an advisory capacity in conjunction
with any one or more of the departments created or authorized hereby. The
members of such boards or commissions shall serve without compensation, and may
be removed at any time by a majority vote of the council.
§ 16 OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY NOT TO HAVE FINANCIAL INTEREST IN ANY
CONTRACTS OF THE CITY.
   No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct
or indirect, in any contract with the city, or be financially interested,
directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials,
supplies, or services, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee.
An officer or an employee of a bank that serves as the city’s depository bank
shall be deemed not to have a financial interest in the city’s contract. Any
willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and
any officer or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office
or position. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, expressed or
implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City Council, shall
render the contract involved voidable by the city manager or the City Council.
(Ord. 16797, § 1(XVIII), 1-24-2006, approved 5-13-2006)
§ 17 CONTRACTS FOR OFFICIAL ADVERTISING; OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.
   The City Council shall periodically let contracts for the official
advertising of the city. For this purpose, the council shall advertise for
bids, setting forth distinctly and specifically the work to be done, including
the type and space to be used, and asking for sealed bids therefor. The
advertisement for bids must be published twice. The second publication must be
on or before the tenth day before the first date bids may be submitted. The
council shall let the contracts for such official advertising to the lowest and
best responsible bidder publishing a newspaper in the City of Fort Worth, which
is a newspaper of general circulation, which newspaper has been published in
said city for at least two (2) consecutive years prior to the time of awarding
the contracts, and which newspaper meets all applicable requirements of state
law for the publication of legal notices for the City of Fort Worth; provided
that the council may reject any and all bids, if found excessive, and advertise
for new bids. The newspaper to which the award of such advertising is made
shall be known and designated as the official newspaper of the city. All
official publications made by the city shall be made in the official newspaper.
(Ord. 10272, § I(VIII), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989; Ord. 25328-02-2022, § 2,
2-8-2022, approved 5-7-2022)
§ 18 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER; RATES OF ADVERTISING.
   All election notices, department reports, ordinances, charters or charter
amendments, advertising, publicity of affairs or other publications required or
authorized by this Charter, or by any ordinance of the city, to be made in any
newspaper, and all such publications for which the City of Fort Worth may be
liable, shall be paid for by the city at such rates as shall not in any event
exceed the ordinary and regular advertising rates charged other advertisers. No
bill shall be paid by the city for such advertising or printing in excess of
the lowest prevailing business rates.
§ 19 CONTINGENT FUND.
   Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the annual appropriation
ordinance for a reasonable contingent fund for use in any of the administrative
departments of the city. Such contingent fund shall be under the control of the
city manager and distributed by and with the approval of the City Council. In
case of emergency, upon written request by the head of any department, stating
the facts constituting such emergency, the city manager shall bring the same to
the attention of the City Council and, if approved by him and by the council,
he shall in writing authorize the transfer from the contingent fund to the
credit of the department making such request of a sum sufficient to meet the
proposed emergency expenditure. He shall transmit a copy of such written
authority to the city controller and likewise to the department making such
request. Upon the receipt by the city controller of such copy, the said fund
shall be available for the purposes aforesaid, and shall be charged against the
appropriation set apart for such department.
§ 20 PUBLIC WORK AND IMPROVEMENTS CONSTRUCTED BY CITY FORCES.
   When authorized by the City Council, public work and improvements may be
constructed by city forces in accordance with ordinances and policies adopted
by the City Council concerning same.
§ 21 PROVIDING PUBLIC NOTICE BY ELECTRONIC AND WEB BASED PUBLICATIONS WHERE
ALLOWED BY STATE LAW.
   The city may provide public notice by utilizing electronic and other web
based publications and notices as a substitute for newspaper publications where
allowed by State law. Electronic and web based publications and notices shall
meet any content or deadlines or other date requirements established by law or
rule for publishing that notice in a newspaper. The notice or link must be
placed in a prominent place on the home page of the City’s website.
(Ord. 22081-02-2016, § 2(X), 2-2-2016, approved 5-7-2016)
§ 22 RATE OF TAXATION NOT TO EXCEED ONE DOLLAR NINETY CENTS PER ONE HUNDRED
DOLLARS VALUATION OF TAXABLE PROPERTY; SUBJECT TO BE INCREASED TO TWO DOLLARS
FIFTY CENTS PER ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS OF VALUATION, PROVIDED SUCH INCREASE BE
VOTED BY THE ELECTORATE IN ELECTIONS HELD TO DETERMINE SAME FROM TIME TO TIME.
   The limit of taxation for all municipal purposes shall not exceed one and
ninety/one-hundredths ($1.90) dollars per annum on each one hundred ($100.00)
dollars valuation of all taxable property situated within the limits of the
city, such rate to be fixed and determined by the Council annually when passing
the appropriation ordinance.
   The said rate of taxation may be annually increased, from time to time, by
the council until the constitutional limit of two and fifty/one-hundredths
($2.50) dollars on each one hundred ($100.00) dollars valuation of taxable
property, shall have been reached; provided that any increase of the annual
rate of taxation beyond the one and ninety/one-hundredths ($1.90) dollars limit
here established shall never be valid unless first authorized by a majority
vote of the qualified voters participating in an election lawfully held for
that purpose. No more than one election in any one year shall ever be held for
such purpose.
§ 23 [REPEALED].
§ 24 NO PROPERTY OF ANY KIND EXEMPT FROM LOCAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES.
   No property of any kind, church, school, or otherwise, in the City of Fort
Worth shall be exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized
by this Charter for local improvements.
§ 25 NOTICE OF CLAIM OF DAMAGES AS PREREQUISITE TO SUIT.
   Before the City of Fort Worth shall become liable for damages for death,
personal injury or damage to property, the person injured or the owner of the
property damaged, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results
in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by
reason of such death, shall file with the City Council written notice of such
death, injury, or damage within one hundred eighty (180) days after the same
has been sustained, unless good cause is shown for the claimant’s failure to
file the notice before the expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days. The
written notice must reasonably describe the damage or injury claimed, the date
and location of the injury or damage, how the injury or damage occurred, the
amount of damages, the amount for which the claimant will settle, the residence
address of the claimant, the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom the
claimant relies to establish his claim, and, if such notice is not filed within
one hundred eighty (180) days, the circumstances establishing good cause for
such failure to file. The notice requirements provided by this section do not
apply if the City of Fort Worth has actual notice within one hundred eighty
(180) days that the death or injury has occurred or that the property has been
damaged.
(Ord. 10272, § I(IX), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 26 ELECTIONS; COUNCIL TO PROVIDE FOR HOLDING SAME; COUNTING RETURNS AND
DECLARING RESULT.
   The City Council shall make all necessary regulations concerning elections,
the manner and method of holding same, by proper ordinances enacted for that
purpose. Such regulations, however, shall be in keeping with the provisions of
this Charter and shall be in keeping and consistent with the provisions of the
state law applicable to elections in municipalities, insofar as the same may be
practicable. The council shall provide for the examination and counting of the
returns of elections, declare the result thereof and issue all proper
certificates to the successful candidates; and it is hereby made the duty of
the council to examine and count the returns at its first regular meeting after
the election is held; and, if no regular meeting shall be held within one week
after an election is held, it is hereby made the duty of the mayor to call a
special meeting of the council for the purpose of counting the votes and
determining the result of the election within one week after the election is
held, and the officers declared to be elected at such election shall be
entitled to qualify immediately after the declaration of the council of the
result of the election and upon taking the oath of office prescribed by law.
   Until changed or modified by the council elected after the adoption of this
Charter, the election laws in force at the time this Charter becomes effective
shall continue to operate and control in the matter of all elections held
within the city.
§ 27 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, to be filed and kept in
the office of the city secretary, that he will support, protect and defend the
Constitution and laws of the United States and of the State of Texas, and in
all respects faithfully discharge the duties of his office or position. This
provision shall apply to the city manager and to the heads of departments.
§ 28 [REPEALED].
§ 29 BUDGET ESTIMATES TO BE FURNISHED CITY MANAGER BY ALL DEPARTMENTS NOT UNDER
HIS IMMEDIATE DIRECTION BY THE FIFTEENTH DAY OF AUGUST OF EACH YEAR.
   Every department of the city government not under the direct control of the
city manager shall by not later than the fifteenth day of August of each year
furnish to the city manager, for use in the preparation of his recommendations
to the council regarding the annual budget, a detailed budget estimate of the
needs and requirements of such department for the coming year.
§ 30 RIGHT OF COUNCIL TO CREATE A TEMPORARY LOAN TO SUPPLEMENT THE REVENUES OF
THE CITY REQUIRED TO CONDUCT THE CITY’S AFFAIRS TO THE END OF THE FISCAL YEAR,
WHERE THE TAXES CONTEMPLATED IN FIXING THE BUDGET ESTIMATES SHOULD FALL BELOW
SUCH ESTIMATES.
   Whenever the revenues of the city for any fiscal year should, before the end
of such fiscal year, fall below the allowances set apart in the budget for the
maintenance and operation of the various departments of the city government for
that year, due to unavoidable shortage in the collection of taxes or other
revenues relied upon by the city at the time of making the annual budget
appropriation for said year, then, in such contingency, the council shall have
the right to borrow, at the lowest obtainable rates, the amount necessarily
required to conduct the operations of the city government for the remainder of
the fiscal year; but the total amount of such indebtedness hereby authorized to
be created shall not exceed ten (10) per cent of the total budget
appropriation. The council shall, as security for the repayment of said loan,
be authorized to pledge the uncollected taxes for said fiscal year, and it
shall be their duty to retire the said loan out of the proceeds of said taxes
as fast as collections thereof shall be made.
§ 31 ZONING ORDINANCES; POWER TO PASS.
   The city shall have the power to pass zoning ordinances permitted by law.
§ 31A [STATE LAW AUTHORIZING PASSAGE OF ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED].
   That all of the powers granted by Chapter 283, page 424 of the General and
Special Laws of the Fortieth Legislature of Texas and known as House Bill No.
87 authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass zoning regulations be
adopted.
§ 32 ENUMERATION OF POWERS HEREIN NOT EXCLUSIVE OF OTHER POWERS.
   The enumeration of particular powers of this Charter shall not be deemed or
held to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied
thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City of Fort Worth shall
have and may exercise all other powers which are now, or may hereafter be,
possessed or enjoyed by cities of over five thousand (5,000) population under
the Constitution and the general laws of the State of Texas, and all the powers
of the city, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and embraced in
the manner prescribed by this Charter, or when not so prescribed, then in such
manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
§ 33 CHARTER TO BECOME EFFECTIVE NOTWITHSTANDING SOME SECTION OR PORTION
THEREOF SHOULD BE HELD INVALID.
   If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the
validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this
Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section
of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a
section is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section
or part of a section so held to be unconstitutional or invalid; it being here
declared that the citizens voting for this Charter would have voted for the
same with such objectionable or invalid section or part of a section omitted
therefrom.
§ 34 WHEN CHARTER TAKES EFFECT.
   For the purpose of nominating and electing officers and exercising the
powers of the city as provided herein, this Charter shall take effect from the
time of its approval by the electors of the city. For the purpose of
establishing departments, divisions and officers, and distributing the
functions thereof, and for all other purposes, it shall take effect at the time
the council elected at the first election held under this Charter shall take
office.
§ 35 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO FIX BOUNDARY LIMITS WITHOUT CONSENT OF INHABITANTS
OF TERRITORY ANNEXED; PROCEDURE, ETC.
   The City Council shall have power, by ordinance, to fix the boundary limits
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, and to provide for the alteration and the
extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional territory
lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the territory and
inhabitants annexed. In fixing said boundary limits, the city shall comply with
the procedures prescribed by state law. Upon passage of any such ordinance, the
boundary limits of the city shall thereafter be fixed in such ordinance; and
when any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be part of the
City of Fort Worth, Texas, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro
rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be
entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens, and shall be
bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city.
(Ord. 10272, § I(X), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 36 [EMPLOYEE’S RETIREMENT FUND].
   (a)   There shall be a retirement system for the employees of the city which
shall be known as the “Employees’ Retirement Fund of the City of Fort Worth.”
The employees’ retirement fund may provide a system of retirement and
disability benefits for all municipal employees who become disabled as a direct
and proximate result of the performance of their duties, or as a regard for
faithful service over a period of years. The mayor, members of the council,
members of boards and commissions, and part-time or temporary employees are not
entitled to participate in the employees’ retirement fund.
   (b)   Such system shall be governed by a board of directors composed of such
members and selected in such manner as may be provided by ordinance of the
council, provided that municipal employees shall have representation on the
board.
   (c)   Such system shall be financed by a retirement fund created by
contributions of the members and of the city, in a manner as may be provided by
ordinance of the council.
   (d)   The City of Fort Worth shall have and enjoy all of the powers and
authority heretofore granted by the statutes and Constitution of the State of
Texas and that may hereafter be so granted affecting pensions for its officers
and employees.
CHAPTER XXVIII: DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT
Section
   
1   Established
   
2   City internal auditor-Appointment; qualifications; compensation
   
3   Term, removal, absence or disability of city internal auditor
   
4   Powers and duties of department of internal audit
   
5   Appointment of employees
   
6   Independent audit
§ 1 ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be a department of internal audit which is charged with
conducting financial, fiscal compliance, and financial procedure audits of all
city departments, offices, agencies and programs.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 2 CITY INTERNAL AUDITOR-APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION.
   The department of internal audit shall be under the direction and control of
the city internal auditor, who shall be recommended by the manager and
appointed by the City Council. The city internal auditor must be a person
knowledgeable in public financial and fiscal theory, municipal accounting and
auditing, and public administration. The city internal auditor’s compensation
shall be fixed by the City Council.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 3 TERM, REMOVAL, ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF CITY INTERNAL AUDITOR.
   The city internal auditor shall not be appointed for a definite fixed time
but shall be removable at the will and pleasure of the City Council by a vote
of not less than a majority of the entire council. If removed after serving six
(6) months, the city internal auditor may demand written charges and the right
to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the City Council prior to the date
on which the city internal auditor’s final removal shall take effect, but
pending such hearing the City Council may suspend the city internal auditor
from office. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the city
internal auditor shall be final. In case of the absence or disability of the
city internal auditor, the City Council may designate some qualified person to
perform the duties of the office.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 4 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT.
   Consistent with other provisions of this Charter, the City Council shall by
ordinance provide for the powers and duties of the department of internal
audit.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 5 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   Within the budget approval process and personnel procedures established by
the City Council for all departments, the city internal auditor shall have the
power to appoint, employ and remove such assistants, employees and personnel as
he may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the
department of internal audit and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of
authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
§ 6 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   This chapter shall not be deemed to repeal or amend
Chapter X, section 11, of this Charter.
(Ord. 10272, § I(XI), 3-16-1989, approved 5-6-1989)
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
References to Texas Codes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
 
Statutory References                Charter Section
Election Code, Article 2.01b        Ch. XIX, § 1
Local Government Code, Sec. 150.041 Ch. III, § 8 [note]
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Adoption Date Date Approved Ord. Section Charter Section
Ord. No.      Adoption Date Date Approved Ord. Section Charter Section
1377          - -           2-14-1928                 Charter
1720          - -           7-21-1931                 Charter
2379          - -           12-18-1946                Charter
5091          - -           1-31-1964                 Charter
7292          - -           4-8-1975                  Charter
7293          - -           1-26-1976                 Charter
-             - -           - -                       Charter
10272         3-16-1989     5- 6-1989     I(I)         Ch. III, § 3
                                       I(II)        Ch. III, § 4
                                       I(III), (IV) Ch. IV, § 2
                                       I(V)         Ch. V, § 7
                                                       Ch. XXIV, §§ 1,
                                       I(VI)        2,
                                                       4,
                                                       6
                                       Rpld         Ch. XXIV, §§ 8, 13, 15,
                                                       22—35
                                       I(VII)       Ch. XXVII, § 14
                                       I(VIII)      Ch. XXVII, § 17
                                       I(IX)        Ch. XXVII, § 25  
                                       I(X)         Ch. XXVII, § 35  
                                       I(XI)        Ch. XXVIII, §§ 1—
                                                       6
16797         1-24-2006     5-13-2006     1(I)         Ch. III, § 3
                                       1(II)        Ch. III, § 5
                                       1(III)       Ch. III, § 4
                                       1(IV)        Ch. IV, § 2
                                       1(V)         Ch. III, § 5
                                       1(VI)        Ch. III, § 8
                                       1(VII)       Ch. IV, § 1
                                       1(VIII)      Ch. IV, § 3
                                       1(IX) Rpld   Ch. V, § 4
                                       1(X)         Ch. XXI, § 5
                                       1(XI)        Ch. XXII, § 5
                                       1(XII)       Ch. XXII, § 6
                                       1(XIII) Rpld Ch. XXIV, § 3
                                       1(XIV)       Ch. XXIV, § 14
                                       1(XV)        Ch. XXV, § 2
                                       1(XVI) Rpld  Ch. XXVII, § 6
                                       1(XVII) Rpld Ch. XXVII, § 8
                                       1(XVIII)     Ch. XXVII, § 16
22081-02-2016 2-2-2016      5-7-2016      2(II)        Ch. III, § 1
                                       2(II)        Ch. III, § 2
                                       2(II), (V)   Ch. III, § 5
                                       2(XI)        Ch. III, § 8
                                       2(VI)        Ch. IV, § 1
                                       2(II), (VI)  Ch. IV, § 3
                                       2(VII)       Ch. VII, § 3
                                       2(VIII)      Ch. X, § 2
                                       2(IX)        Ch. X, § 6
                                       2(XI) Rpld   Ch. XXVII, § 7
                                       2(X)         Ch. XXVII, § 21
25328-02-2022 2-8-2022      5-7-2022      2(XII)       Ch. I, § 3
                                       2(II)        Ch. IV, § 3
                                       2(V)         Ch. IX, § 1
                                       2(XIII)      Ch. X, § 11
                                       2(VI) Rpld   Ch. XV, § 1
                                       2(IV)        Ch. XIX, § 1
                                       2(IV)        Ch. XX, § 3
                                       2(VII)       Ch. XXI, § 5
                                       2(VIII)      Ch. XXII, § 4
                                       2(IX)        Ch. XXIV, § 1
                                       2(XI)        Ch. XXVII, § 17
                                                    
 
PART II: CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1   How code designated and cited
   
1-2   Rules of construction and definitions
   
1-3   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
1-4   Catchlines of sections
   
1-5   Severability of parts of code
   
1-6   General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
   
1-7   Ordinances—Amendments or additions to code
   
1-8   Same—Recording; ordinance books as evidence
   
1-9   Prosecution not required to negative exceptions
   
1-10   City exempt from posting bond
   
1-11   Reserved
   
1-11.1   Standard of care for emergency action
   
1-12   Certain ordinances not affected by code
§ 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the “Code of the City of Fort Worth, Texas,”
and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as “Fort Worth City Code.”
(1964 Code, § 1-1)
Charter reference:
   Council to provide for periodic revision and publication of ordinances, see
Ch. XXV, § 5
Statutory reference:
   Provisions of Home Rule Act as to codification of ordinances, Texas Local
Government Code Ch. 53; provisions of state law in regard to admission of
printed codes in evidence, see Texas Local Government Code § 53.006
§ 1-2 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council.
   CITIZEN. Unless otherwise defined, a citizen shall be a person who resides
within the city limits of Fort Worth.
   CITY. The words “the city” or “this city” shall mean the City of Fort Worth,
in the County of Tarrant and State of Texas.
   CITY SECRETARY, CHIEF OF POLICE OR OTHER OFFICERS. The words “city
secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officers or departments shall be
construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. In computing a period of days, the first day is
excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next
day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If a number of months is
to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on
the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from
which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the
concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month.
   COUNCIL. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are
used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Fort
Worth, Texas.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city
officer or employee to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be
construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required
inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designates otherwise.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   HIGHWAY. The term “highway,” when used herein, shall include any street,
alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels
and causeways, in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Charter reference:
   Similar provision, see
Ch. XXII, § 2
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   MONTH. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7)
   NUMBER. Any words importing the singular number shall include the plural and
any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
   OATH. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 23(4)
   OR, AND. “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or” if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant
or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations,
corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as
to individuals. The knowledge and acts of agents or employees of corporations
or firms shall be held to be the knowledge and acts of such corporation or
firm.
Statutory reference:
   “Person” to include “corporation,” see V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011
(10)
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   ROADWAY. The word “roadway” shall mean that portion of a street improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK. The word “sidewalk” shall mean any portion of the street between
the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. The word “signature” or “subscription” shall
include a mark when a person cannot write.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14); references
to state statutes may be cited as follows: “V.A.C.S.,” “V.T.C.S.;” “Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat. Ann.;” “Revised Civil Statutes;” “Revised Civil Statutes of Texas.”
   STREET. The term “street,” when used herein, shall include any highway,
alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels and
causeways, in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Ch. XXII, § 2
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   WRITTEN OR IN WRITING. The words “written” or “in writing” shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18)
§ 1-3 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so
far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the
adoption of “The Code of the City of Fort Worth,” shall be considered as a
continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
(1964 Code, § 1-2)
§ 1-4 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1964 Code, § 1-3)
Charter reference:
   Corporate seal, see
Ch. II, § 1
§ 1-5 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the
incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section.
(1964 Code, § 1-4)
§ 1-6 GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF CODE; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine.
   (b)   A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police
regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation,
including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000, nor exceed $500 for all
other violations.
   (c)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of
this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed
$500 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is
hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that exceeds $500 shall require a culpable mental state as
specified by Tex. Penal Code § 6.02(c).
   (d)   If the amount of any penalty imposed by this code or in any ordinance
conflicts with a penalty amount specified by state law, the penalty amount
specified by state law shall govern.
   (e)   Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any
violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1964 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 10423, § 1, passed 10-31-1989; Ord. 23569-02-2019, §
1, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Courts, see
Ch. 10
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, see
Ch. 23
   Police,
Ch. 27
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for ordinance violations, see V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003
§ 1-7 ORDINANCES—AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO CODE.
   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such
ordinances, hereinafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment,
shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions
to, this code. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the
chapter and section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall
bear an appropriate designation of chapter and section.
(1964 Code, § 1-7)
Charter reference:
   Charter provision as to ordinances, resolutions, etc., generally, see
Ch. XXV, §§ 1 to
7
   Charter provision providing that the ayes and noes shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances or resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the
proceedings of the council and requiring a majority vote for final passage, see
Ch. III, § 5
§ 1-8 SAME—RECORDING; ORDINANCE BOOKS AS EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances adopted or passed by the city council shall be inscribed at
large by the city secretary, not only in the minutes of the council, but also
in a special book to be kept for that purpose by the city secretary, and
wherein at the foot of each ordinance so inscribed the city secretary shall
make a note stating the time of the adoption of such ordinance. Such book of
ordinances and all copies and extracts therefrom shall be evidence of the tenor
and contents of the ordinances therein inscribed, as well of such as have been
heretofore or as may be hereafter therein so inscribed.
(1964 Code, § 1-8)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions of state law in regard to admission of printed codes in evidence,
see Tex. Local Government Code § 53.006
§ 1-9 PROSECUTION NOT REQUIRED TO NEGATIVE EXCEPTIONS.
   In any prosecution for any violation of this code, it shall not be necessary
for the prosecution to negative any provisions of exception, but the same may
be raised by the defendant by way of defense.
(1964 Code, § 1-9)
§ 1-10 CITY EXEMPT FROM POSTING BOND.
   It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the
city shall be a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in
behalf of the city; but all such actions, suits and proceedings shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been
given.
(1964 Code, § 1-10) (Ord. 7198, § 1, passed 7-21-1975)
§ 1-11 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1(A) of Ord. 11592, adopted June 6, 1994, repealed §
1-11 in its entirety. Formerly, §
1-11 pertained to state of emergency and derived from §
1-11 of the 1964 Code and § 1 of Ord. 8023, adopted December 27, 1979.
    For current provisions regarding emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5 of this code.
§ 1-11.1 STANDARD OF CARE FOR EMERGENCY ACTION.
   Every officer, agent or employee of the city, including, but not limited to,
every unit of government or subdivision thereof, while responding to emergency
calls or reacting to emergency situations, regardless of whether any
declaration of emergency has been declared or proclaimed by a unit of
government or subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized to act or not to act in
such a manner to effectively deal with the emergency. An action or inaction is
“effective” if it in any way contributes or can reasonably be thought to
contribute to preserving any lives or property. This section shall prevail over
every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the
authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care
in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee, agent or
officer thereof, or other unit of government or subdivision thereof or its
employees, agents or officers, shall be liable for the failure to use ordinary
care in such emergency.
(Ord. 9528, § 1, passed 12-12-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 9528, adopted December 12, 1985, adding §
1-12 to the 1964 Code, has been included herein as §
1-11.1 at the editor’s discretion.
§ 1-12 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (a)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect
any ordinance:
      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s
indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
      (2)   Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates
therefor;
      (3)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city;
      (4)   Making any appropriation;
      (5)   Levying, imposing or otherwise concerning taxes not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (6)   Establishing or prescribing street or road grades in the city;
      (7)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
      (8)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
      (9)   Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
      (10)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city
officers or employees, not inconsistent with this code;
      (11)   Prescribing traffic or parking regulations for specific streets or
portions thereof, not inconsistent with this code;
      (12)   Pertaining to zoning;
      (13)   Adopted after November 18, 2014;
      (14)   All ordinances in effect upon the effective date of this code not
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this code which are omitted from
such revision or codification; and
      (15)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general
and permanent nature.
   (b)   And all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. Such
ordinances are on file in the city secretary’s office.
(Ord. 21653-02-2015, § 2, passed 2-17-2015)
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   APPOINTED OFFICIALS
      
III.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
IV.   DEPARTMENTS UNDER CONTROL OF THE CITY MANAGER
      
V.   HUMAN RESOURCES
      
VI.   RESERVED
      
VII.   CODE OF ETHICS
      
VIII.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
      
IX.   PERSONAL LIABILITY INDEMNITY PLAN
      
X.   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
      
XI.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
      
XII.   FEE SCHEDULES
Cross-reference:
   Courts, see
Ch. 10
   Department of aviation and aviation advisory board, see §§
3-16 et seq.
   Department of public health, see §§
16-31 et seq.
   Department of public libraries, see §§
19-16 et seq.
   Emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5
   Fire department, see §§
13-21 et seq.
   Human relations commission, see §§
17-16 et seq.
   Office of utilities supervision, see §§
28-16 et seq.
   Park and recreation department, see §§
24-36 et seq.
   Planning and development department, see §§
2-310 et seq.
   Police, see
Ch. 27
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Section
Article I. In General
   
2-1   City council—Special meetings
   
2-2   Same—Voting, rules of procedure
   
2-3   Inquiries into officers, employees—Authority of city
   
2-4   Same—Uncooperative witnesses
   
2-5   Same—Attachments and other appropriate writs
   
2-6   Disposition of collected money
   
2-7   Payment of city taxes
   
2-8   Tax certificates
   
2-9   Contract execution; amendments; change orders
   
2-10   Regulations applicable to certain appointed city officials and their
departments
   
2-11   Convenience fees and services charges
   
2-12   Reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred by members of the city
council in performance of their official duties
   
2-13   Conveyance of tax foreclosure property to eligible housing nonprofit
organizations for the development of low income housing
   
2-14   Procedures for granting local preferences in purchasing and contracting
for certain personal property and services
   
2-15   Former city officers
   
2-16—2-25   Reserved
Article II: Appointed Officials
Division 1: City Manager
   
2-26   City manager
   
2-27   Divisions of the city manager
Division 2: City Attorney
   
2-28   City attorney
Division 3: City Secretary
   
2-29   City secretary
   
2-30   Copying, typing, materials, fee
   
2-31   Disposition of fees
   
2-32   Assistance city secretary and assistant to the city secretary—Offices
created
   
2-33   Same—Duty in absence of city secretary
Division 4: City Auditor
   
2-34   Established
   
2-35   City internal auditor, appointment, qualification, compensation
   
2-36   Term; removal; absence or disability of city internal auditor
   
2-37   Administration, powers and duties of the department of internal audit
   
2-38   Appointment of employees
   
2-39—2-45   Reserved
Article III: Boards and Commissions
Division 1: Generally
   
2-46   Role of the city secretary’s office
   
2-47   Appointment process for boards and commissions that are structured
utilizing by-district representation
   2-48—2-55   Reserved
Division 2: Art Commission and Public Art Program
   
2-56   Purposes
   
2-57   Definitions
   
2-58   Fort Worth art commission created; composition; term
   
2-59   Powers and duties
   
2-60   Administration of the public art plan
   
2-61   Funding
Division 3: Composition and Role of By-District Boards and Commissions
   
2-62   Aviation advisory board—created; composition; appointment; compensation
   
2-63   Board of adjustment
   
2-64   Building Standards Commission
   
2-65   Community development council
   
2-66   Historic and cultural landmarks commission
   
2-67   Library advisory board
   
2-68   Park and recreation advisory board
   
2-69   Pedestrian and bicycle advisory commission
   
2-70   Plan commission
   
2-71   Urban design commission
   
2-72   Zoning commission
   2-73—2-79   Reserved
Division 4: Rules and Procedures for Certain City Boards
   
2-80   Sunset provisions
   
2-81   Absence rule
   
2-82   Reserved
   
2-83   Number of members and terms of service; establishment of places
Division 5: The Community Development Council
   
2-84   Reserved
   
2-85   Community development council
   
2-86   Administrative support
   
2-87   Power and duties
   2-88—2-95   Reserved
Article IV: Departments Under Control of the City Manager
Division 1: Information Technology Solutions
   
2-96   Establishment and supervision of department
   
2-97   Department employees
   
2-98   Department duties
   
2-99   Executive steering committee
Division 2: Department of Diversity and Inclusion
   
2-100   Establishment and supervision
   
2-101   Appointment of employees
   
2-102   Duties
Division 3: Department of Planning and Data Analytics
   
2-103   Establishment and supervision
   
2-104   Appointment of employees
   
2-105   Duties
Division 4: Department of Development Services
   
2-106   Establishment and supervision
   
2-107   Appointment of employees
   
2-108   Duties
   
2-109   Building official
   
2-110   Reserved
Division 5: Department of Financial Services
   
2-111   Establishment; duties
   
2-112   Director appointment; qualifications; compensation
   
2-113   Appointment of employees
   
2-114   General duties of the director
   
2-115, 2-116   Reserved
   
2-117   Returned check charge
   
2-118   Reserved
Division 6: Department of Human Resources
   
2-119   Establishment and supervision
   
2-120   Appointment of employees
   
2-121   Duties
Division 7: Department of Property Management
   
2-122   Establishment and supervision
   
2-123   Appointment of employees
   
2-124   Duties
Division 8: Department of Aviation
   
2-125   Establishment, supervision and funding
   
2-126   Appointment of employees
   
2-127   Duties
Division 9: Department of Municipal Court Services
   
2-128   Establishment and supervision
   
2-129   Appointment of employees
   
2-130   Duties
Division 10: Fire Department
   
2-131   Established
   
2-132   Appointment of employees
   
2-133   Duties
Division 11: Department of Public Libraries
   
2-134   Established; supervision
   
2-135   Duties
   
2-136   Appointment of employees
Division 12: Department of Park and Recreation
   
2-137   Established
   
2-138   Duties
   
2-139   Appointment of employees
Division 13: Police Department
   
2-140   Established
   
2-141   Duties
   
2-142   Executive assistance chief
Division 14: Department of Code Compliance
   
2-143   Established
   
2-144   Duties
   
2-145   Appointment of employees
Division 15: Department of Transportation and Public Works
   
2-146   Established
   
2-147   Director—Appointment; salary; qualifications
   
2-148   Same—Powers and duties
   
2-149   Appointment of employees
Division 16: Department of Water
   
2-150   Established
   
2-151   Duties
   
2-152   Appointment of employees
Division 17: Department of Communications and Public Engagement
   
2-153   Established
   
2-154   Duties
   
2-155   Appointment of employees
   
2-156—2-160   Reserved
Division 18: Department of Public Events
   
2-161   Established; director
   
2-162   Appointment of employees
   
2-163   Duties of director
Division 19: Department of Economic Development
   
2-164   Establishment and supervision of department
   
2-165   Department employees
   
2-166   Department duties
   
2-167—2-170   Reserved
Division 20: Department of Neighborhood Services
   
2-171   Establishment and supervision of department
   
2-172   Department employees
   
2-173   Department duties
Division 21: Department of Environmental Services
   
2-174   Creation and establishment of department of environmental services
   
2-175   Appointment of employees
   
2-176   Duties
Division 22: Department of Office of Medical Director
   
2-177   Creation and establishment of department of office of medical director
   
2-177.1   Appointment of employees
   
2-177.2   Duties
   
2-177.3—2-177.4   Reserved
Division 23: Department of Emergency Management and Communications
   
2-177.5   Creation and establishment
   
2-177.6   Appointment of employees
   
2-177.7   Duties
   
2-177.8   Emergency communications
   
2-177.9   Office of emergency management
   
2-177.10 Emergency operations authority
   
2-177.11 Interdepartmental and external coordination
   
2-177.12—2-177.14   Reserved
Article V: Human Resources
   
2-178   Merit system
   
2-179   Merit principles
   
2-180   Coverage of the system
   
2-181   Dismissal, suspension or demotion
   
2-182   Disciplinary appeal process
   
2-183   Designation of hearing officer
   
2-184   Personnel rules and regulations
   
2-185   Certification of payroll vouchers
   
2-186   Political activities
   
2-187   Unlawful acts
   
2-188   Penalties
   
2-189   Residency requirements for city employees; standards for response by
certain city employees to civil emergencies
   
2-190   Retired employee health coverage
   
2-191—2-200   Reserved
Article VI: Reserved
   
2-201—2-235   Reserved
Article VII: Code of Ethics
Division 1: Generally
   
2-236   Declaration of policy
   
2-237   Definitions
   
2-238   Standards of conduct
   
2-239   Disclosure of interest
   
2-239.1   Effect of written opinion of city attorney
Division 2: Ethics Review Commission
   
2-240   Creation and organization
   
2-241   Jurisdiction and powers; meetings
   
2-242   Staffing
   
2-243   Reserved
Division 3: Hearing Officers
   
2-244   Appointments
   
2-245   Jurisdiction and powers
   
2-246   Reserved
Division 4: Disposition of Alleged Violations; Hearings
   
2-247   Complaints
   
2-248   Legal counsel
   
2-249   Reserved
   
2-250   Standards of conduct
   
2-251   Hearings
   
2-252   Sanctions to be imposed or recommended
   
2-253   Appeal of certain determinations
   
2-254   Criminal penalties
   
2-255   Subpoenas
   
2-256   Evidence of criminal conduct
   
2-257   Postponement of hearings in certain cases
   
2-258—2-260   Reserved
Division 5: Financial Disclosure by Officers and Candidates
   
2-261   Definitions
   
2-262   Personal financial statement
   
2-263   Forms for statements
   
2-264   Public records; inspection
   
2-265—2-275   Reserved
Article VIII: Records Management
   
2-276   Policy
   
2-277   Scope
   
2-278   Definitions
   
2-279   Records management program
   
2-280   Municipal archive
   
2-281   City records
   
2-282   Prohibitions on destruction of city records
   
2-283   Duties of the city council
   
2-284   Duties of the city manager
   
2-285   Records management officer
   
2-286   Records management policy committee
   
2-287   Records management plan
   
2-288   Department director duties
   
2-289   Departmental records liaison officers
   
2-289.1   Records control schedules
   
2-289.2   Destruction of city records
   
2-289.3   City right to city records
   
2-289.4   Criminal offense
Article IX: Personal Liability Indemnity Plan
   
2-290   Definitions
   
2-291   Coverage
   
2-292   Cooperation of plan member required
   
2-293   Limits of coverage
   
2-294   Exclusions
   
2-295   Subrogation
   
2-296   Defense and legal representation
   
2-297   No defenses waived
   
2-298   No creation of cause of action
   
2-299   City motor vehicle coverage
   
2-300   Reserved
Article X: Reserved
   
2-301—2-303   Reserved
Article XI: Reserved
   
2-310—2-320   Reserved
Article XII: Fee Schedules
   
2-321   Development application fees
   
2-322   Penalties and mitigation fees
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 2-1 CITY COUNCIL—SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The mayor, mayor pro tem or any three of the council members may call a
special meeting of the city council to be held at such hour and date as may be
specified in the notice calling such meeting, which notice must be given to
each member of the council personally, if possible, after reasonable effort has
been exerted; otherwise, notice for the purpose in this section shall be deemed
sufficient if a written notice calling such meeting is left at either the
business or residence address of each member prior to the time such meeting is
held.
(1964 Code, § 2-2)
Charter reference:
   Meetings, see
Ch. III, § 5
   Nominating and electing members of council, see
Ch. IV, §§ 1 through
3
§ 2-2 SAME—VOTING, RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   No member of the city council shall be excused from voting except on matters
involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct, or where his or
her financial interests are involved. The council shall determine its own rules
of procedure, and may punish its members for misconduct, and may compel the
attendance of absent members.
(1964 Code, § 2-2.1) (Ord. 8613, § 1, passed 8-3-1982)
§ 2-3 INQUIRIES INTO OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES—AUTHORITY OF CITY.
   The city council, the city manager or any person or committee authorized by
either the city council or the city manager, or both of them, shall have power
to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, officer or employee of
the city, to make investigations as to city affairs, and, for that purpose, the
mayor, city manager or any member of such committee may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence
material to such inquiry. Such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum may be served
by any police officer of the city or any sheriff or constable of the state, or
by any person deputized or authorized to do so by the mayor, city manager or
any member of the committee.
(1964 Code, § 2-3)
§ 2-4 SAME—UNCOOPERATIVE WITNESSES.
   Every person who voluntarily appears, or who, having been summoned as a
witness by the authority of the city council or the city manager, or both of
them, to give testimony or to produce books, papers and other evidence material
to the inquiry being conducted by the city council, city manager or any
committee authorized by either the city council or the city manager, or both of
them, willfully makes default or refuses to answer any question pertinent to
the matter under investigation, or refuses to obey any subpoenas or fails to
produce books, papers and other evidence required by them, or any of them,
shall be deemed guilty of contempt and may be fined as provided in §
1-6 of this code.
(1964 Code, § 2-4)
Charter reference:
   Council to provide by ordinance penalties for failure to comply with
subpoenas or furnish books, etc., in connection with investigation, see
Ch. V, § 7
§ 2-5 SAME—ATTACHMENTS AND OTHER APPROPRIATE WRITS.
   The mayor, city manager or any member of any committee authorized under §
2-3 shall have the power to issue and have executed attachments and other
appropriate writs to enforce the jurisdiction conferred by §§
2-3 and
2-4 of this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 2-5)
§ 2-6 DISPOSITION OF COLLECTED MONEY.
   It shall be the duty of all officers and employees collecting or obtaining
money from any other person, belonging to the city, or of which the city may be
custodian, to promptly deliver to and deposit such money with the city
treasurer.
(1964 Code, § 2-6)
§ 2-7 PAYMENT OF CITY TAXES.
   It shall be the duty of every person owing any taxes to the city to pay the
same at the office of the city assessor-collector of taxes before the last day
of December of the same year for which the assessment on which such taxes are
due is made.
(1964 Code, § 2-7)
Cross-reference:
   City taxation generally, see
Ch. 32
§ 2-8 TAX CERTIFICATES.
   The assessor-collector of taxes, or his or her authorized deputy shall, upon
request, issue a certificate showing the amount of taxes and penalty due, if
any, on property located within the city and described in such certificate. A
charge of $4 shall be made for each separate lot, tract or parcel of land
certified to by the assessor-collector of taxes or his or her authorized
deputy.
(1964 Code, § 2-8)
Cross-reference:
   City taxation generally, see
Ch. 32
Statutory reference:
   V.T.C.A., see Tax Code § 31.08
§ 2-9 CONTRACT EXECUTION; AMENDMENTS; CHANGE ORDERS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, all contracts, including claim
and lawsuit settlement agreements, to which the city is a party shall be
approved by the city council prior to execution by the city manager. As used in
this section, the term CITY MANAGER shall also include assistant city manager.
   (b)   The city council hereby adopts and the city manager is authorized to
implement:
      (1)   Use of the best value selection criteria for eligible transactions
as authorized by state law;
      (2)   Use of electronic bid and proposal processing, provided that
appropriate rules for procedure and security have been adopted and implemented;
      (3)   Use of the online reverse auction procedure where authorized and
appropriate;
      (4)   Use of interlocal contracts with entities outside the State of
Texas where authorized and advantageous to the city.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any contract or other
legal instrument for the sale, purchase or lease of real property shall be
approved by the city council prior to the execution or acceptance of the city
manager. The following may be executed without city council approval:
      (1)   Leases that:
         a.   1.   Involve an annual city expenditure amount not exceeding
$50,000; or
            2.   Involve the city as landlord; and
         b.   1.   Have a month-to-month term; or
            2.   Have a term not exceeding 31 days; and
      (2)   Licenses, except for those that involve use of public right of way
for a period in excess of six months.
   (d)   Provided that sufficient funds have previously been appropriated by
the city council, the city manager may execute the following without city
council approval:
      (1)   Any contract or purchase order involving an expenditure of $100,000
or less of city funds, provided that the contract award otherwise complies with
applicable state law;
      (2)   Any amendment or change order to a contract or purchase order
involving an expenditure of $100,000 or less of city funds, except that the
city manager may not execute any of the following without city council
approval:
         a.   An amendment or change order that causes the total expenditure
under the contract or purchase order to exceed $100,000 or any subsequent
amendment or change order that causes the total expenditure under the contract
or purchase order to exceed $100,000 since the last amendment approved by the
City Council;
         b.   An amendment or change order to any non-public works contract or
purchase order over $50,000 that is subject to the competitive procurement
requirements under Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 252; or
         c.   An amendment or change order to any public works contract over
$50,000 that is subject to the competitive procurement requirements under Tex.
Local Government Code Chapter 252, and that was originally advertised before
September 1, 2011.
      (3)   Any contract or other legal instrument for the lease, license or
use of facilities at the Will Rogers Memorial Center;
      (4)   Any contract or other legal instrument for the lease, license or
use of facilities at the Fort Worth Convention Center;
      (5)   The vacation of a water, sanitary sewer, public or quasi-public
utility or drainage easement;
      (6)   Temporary and permanent easements granted to the city and valued at
less than $100,000;
      (7)   Consent agreements for encroachments into public property which
comply with the Building Code §
7-47 adopting, among other things, Chapter 3210 of the International Building
Code; and provided further, that the city manager may authorize the building
official and development services director to execute such agreements;
      (8)   Any contract for the purchase of electricity provided that:
         a.   The term of any such contract does not exceed 120 months; and
         b.   Sufficient funds have previously been appropriated by the city
council for that purpose.
      (9)   Any contract for an emergency procurement. An EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT
is defined as a procurement made because of a public calamity that requires the
immediate appropriation of money to relieve the necessity of the city's
residents or to preserve the property of the municipality; a procurement
necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety of the city's
residents; or a procurement necessary because of unforeseen damage to public
machinery, equipment or other property, and is exempt from the competitive
procurement requirements pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 252, as
amended; and
      (10)   Any contract or other legal instrument for the construction and/or
maintenance of a stormwater management facility in accordance with all
standards and ordinances then in force and effect.
      (11)   Any contract or other legal instrument necessary to provide public
assistance from funds available under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act, as may be amended, or from funds available under the
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, as may be amended.
   (e)   Any contract for which the best value selection criteria are not
authorized, that is submitted to competitive bids and is proposed to be awarded
to a bidder other than the lowest bidder shall be approved by the city council
before execution by the city manager.
(Ord. 20533-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 21284-06-2014, § 1, passed 6-
10-2014; Ord. 22556-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-13-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23946-
11-2019, § 1, passed 11-19-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020;
Ord. 24166-04-2020, § 1, passed 4-29-2020; Ord. 24719-02-2021, § 1, passed 2-
23-2021; Ord. 24830-05-2021, § 1, passed 5-11-2021)
§ 2-10 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN APPOINTED CITY OFFICIALS AND THEIR
DEPARTMENTS.
   (a)   As used in this section, APPOINTED CITY OFFICIAL shall mean the
following officials who are appointed by the city council: city manager, city
attorney, city secretary, city internal auditor and judges of the municipal
courts.
   (b)   The city council shall annually evaluate appointed city officials on
or before September 15 of each year.
   (c)   Annual budgets of departments which are headed by appointed city
officials shall be submitted as part of the city manager’s proposed budget. The
budgets of these departments shall be subject to the same administrative review
as other city departments before such budgets are reviewed by the city council.
Final adoption of the budgets for these departments shall be by the city
council.
   (d)   Departments which are headed by appointed city officials shall be
subject to the same fiscal and budgetary policies as other city departments.
   (e)   Except when otherwise provided in the City Charter or the city code,
appointed city officials and the employees in their departments shall be
governed by the personnel rules of the city and the classification plan for
city employees.
(Ord. 10910, § 1, passed 9-3-1991)
§ 2-11 CONVENIENCE FEES AND SERVICES CHARGES.
   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 132, as amended, to the
extent any fine, permitting fee, or other financial obligation owed to the city
is paid utilizing a credit card, there is hereby established and authorized a
convenience fee charge equal to two-and-one-half percent (2.5%) of the amount
of such payment as a convenience fee to the customer in order to reimburse the
city for the merchant processing costs such credit card transaction would
otherwise impose on the city.
(Ord. 27978-09-2025, § 2, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 2-12 REIMBURSEMENT OF NECESSARY EXPENSES INCURRED BY MEMBERS OF THE CITY
COUNCIL IN PERFORMANCE OF THEIR OFFICIAL DUTIES.
   (a)   Purpose. The City Charter provides that the city shall pay all
necessary expenses incurred by members of the city council in the performance
of their official duties. This section establishes procedures to be followed in
reimbursing members of the city council for such expenses.
   (b)   Applicability. This section applies to reimbursement of members of the
city council for all necessary expenses incurred by the city council in
performance of their official duties.
   (c)   Definitions.
      NECESSARY EXPENSES.
         a.   Expenses that are reasonable and necessary for a member of the
city council to incur in the performance of his or her official duties. Such
expenses may include, but are not limited to, expenditures for personal
automobile usage, telephone calls and postage and costs of travel related to
official city business.
         b.   NECESSARY EXPENSES do not include expenditures for:
            1.   Political advertising or political purposes;
            2.   Personal entertainment;
            3.    Compensation of additional council assistants or personnel to
assist a council member; or
            4.   Personal expenditures that are not related to a council
member's official duties.
      POLITICAL ADVERTISING. A communication supporting or opposing a candidate
for nomination or election to a public office or office of a political party, a
political party, a public office or a measure that:
         a.   In return for consideration, is published in a newspaper,
magazine or periodical or is broadcast by radio or television; and/or
         b.   Appears in a letter, pamphlet, circular, flier, billboard or
other sign, bumper sticker or similar form of written communication.
   (d)   Procedures.
      (1)   The annual budget shall include a specified amount which shall be
available to reimburse each member of the city council for necessary expenses
that he or she incurs during the fiscal year.
      (2)   In adopting this section, the city council agrees to follow
procedures to be adopted by the city manager that address reimbursement of
travel and non-travel related out-of-pocket expenses for elected officials with
such policy to provide for basic documentation of such expenses, including
required receipts.
      (3)   Reimbursement forms completed in accordance with the city manager's
policy shall be reviewed by the chief of staff or deputy chief of staff for the
mayor and city council. That review shall consist of ensuring forms are
complete and determining whether budgeted funds are available to pay the amount
shown. Following this review, the reimbursement request shall be forwarded to
city staff charged with processing accounts payable for payment.
(Ord. 12654, § 1, passed 9-3-1996; Ord. 24815-04-2021, § 1, passed 4-20-2021)
§ 2-13 CONVEYANCE OF TAX FORECLOSURE PROPERTY TO ELIGIBLE HOUSING NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOW INCOME HOUSING.
   (a)   Definitions.
      AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing is considered affordable if the monthly
housing cost does not exceed 30% of the household’s monthly gross income. For
homebuyers, housing cost includes the payment of principal, interest, taxes and
insurance. For renters, it means the amount of rent paid, not to exceed the
fair market rent for comparable units in the area as determined by HUD. For
multifamily projects, at least 20% of the units should be affordable to low
income households.
      APPLICATION FEE. A non-refundable $100 fee charged by the city to process
the application of an eligible housing nonprofit organization for the
conveyance of tax foreclosure property in accordance with this section.
      COSTS AND EXPENSES. Costs and expenses shall mean the costs and expenses
as provided in Tex. Tax Code §§ 34.02 and 34.06.
      ELIGIBLE HOUSING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. A current and active nonprofit
organization which meets the following requirements:
         a.   1.   A nonprofit corporation described by 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)
that:
               i.   Has been incorporated in the State of Texas for at least
one year;
               ii.   Has a corporate purpose to develop affordable housing that
is stated in its articles of incorporation, bylaws or Charter;
               iii.   Has at least one-fourth of its board of directors
residing in Fort Worth; or
               iv.   Engages primarily in the building, repair, rental or sale
of housing for low income individuals and families (“low income households”).
            2.   A nonprofit organization that develops housing for low income
households as a primary activity to promote community-based neighborhood
revitalization in the City of Fort Worth.
         b.   Has a satisfactory record in leasing, acquiring, building or
rehabilitating residential property and selling the property to low income
households for the two years immediately preceding the application;
         c.   Demonstrates financial and management capacity to complete
projects on the property after acquisition;
         d.   Has the capability, upon conveyance of the property, to obtain
insurance to cover liabilities that may arise out of holding and developing the
property; and
         e.   Has a designated person authorized by its board of directors as
signatory on behalf of the organization.
      ELIGIBLE PROPERTY. Real property obtained by the city following the
foreclosure of a tax lien in favor of the city and other taxing entities that
is capable of being developed for low income housing.
      HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AS A PRIMARY ACTIVITY. A nonprofit organization is
considered to develop housing for low income households as a “primary activity”
or “engaged primarily” in housing development activities for low income
households if it:
         a.   Has as a corporate purpose of developing and managing affordable
housing for low income households as stated in its articles of incorporation or
bylaws;
         b.   More than 50% of its budget or actual expenditures is related to
housing development activities for low income households; or
         c.   Has a comprehensive or strategic revitalization or redevelopment
plan which is approved, recognized or acknowledged by the city and includes the
provision of housing development activities for low income households as a
major strategy.
      LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS. Individuals and/or families whose annual incomes
do not exceed 80% of the median income for the area with adjustments for family
size, as determined and updated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (“HUD”).
      TAX APPRAISAL VALUE. The value of a specific parcel of property as
determined by the Tarrant appraisal district as of January 1 of the year the
property is conveyed to an eligible housing nonprofit organization or by an
independent certified appraiser.
      TAX RESALE DEED WITHOUT WARRANTY. The legal instrument used by the city
to transfer its interest and that of all the other taxing entities in the
property to an eligible housing nonprofit organization pursuant to this
section.
   (b)   Method of sale.
      (1)   The city may sell eligible property to an eligible housing
nonprofit organization for the development of low income housing for an amount
that is less than the lesser of:
         a.   The market value specified in the judgment of foreclosure; or
         b.   The total amount of judgments against the property.
      (2)   In general, the property shall be transferred to an eligible
housing nonprofit organization for an amount equal to 20% of the tax appraisal
value of the property plus costs and expenses. Provided, the property
management department may in extraordinary circumstances recommend a higher or
lower purchase price, but in no case shall the property be conveyed for less
than the total of the costs and expenses incurred on the property.
      (3)   All conveyance shall be approved by the city council.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Application fee. The city shall charge an application fee for the
processing of each application for the conveyance of eligible property.
   (e)   Procedure of sale. The property management department may develop
procedures to implement this section.
(Ord. 13533, § 1, passed 7-28-1998; Ord. 18320-09-2008, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-30-
2008; Ord. 21650-02-2015, § 6, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2-14 PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING LOCAL PREFERENCES IN PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING
FOR CERTAIN PERSONAL PROPERTY AND SERVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. The words and phrases defined in this section have the
following meanings:
      LOCAL BUSINESS. A business with a principal place of business within the
corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth.
      PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS.
         a.   A facility that is fully operational and has sufficient
equipment, supplies and personnel to provide the product or service of the
business in question to clients in the city without significant reliance on the
resources of another entity or affiliate or of an auxiliary facility of the
business which is located outside the corporate limits of the city.
         b.   A location utilized solely as a post office box, mail drop or
telephone message center, or
any combination thereof, with no other substantial function, shall not be
construed as a principal place of business.
   (b)   Contracts for personal property or services in an amount greater than
$50,000 and less than $500,000 using lowest responsible bidder criteria. In
purchasing any personal property that is not affixed to real property or
services, if the city receives one or more competitive bids from a bidder that
is a local business and whose bid is within 5% of the lowest bid price received
by the city from a bidder that is not a local business, the city may enter into
a contract for an amount greater than $50,000 but less than $500,000 with:
      (1)   The lowest bidder; or
      (2)   The bidder that is a local business as defined herein, provided the
city council determines, in writing, that awarding to the local bidder offers
the city the best combination of contract price and economic development
opportunities.
   (c)   Contracts for personal property in an amount equal to or greater than
$500,000 using lowest responsible bidder criteria. In purchasing any personal
property that is not affixed to real property, if the city receives one or more
competitive bids from a bidder that is a local business and whose bid is within
3% of the lowest bid price received by the city from a bidder that is not a
local business, the city may enter into a contract for an amount equal to or
greater than $500,000 with:
      (1)   The lowest bidder; or
      (2)   The bidder that is a local business as defined herein, provided the
city council determines, in writing, that awarding to the local bidder offers
the city the best combination of contract price and economic development
opportunities.
   (d)   Contracts for construction services in an amount between $50,000 and
$99,999.99 using lowest responsible bidder criteria. In purchasing any
construction services if the city receives one or more competitive bids from a
bidder that is a local business and whose bid is within 5% of the lowest bid
price received by the city from a bidder that is not a local business, the city
may enter into a contract in an amount greater than $50,000.00 but less than
$99,999.99 with:
      (1)   The lowest responsible bidder; or
      (2)   A responsible bidder that is a local business as defined herein
provided the city council determines that awarding to the local bidder offers
the city the best combination of contract price and economic development
opportunities.
   (e)   Contracts for services, construction services, or personal property
procured using the best value criteria. The city finds that awarding more
contracts to local businesses can provide additional value to the city in the
form of increased local capacity that allows the city to: (1) maintain and
expand an able and competitive pool of businesses from which to procure goods
and services; (2) improve employment opportunities for city residents; and (3)
increase tax revenues to the city. Therefore, when procuring any services
construction services, or personal property that is not affixed to real
property, in determining the best value for the city, the city may consider, in
addition to other relevant criteria as may be determined by the city:
      (1)   The bidder's principal place of business, if specifically included
in the request for bids or proposals.
   (f)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This § 2-14 does not apply to the acquisition of:
         a.   Personal property that is not affixed to real property or
services that are not acquired pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Title 8;
or
         b.   Professional services.
      (2)   Unless specifically allowed by federal law, this § 2-14 does not
apply to any contract in which the federal government participates in the form
of a grant or loan, or the city acts as a conduit for federal money.
      (3)   Section 2-14(b) herein does not apply to the purchase of
telecommunications services or information services, as those terms are defined
by 47 U.S.C. § 153.
   (g)   Rejection of all bids. This section does not prohibit the city from
rejecting all bids.
(Ord. 20645-03-2013, § 1, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 25533-06-2022, § 1, passed 6-
14-2022)
§ 2-15 FORMER CITY OFFICERS.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      DEPARTURE DATE means the last day of employment with the city. When leave
time is taken prior to termination, the departure date is the last day of the
leave period.
      FORMER CITY OFFICER shall mean any person, who immediately prior to his
or her departure date with the city, was:
         a.   The city manager, assistant city manager, city attorney, city
secretary, city auditor, municipal judge or municipal pro tem judge;
         b.   A director or assistant director of a city department; or
         c.   An employee of the city who had substantial and personal
involvement in the handling of a matter as defined herein.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a FORMER CITY OFFICER does not include any
individual whose employment with the city was terminated or eliminated due to
job outsourcing.
      JOB OUTSOURCING means the transfer under an arrangement overseen by the
city manager of an individual's job duties with the city to another entity that
will employ that individual to carry out the same or similar job duties.
      SUBSTANTIAL AND PERSONAL INVOLVEMENT means that a person, either as a
person assigned to handle or participate in the handling of the matter or as a
supervisor making decisions with respect to the matter, exercised discretion or
decision-making in the handling of a matter.
   (b)   No former city officer shall, during the one year period following his
or her departure date from the city, communicate directly with a member of the
city council, a city employee, or a board or commission to influence municipal
legislation or administrative action unless lobbying on behalf of another
governmental agency as its employee or as a consultant under contract with the
governmental agency. This subsection does not apply to a board or commission
that is only advisory in nature.
   (c)   No former city officer shall, within one year period following his or
her departure date, enter into a contractual relationship with the city or hold
more than a 20% interest in any entity that has a contractual relationship with
the city. Any violation of this subsection, with knowledge, express or implied
of the person or entity will render the contract voidable by the city manager
or the city council. If the contract is voided, the individual or company shall
be barred from additional contracting with the city for a period of three
years. This subsection does not apply to contracts awarded on a competitive bid
basis.
   (d)   A former city officer shall be prohibited from communicating directly
with the mayor, a member of the city council or a city employee in an attempt
to secure access to information not otherwise available to the general public.
   (e)   Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a former city officer from
accepting employment with the city or another entity following his departure
date.
   (f)   Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a former city officer from
serving on a city board or commission.
   (g)   A former city officer is afforded the same rights as any citizen to
address the city council in public meetings for their own benefit or to make
uncompensated direct communications to the city council relating to matters of
purely civic or public concern
   (h)   Any violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 23981-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-10-2019, eff. 12-18-2019)
§§ 2-16—2-25 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: APPOINTED OFFICIALS
Charter reference:
   City secretary, see
Ch. III, § 7
Statutory reference:
   Home rule cities’ authority to create offices, see Tex. Local Government
Code § 26.041
DIVISION I. CITY MANAGER
§ 2-26 CITY MANAGER.
   Per the City Charter, the council shall appoint the city manager, who shall
be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. The city manager
shall have all the powers and duties as outlined in the City Charter.
Appointment, compensation, removal and all other matters concerning the city
manager shall be controlled by the provisions in the City Charter.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-27 DIVISIONS OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager's Office currently consists of four divisions:
Administration, Mayor and Council, Governmental Relations, and the Directions
Home program. The City Manager shall have the authority to add or delete
divisions or revise the structure of the current divisions as s/he deems
necessary for the efficient operation of the office.
   (a)   Administration.
      (1)   Administers the programs and policies established by the City
Council; directs and coordinates the operations of the city departments;
informs and advises the City Council regarding city transactions, existing
conditions and future requirements, oversees the 100x25 Reading Instruction
Program and the Independent Police Monitor.
      (2)   Independent Police Monitor. The Independent Police Monitor will
advise the City Manager and Assistant City Manager on strategic policy matters
as it relates to the Police Department, will track the internal investigations
and community complaints and produce reports for the City Manager and the
police chief. The Independent Police Monitor will also lead the long-term
operational planning for the Office of the Independent Police Monitor. The
duties and responsibilities of the Independent Police Monitor will include:
         a.   Establishing and implementing the independent investigative
process to receive and review formal citizen complaints of the Police
Department or its staff separate from Internal Affairs while maintaining
communication with the Fort Worth Police Department and the Internal Affairs
Division;
         b.   Providing ongoing assurance that internal investigations by law
enforcement are thorough, fair, and unbiased and that police practices in this
regard are transparent;
         c.   Reviewing the strategic planning/ long-range policy, practices
and training of the Police Department to provide feedback and advice;
         d.   Demonstrating a proactive approach when interacting with the
community, keeping the community informed about the work of the Office of the
Independent Police Monitor, the City's role and oversight of the Police
Department and Police-related activities impacting the community;
         e.   Increasing communication from geographic locations in the city
made up of majority-minority populations to listen to their issues and receive
input directly from Fort Worth citizens;
         f.   Reviewing formal complaints that have been made against officers
and monitors or participates in internal investigations which may include an
independent investigative component.
         g.   Examining broad patterns in investigations and recommends policy
changes; and
         h.   Requesting and initiating professional review of individual or
systemic issues concerning race, culture and diversity within the Police
Department or of Police Department practices.
   (b)   The Mayor and Council Office. Supports the City Council with a full-
time staff and council aides, providing oversight of office operations, handles
citizen interactions, drafts correspondence and speeches, and handling on
various special projects.
   (c)   The Governmental Relations Division. Researches and assists in the
passage of federal and state legislative initiatives that favorably affect the
City of Fort Worth and its citizens.
   (d)   The Directions Home Division . Responsible for the Directions Home
Program - the city's ten-year plan to make chronic and persistent homelessness
non-existent in the City of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION II. CITY ATTORNEY
§ 2-28 CITY ATTORNEY.
   Per the City Charter, the city attorney, whose appointment shall be
recommended by the city manager and approved by the council, shall serve as the
director of the department of law, and shall have power to appoint such
assistants as may be deemed necessary to assist in performing the duties as
outlines in the City Charter. Appointment, compensation, removal and all other
matters concerning the city attorney shall be controlled by the provisions in
the City Charter.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION III. CITY SECRETARY
§ 2-29 CITY SECRETARY.
   The City Council shall appoint a city secretary, prescribe the duties and
compensation and provide assistants as needed. Appointment, compensation,
removal and all other matters concerning the city secretary shall be controlled
by the provisions in the City Charter.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-30 COPYING, TYPING, MATERIALS, FEE.
   (a)   (1)   The city secretary may charge fees for researching, locating,
preparation and copying of public records and public information as provided by
the regulations and laws of the State of Texas governing such fees, as same may
be amended from time to time. In addition, the following fees may be charged
for the typing of any papers:
 
Type/Size   Fee
8-1/2 × 11 $2 per sheet
11 × 14    $2.50 per sheet
Transcripts $5 per sheet
 
      (2)   If any of the above papers are to be mailed by the city secretary a
$1 handling fee and a fee for postage will be charged.
   (b)   No charge shall be required of any city official for copies to be used
by him or her in connection with his or her duties as such official.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-31 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   Any money collected by the city secretary under the provisions of § 2-30
shall be deposited by him or her with the city treasurer to the credit of the
city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-32 ASSISTANT CITY SECRETARY AND ASSISTANT TO THE CITY SECRETARY—OFFICES
CREATED.
   The offices of assistant city secretary and assistant to the city secretary
are hereby created and established.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-33 SAME—DUTY IN ABSENCE OF CITY SECRETARY.
   In case of the absence, death, resignation or permanent disability of the
city secretary or whenever a vacancy in the office of city secretary shall
occur for any reason, the assistant secretary or assistant to the city
secretary shall act as city secretary and possess all the rights and powers of
the city secretary and perform all the duties under the official title of
assistant city secretary or assistant to the city secretary until the city
secretary returns to his or her duties or until an appointment is made by the
city council to fill the vacancy.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION IV. CITY AUDITOR
§ 2-34 ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to
Chapter XXVII of the City Charter, there shall be a department of internal
audit.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-35 CITY INTERNAL AUDITOR, APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATION, COMPENSATION.
   The department of internal audit shall be under the direction and control of
the city internal auditor, who shall be recommended by the city manager and
appointed by the city council. The city internal auditor must be a person
knowledgeable in public financial and fiscal theory, municipal accounting and
auditing, and public administration. The city internal auditor's compensation
shall be fixed by the city council.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-36 TERM; REMOVAL; ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF CITY INTERNAL AUDITOR.
   The city internal auditor shall not be appointed for a definite fixed time
but shall be removable at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote
of not less than a majority of the entire council. If removed after serving six
months, the city internal auditor may demand written charges and the right to
be heard thereon at a public meeting of the city council prior to the date on
which the city internal auditor's final removal shall take effect, but pending
such hearing the city council may suspend the city internal auditor from
office. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city
internal auditor shall be final. In case of the absence or disability of the
city internal auditor, the city council may designate some qualified person to
perform the duties of the office.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-37 ADMINISTRATION, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT.
   (a)   Subject to the City Charter, city council oversight of general and
administrative matters pertaining to the department of internal audit may be
delegated as appropriate. The city council or its delegatee may assign
signature authority for routine administrative matters to the city manager or
his or her designee. The department of internal audit shall be subject to the
budgetary, personnel and general administrative regulations of the city as
established by the city manager. The internal auditor may appeal an
administrative determination of the city manager to the city council or its
delegatee.
   (b)   The department of internal audit shall have the following duties and
responsibilities.
      (1)   No less than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year,
the department of internal audit shall submit an annual audit plan to the city
council or its delegatee for review and comment.
         a.   1.   The plan shall be based on:
               i.    Requests from city council, city manager's office and
department heads;
               ii.   A risk assessment of all city activities which shall be
performed by the internal audit department each year prior to the completion of
the annual audit plan;
               iii.    Suggestions from internal audit department staff based
on their knowledge of city activities or observations made during the
performance of other audits; and
               iv.   Other relevant criteria agreed to by the city council or
its delegatee and the city internal auditor.
            2.   The annual audit plan shall include a block of unassigned
hours (the number to be approved by city council) which shall be used to
perform special audits, investigations and/or projects requested by city
council and/or city manager.
         b.   The annual audit plan may be amended during the year, following
notification of the city council and due provision for comment.
         c.   If the city internal auditor determines there is serious concern
regarding fraud, abuse or illegality, or that the scope of an audit in progress
should be expanded as the result of any findings, the city internal auditor is
authorized to initiate spontaneously and conduct, or expand the scope of, an
audit beyond that approved in the audit plan. Any changes made under this
provision shall be communicated to the city council or its delegatee as soon as
feasible, but not later than its next scheduled meeting.
      (2)   The department shall conduct the following types of audits, varying
in scope as required, on an ongoing basis.
         a.   Financial-related audits. The department shall conduct financial-
related audits of all city activities, designed to evaluate whether:
            1.   The entity is maintaining effective control over revenues,
expenditures, assets and liabilities and financial operations;
            2.   The entity is properly accounting for resources, liabilities
and operations;
            3.   The entity is using accounting methods and procedures which
conform to established policies, practices and guidelines; and/or
            4.   The official financial statements fairly present the financial
results of operations and the financial position of the entity.
         b.   Compliance audits. The department shall conduct compliance audits
of all city activities, designed to evaluate whether:
            1.   All activities are properly authorized;
            2.   All activities required by law or policy are being carried
out;
            3.   The management system provides the capacity for adequate
control of compliance with applicable laws and policies; and/or
            4.   Operations actually conform to applicable laws and policies.
         c.   Contractor/vendor audits. The department shall conduct financial-
related and compliance audits of contractors and vendors doing business with
the city to determine whether materials furnished, work performed and/or prices
charged accord with the terms of the contracts involved.
         d.   Electronic data processing audits. The department shall conduct
audits of the electronic data processing activities of the city.
      (3)   The department shall conduct performance audits of all city
activities. The department shall conduct special audits, investigations and
projects at the request of the city council or the city manager.
         a.   Performance audits. The department shall conduct performance
audits of all city activities, designed to determine:
            1.   Whether the audited entity is managing or utilizing its
resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment and space in
an economical and efficient manner;
            2.   The causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices, such
as problems or inadequacies in organizational structures, management
information systems, internal or administrative procedures, purchasing policies
and/or in allocation of personnel, resources and equipment; and
            3.   Whether the desired results are being achieved.
         b.   Special audits. The department shall conduct special audits,
investigations and projects when requested to do so by the city council or the
city manager, with the scope of same to be determined by the request.
      (4)   The department shall participate in the planning, design,
development, implementation and operation of major computer systems in the city
to evaluate whether:
         a.   Adequate controls are incorporated in the systems;
         b.   Thorough system testing is performed at appropriate stages;
         c.   System documentation is complete and accurate; and/or
         d.   The needs of user entities are met.
      (5)   The department shall notify the city council or its delegatee when
audits in progress identify areas which may require the use of additional
resources (city staff from other departments or outside consultants) to address
serious operational problems.
   (c)   In the performance of its duties, the department of internal audit
shall have access to all books and records of all departments, agencies and
programs of the city and to all officers, agents or employees of the city.
   (d)   All city contracts and subcontracts shall contain a "right to audit"
clause. This clause shall provide that the city and the city internal auditor
shall have access to and the right to examine all necessary books, papers,
documents, records and personnel of parties who contract with the city or who
subcontract under a city contract. NECESSARY BOOKS, PAPERS, DOCUMENTS, RECORDS
AND PERSONNEL are those which pertain to city contracts and subcontracts and
are required to evaluate compliance with the terms of those contracts and
subcontracts.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-38 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   Within the budget approval process and personnel procedures established by
the city council for all departments, the city internal auditor shall have the
power to appoint, employ and remove such assistants, employees and personnel as
he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of
the department of internal audit and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope
of authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-4-2020)
§§ 2-39—2-45 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Cross-reference:
Airport zoning regulations board of adjustment, see §
3-204
Building standards commission, see §
7-99
City library advisory board, see §
19-22
Construction and fire prevention board of appeals, see §
7-42
Emergency physicians advisory board, see §§
5-16 et seq.
Human relations commission, see §§
17-16 et seq.
Park and recreation advisory board, see §§
24-42 et seq.
Parking violations bureau, see §§
10-16 et seq.
Pedestrian and bicycle advisory commission, see Ord. 21707-03-2015, passed 3-
24-2015
Planning and development department, see §§
2-310 et seq.
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 2-46 ROLE OF THE CITY SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
   (a)   The city secretary's office is charged with being a centralized
resource for boards and commissions. In addition to other specific duties
outlined below, the city secretary's office shall serve as a neutral resource
to liaise among each board and commission, its departmental staff liaison, and
the city council and to facilitate communication and cooperation among them.
   (b)   Training. The city secretary's office shall, in conjunction with the
city attorney's office, coordinate initial and follow-up training for all board
and commission members, presiding officers, and departmental staff liaisons.
Each board and commission member should complete their initial training within
90 days of taking office. Training shall include, but not be limited to, the
application of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Robert's Rules of Order, the Public
Information Act, state and local ethics requirements, and other pertinent laws
such as this article.
   (c)   Attendance. The city secretary's office shall coordinate attendance
records and make reports in accordance with §
2-81.
   (d)   Rules of decorum. Each board and commission is required to incorporate
the model rules of decorum into the board/commission's rules of procedure; if a
board or commission does not have rules of procedure, the board or commission
is required to adopt and follow the rules of decorum as a freestanding policy.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-47 APPOINTMENT PROCESS FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS THAT ARE STRUCTURED
UTILIZING BY-DISTRICT REPRESENTATION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the following boards and commissions,
which are composed of one representative from each city council district and
one representative nominated by the mayor:
      (1)   The aviation advisory board;
      (2)   The board of adjustment;
      (3)   The building standards commission;
      (4)   The community development council;
      (5)   The historic and cultural landmarks commission;
      (6)   The library advisory board;
      (7)   The park and recreation advisory board;
      (8)   The plan commission;
      (9)   The pedestrian and bicycle advisory commission;
      (10)   The urban design commission; and
      (11)   The zoning commission.
   (b)   The city councilmember representing a district is entitled to nominate
a city resident to each such board or commission with preference given to those
residing in the appointing councilmember's district. The mayor is entitled to
nominate a resident of the city to each such board or commission. Nominations
should be made known at a work session at least one week prior to the business
meeting at which the council member or mayor intends to seek action on their
nomination.
   (c)   Subject to subsection (b), action on board/commission nominations
shall be taken by the entire city council following a motion and second being
offered.
   (d)   If any board or commission that is subject to this section has
alternate members, nominations for such alternate members shall be brought
forward by the mayor based on recommendations from city staff. Nominations for
alternate members should be made known at a work session at least one week
prior to the business meeting at which action is intended to be taken on the
nomination.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 2, passed 8-8-2023)
§§ 2-48—2-55 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: ART COMMISSION AND PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 14794, § 1, adopted October 2, 2001, amended Div. 2, title and §§
2-56 through
2-61, to read as herein set out. Section 2 of said ordinance repealed former §§
2-62 through 2-66. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 2-56 PURPOSES.
   (a)   Fort Worth art commission. The purpose and object of the art
commission created by this division is to act as an advisory board to the city
council relating to all questions involving public art and the Fort Worth
public art program.
   (b)   Fort Worth public art program. The purposes of the Fort Worth public
art program are to create an enhanced visual environment for Fort Worth
residents, to commemorate the city’s rich cultural and ethnic diversity, to
integrate the work of artists into the development of the city’s capital
infrastructure improvements, and to promote tourism and economic vitality in
the city through the artistic design of public spaces.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001)
§ 2-57 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   ART or ARTWORK. Works in any permanent medium or combination of media,
produced by artists who are generally recognized by critics and peers as
professionals of serious intent and substantial ability.
   CITY OF FORT WORTH PUBLIC ART COLLECTION. All artworks commissioned by the
City of Fort Worth through its designated public art program and artworks
purchased by or donated to the City of Fort Worth that have been accepted by
the City of Fort Worth into its designated public art program.
   PUBLIC ART PLAN or PLAN. The prioritized list of public art projects to be
commenced during a fiscal year and the budget to effect it.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001; Ord. 21122-02-2014, § 1, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 2-58 FORT WORTH ART COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION; TERM.
   (a)   There is hereby created the Fort Worth art commission, comprised of
nine members appointed by a majority vote of the City Council, with the
following composition:
      (1)   Three art professionals, of which at least one must be a practicing
artist and at least one a curator;
      (2)   Two design professionals; and
      (3)   Four community representatives.
   (b)   Ex-officio, non-voting members shall be the Fort Worth city manager or
that person’s designee, and the director or designee of any City of Fort Worth
department with an eligible project included in the Plan. Appointed members of
the Fort Worth art commission shall serve without compensation. Terms shall be
as prescribed in this Article for city boards and commissions. When any
vacancies occur on the Fort Worth art commission by reason of death,
resignation or other cause, such vacancies shall be filled in the manner
provided for original appointment for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001; Ord. 21122-02-2014, § 2, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 2-59 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Fort Worth art commission shall advise and make recommendations to the
Fort Worth city council regarding the public art program concerning the
following matters:
   (a)   Administration of the public art program, including the qualifications
of the entity and the scope of services necessary to administer the program;
   (b)   Public art policies and procedures;
   (c)   Artist selection juries and process;
   (d)   Commission and placement of artworks;
   (e)   Maintenance and removal of artworks; and
   (f)   Preparation of the recommendations for the annual public art plan.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001)
§ 2-60 ADMINISTRATION OF THE PUBLIC ART PLAN.
   Day-to-day administration of the Fort Worth public art program shall be
provided by an appropriate entity selected by the Fort Worth city council
through a contract for services. The administrative duties of the selected
entity shall include the following:
   (a)   Preparation of the annual public art plan, in consultation with the
Fort Worth art commission, the city manager and/or his or her designee, the
directors of all city departments with eligible projects included in that plan,
and the mayor and city council, as appropriate;
   (b)   Preparation and presentation of recommendations for the annual public
art plan to the Fort Worth art commission and to the mayor and council members
and the city manager;
   (c)   Administration of all aspects of the public art program, including,
the following:
      (1)   The establishment of program policies and guidelines;
      (2)   The development of program budgets, artist selection processes and
juries; and
      (3)   Public education and all other aspects of carrying out the program.
   (d)   Reporting annually to the Fort Worth art commission and Fort Worth
city council and city manager regarding prior year activities related to the
public art program;
   (e)   Provision of staff support to the Fort Worth art commission;
   (f)   Development of policies and procedures, in consultation with
appropriate city representatives, for approval by the city council, to ensure
that public projects into which public art is to be incorporated can be
designed, bid and constructed in such a manner that the incorporation of public
art does not adversely impact the design or construction of those projects;
   (g)   Conducting surveys of the condition of the City of Fort Worth public
art collection every two years. Each survey would include a report on the
condition of each artwork, prioritized recommendations for the restoration,
repair and maintenance of the artwork and estimated cost for that restoration,
repair and maintenance. The report shall be reviewed by the Fort Worth art
commission and approved by the Fort Worth city manager;
   (h)   Conducting insurance and conservation surveys on the condition of the
artwork in the City of Fort Worth public art collection. Coordinated with the
city’s risk management function, these surveys will be updated at least once
every five years;
   (i)   Conducting an evaluation of the public art program five years after
adoption of the enabling ordinance for the program, and presenting the results
to the Fort Worth city council and city manager; and
   (j)   Development of a conservation plan for the City of Fort Worth public
art collection in consultation with the Fort Worth art commission, with
particular attention to any artwork requiring extraordinary operations or
maintenance costs. The conservation plan shall be reviewed by the Fort Worth
city manager and approved by the Fort Worth city council.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001; Ord. 21122-02-2014, § 3, passed 2-11-2014)
§ 2-61 FUNDING.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a-1) below, funding for
the Fort Worth public art program shall be accomplished by annually setting
aside 2% of capital improvement project funding for public art. The percentage,
approved in advance by the city council for the public art program, shall be
added to the total cost of each proposition in City of Fort Worth capital
project programs.
   (a-1)   With respect to capital improvement projects included in Proposition
One, “Street and Transportation Improvements,” of the 2014 capital improvement
program; Proposition A, “Streets and Mobility Infrastructure Improvements,” of
the 2018 bond program; and any street-related proposition in a bond program
taken to the voters in or after 2022, funding for the Fort Worth public art
program shall be accomplished by setting aside for public art 1% of the capital
improvement project funding. The percentage, approved in advance by the city
council for the public art program, shall be added to the total cost of such
proposition in City of Fort Worth capital project program. With respect to
capital improvement projects included in any natural area and open space
proposition in a bond program taken to the voters in or after 2022, no funding
shall be set aside for public art.
   (a-2)   (1)   Funding for the Fort Worth public art program shall also be
accomplished by an annual transfer from the water and sewer fund made in
accordance with the terms of this subsection (a-2).
      (2)   In connection with the annual budget process, the department
responsible for ensuring the administration of the Fort Worth public art
program shall prepare and submit to the city manager a proposed program budget,
including a proposed allocation from the water and sewer fund.
      (3)   The city manager shall review the requested program budget and
shall include his recommended program budget as part of the proposed annual
budget submitted to the city council.
      (4)   Notwithstanding anything in this article or the City Code to the
contrary, the costs of the water and sewer fund’s public art contribution
provided under this subsection shall be excluded from the calculation of
wholesale rates applicable to water and sewer services.
      (5)   References in this subsection (a-2) to the “water and sewer fund”
shall include any successor funds thereto.
   (b)   Funds shall be used for artist fees and costs related to the
production and maintenance of artwork. Funds shall not be used for professional
graphics, mass produced work or work not produced by an approved artist.
   (c)   For all capital grants of $100,000 or more sought by the City of Fort
Worth, city departments shall include in appropriate grant applications a
request that a certain percentage of the grant amount be authorized for public
art and conservation projects in keeping with the established Fort Worth public
art plan. All eligible projects financed with grants or contributions from
private entities or public agencies are subject to this ordinance unless public
art expenditures are not authorized by the granting or contributing entity. If
public art and conservation projects are expressly excluded, then only the
city-funded portion of the eligible project would be subject to the public art
ordinance. The public art policy is applicable to all grants of $100,000 or
more. Artist involvement shall be optional for city for grants of less than
$100,000.
   (d)   Appropriations for public art shall be made at the same time that the
city appropriates funds for eligible projects. All moneys appropriated for
public art program purposes shall be transferred into a special, interest-
bearing public art project account, which shall be maintained in a separate
project fund.
As a project account, any funds not expended at the conclusion of the fiscal
year would roll forward into the following fiscal year. The city manager, or
his or her designee, shall establish appropriate accounting procedures for the
public art program and shall report to the city council periodically regarding
the amounts appropriated, encumbered and expended under the program.
   (d-1)   There shall be permitted a one-time transfer of funds from monies
appropriated to the specially funded capital projects fund, for the fiscal year
2013, 2% set aside of the water and sewer fund for cash financing of capital
projects, to the general fund in an amount up to $222,159.00 for the purpose of
reimbursing the general fund for costs associated with the installation of a
World Trade Center Artifact at the Fort Worth Museum of Science and History.
(Ord. 14794, § 1, passed 10-2-2001; Ord. 20972-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-24-2013;
Ord. 21122-02-2014, §§ 4, 5, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 22090-02-2016, § 1, passed
2-9-2016; Ord. 23112-02-2018, § 1, passed 2-6-2018; Ord 25463-04-2022, § 1,
passed 4-12-2022)
DIVISION 3: COMPOSITION AND ROLE OF BY-DISTRICT BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 2-62 AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD—CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.
   The city council shall appoint an aviation advisory board to be comprised of
residents to act in an advisory capacity in conjunction with the aviation
department, with the board having powers and functions as described in Chapter
3 of the city code. The board shall consist of 11 members who shall serve in
places numbered one through 11. Members of the board serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-63 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The board of adjustment is established and governed in accordance with §
2.101 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-64 BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby established a building standards commission.
   (b)   The commission shall consist of 11 members, each of whom shall be a
resident of the city. Each member of the commission shall be appointed by the
city council. It is the declared policy of the city that the city council shall
consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have
demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community,
independent and intelligent judgment, understanding of building standards,
understanding of neighborhood integrity and availability to prepare for and
attend meetings, and who by reason of diversity of their occupations,
constitute a commission which is broadly representative of the community.
   (c)   The building standards commission shall have powers and functions as
described in Chapter 7 of the city code.
   (d)   The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one
through 11.
   (e)   Except as provided in subsection (f) below, members of the commission
shall be appointed for a two-year term, unless removed prior to the expiration
of the term. Members of the commission shall be subject to removal at any time
by the city council.
   (f)   Members of the commission in the odd-numbered places shall serve terms
expiring September 30 of odd-numbered years. Members of the commission in the
even-numbered places shall serve terms expiring September 30 of the even-
numbered years.
   (g)   Any vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be fdled by the
city council for the unexpired term of the member whose place has, by removal
or otherwise, become vacant. Vacancies shall be filled within 60 days after the
city council removes the member or within 60 days after the city council
receives notice of the member's resignation.
   (h)   In addition to the 11 members of the commission, the city's code
compliance director, shall be an ex officio, non-voting member of the
commission.
      (1)   An ex officio member will attend each commission meeting in person
or through an authorized representative.
      (2)   Ex officio members will advise and consent with the commission in
matters pertaining to enforcement of this article.
   (i)   The building standards commission shall follow all established
procedures and standards on their effective date.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-65 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.
   (a)   A residents' advisory board to be known as the community development
council is hereby established for the purposes of advising the city council on
setting priorities for projects funded through the following federal grant
programs:
      (1)   Community Development Block Grant program.
      (2)   Emergency Solutions Grant program.
      (3)   Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Grant program.
      (4)   HOME Investment Partnerships Program.
   (b)   The community development council shall also assist in ensuring
compliance with all requirements imposed by the United States government
regarding the above listed grant programs.
   (c)   Subject to the provisions of Chapter 2 "Administration," Article III
"Boards and Commissions," Division 4 of the Code of the City of Fort Worth,
Texas (2015), as amended, the community development council shall be comprised
of 11 membership places.
   (d)   The mayor and other members of the city council shall each nominate
one resident of the City of Fort Worth to serve in each place. Members
appointed to odd-numbered places shall have terms which expire in odd-numbered
years, and members appointed to even-numbered places shall have terms which
expire in even-numbered years.
   (e)   Members shall serve two-year terms, and no member shall serve more
than three consecutive two-year terms.
   (f)   Members shall serve without compensation and may be removed at any
time by the city council.
   (g)   The community development council shall have powers and functions as
described in Division 5 of this article.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-66 HISTORIC AND CULTURAL LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
   The historic and cultural landmark commission is established and governed in
accordance with § 2-103 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-67 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   Appointment; members. The city council shall appoint an advisory board
to act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the city manager in
conjunction with the library department. The board shall be composed of 11
residents, who shall each be appointed to places one through 11. Members shall
be appointed for two-year terms. No member shall serve more than three
consecutive terms. Members shall serve without compensation and shall be
subject to removal at any time by the city council.
   (b)   Powers and duties. The library advisory board shall have powers and
functions as described in Chapter 19 of the City Code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-68 PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   The city council shall appoint a park and recreation board to be
comprised of residents to act in an advisory capacity in conjunction with the
park and recreation department. The board shall consist of eleven members, who
shall serve in places numbered one through 11. Members shall serve two-year
terms. No member shall serve more than three consecutive two-year terms, and
the terms of current members of the board shall be counted toward the limit of
terms to be served for purposes of this section.
   (b)   The park and recreation advisory board shall have powers and functions
as described in Chapter 24 of the City Code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-69 PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION.
   (a)   The pedestrian and bicycle advisory commission shall consist of 11
residents of the City of Fort Worth appointed by the city council.
   (b)   The purpose of the commission shall be to provide recommendations to
the city manager, city plan commission, and the city council on plans,
policies, programs, and projects to improve the environment for non-motorized
travelers, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Guide the preparation and updates of pedestrian, bicycle, and trail
plans.
      (2)   Recommend policies and programs for the safe travel of all non-
motorized traffic.
      (3)   Review and comment on the city's annual operating budget and
capital improvement program for pedestrian and bicycle improvements.
      (4)   Guide the design, location, and type of pedestrian and bicycle
facilities in significant on-street and off-street programs.
      (5)   Encourage resident participation in identifying problems, assessing
existing facilities, and planning for future facilities.
      (6)   Assist in updating the Walk Fort Worth and Bike Fort Worth Plans
every five years.
   (c)   Commission members shall serve two-year terms. Members appointed in
odd-numbered places will serve terms that expire October 1 of odd-numbered
years. Members appointed to even-numbered places will serve terms that expire
on October 1 of even-numbered years.
   (d)   The commission shall meet at least quarterly in a calendar year.
   (e)   A quorum of the commission shall consist of six members. The presence
of a quorum of the commission shall be required prior to deliberation or action
by the commission-approval of all items before the commission shall require a
majority vote of those appointed.
   (f)   The commission shall establish procedures, as necessary and
appropriate, for the conduct of its business and for receiving of public
comment on pedestrian and bicycle issues.
   (g)   The commission shall report annually to the city council on the
activities of the commission. The commission shall include in its annual report
the status of projects, initiatives and goals established by the commission and
by city council.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-70 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (a)   The city plan commission is created to assist Fort Worth in becoming
and maintaining the stature as the most livable city in Texas. The mission is
to serve the public and advise the city in the orderly growth and development
of the community. This mission is accomplished through the formulation and
maintenance of a comprehensive plan and its appendices, recommendations of
proposals for annexations, the processing of plats, plans and other tasks as
defined by city council and applicable law.
   (b)   Incorporated within the duties of the plan commission are the
responsibilities for the following:
      (1)   Study and recommend on all proposals for voluntary annexation or
limited purpose annexation that are inconsistent with the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   Exercise all the powers of a commission as to the approval or
disapproval of plans, plats or replats and vacations of plans, plats or replats
as set out in Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212;
      (3)   Keep informed with reference to the progress of city planning in
Fort Worth and other cities and counties and recommend improvements to the
adopted plans of the city; and
      (4)   Study and recommend on the planning, design, location, vacation,
closing or termination of public rights-of-way, bridges, public buildings,
parks and other capital improvement projects, considering the design of streets
and blocks that promote viable, safe and sustainable neighborhoods with regard
for traffic control and safety, convenient access, and traffic and pedestrian
circulation and internal sub-neighborhood area connection and circulation both
within the subdivision and between adjacent subdivisions, without the need for
utilizing the perimeter arterial streets system for such purpose.
   (c)   The city plan commission shall be composed of residents of the city.
The city council shall consider for appointment to the commission only those
persons who have demonstrated their civic interest; general knowledge of the
community, independent judgment; understanding of zoning and planning;
availability to prepare for and attend meetings; and who, by reason of
diversity of their occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly
representative of the community.
   (d)   The city council shall appoint the city plan commission, which shall
consist of 11 members, who shall serve in places numbered one through 11, and
five alternate members to serve in the absence of one or more regular members.
Preference will be given, where feasible, to prior plan commission members as
appointees to serve as alternate members to the commission. After the
expiration of the initial members' terms, members shall serve two-year terms.
No regular member shall serve more than three consecutive two-year terms and
the terms of current members of the commission shall be counted toward the
limit of terms to be served, for purposes of this section. At the expiration of
three consecutive two-year terms of service as a regular member, the member may
be appointed to serve as an alternate member at the discretion of the city
council.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-71 URBAN DESIGN COMMISSION.
   The urban design commission is established and governed in accordance with §
2.102 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-72 ZONING COMMISSION.
   The zoning commission is established and governed in accordance with § 2.100
of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023)
§§ 2-73—2-79 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN CITY BOARDS
§ 2-80 SUNSET PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Definition. As used in this section, the term CITY BOARD shall mean
any board, commission, committee or other body which is created by the city
council and is not required to exist by the City Charter or state law.
   (b)   Report by city secretary. Before the first day of March of each year,
the city secretary shall report the following information to the city council
in writing:
      (1)   The name of any city board which has not met during the preceding
12 months; and
      (2)   The name of any city board which has a vacancy in the membership
thereof and such vacancy has not been filled during the preceding 12 months.
   (c)   Abolition of boards. When any board is reported to the city council by
the city secretary under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above, the council shall
within 30 days after the receipt of such report, take action to continue the
existence of such board. Should not such action be taken, the board shall be
abolished.
(1964 Code, § 2-33) (Ord. 8758, § 1, passed 3-15-1983; Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 5,
passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-81 ABSENCE RULE.
   (a)   Definition. As used in this section, the term CITY BOARD shall mean
any board, commission,
committee or other body of the city whose members the city council has the
power to remove.
   (b)   Reports to city secretary. When a member of any city board, as defined
in subsection (a) of this section, is absent from three successive meetings of
such board, or misses 25% or more of the meetings of such board in a 12-month
period, the chairperson, vice-chairperson or secretary of such board shall
report this fact to the city secretary in writing, within ten days of the third
missed meeting.
   (c)   Attendance and records thereof.
      (1)   Members of each city board, as defined in subsection (a) of this
section, are generally expected to attend all regularly scheduled and special
called meetings. If a member of a city board is unable to attend a meeting,
that member is expected to advise the departmental staff liaison in advance
whenever possible and to provide an explanation for any absence for which
advance notice was not provided. If a member does not attend a meeting and
fails to provide either advance notice or an after-the-fact explanation, such
absence shall be deemed an unexcused absence.
      (2)   The city secretary's office shall develop and promulgate
standardized attendance forms for use by each city board, as defined in
subsection (a) of this section.
      (3)   The departmental staff liaison assigned to each city board, as
defined in subsection (a) of this section, is responsible for making a written
record of attendance at each regular and special meeting of the city board,
utilizing the form provided by the city secretary's office.
      (4)   Completed attendance documentation for each meeting of a city
board, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, must be submitted to the
city secretary's office within 24 business hours of when the meeting is held.
   (d)   Report to city council; removal of board members. At least monthly,
the city secretary's office shall submit to the city council a summarized
written attendance report for all city boards, as defined in subsection (a) of
this section, with a preference for such reports to be included on a work
session agenda to allow for city council discussion. The city secretary's
office shall also directly contact the nominating councilperson to apprise them
of any recurring attendance issues observed with their appointees. Removal of a
city board member for attendance issues is at the discretion of the member for
the district from which the city board member was appointed.
(1964 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. 8758, § 1, passed 3-15-1983; Ord. 9272, § 1, passed
12-13-1984; Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 6, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-82 RESERVED.
§ 2-83 NUMBER OF MEMBERS AND TERMS OF SERVICE; ESTABLISHMENT OF PLACES.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided by state law, City Charter or city council
exception, all city boards shall be composed of 11 members. Board members shall
serve for terms of two years. No member shall serve more than three consecutive
terms. Each such board shall have 11 places, and all appointments shall be made
for two-year terms, as follows:
      (1)   Odd-numbered places. Terms expire October 1, each odd-numbered
year; and
      (2)   Even-numbered places. Terms expire October 1, each even-numbered
year.
   (b)   Those boards excepted from the provisions of this section regarding
the number of members serving on the board, and regarding the length of terms
of service, because of conflicting state law, city Charter provision or city
council exception, shall include currently, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Civil service commission;
      (2)   Dallas-Fort Worth international joint airport zoning board;
      (3)   Meacham Field joint airport zoning board; city council exception
(ordinance);
      (4)   Dallas-Fort Worth international airport board; state law exception;
      (5)   Board of commissioners of the Fort Worth housing authority; state
law exception;
      (6)   Fort Worth human relations commission; and
      (7)   Neighborhood resources development council; federal law;
      (8)   Capital improvements advisory committee for transportation impact
fees; and
      (9)   Capital improvements plan advisory committee for water and
wastewater impact fees.
   (c)   Those boards exempted from the provisions of this section regarding
the limitation on the number of terms which may be served, because of
conflicting state law, City Charter provision of city council exception shall
include currently, but shall not be limited to, the following: Board of
trustees of the employee retirement fund—city council exception (ordinance).
(1964 Code, § 5-35) (Ord. 8758, § 1, passed 3-15-1983; Ord. 8971, § 1, passed
11-15-1983; Ord. 9272, § 2, passed 12-13-1984; Ord. 11921, § 1, passed 4-18-
1995; Ord. 14849, § 1, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 21197-04-2014, § 6, passed 4-15-
2014, eff. 4-25-2014; Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 7, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 27900-08-
2025, § 8, passed 8-26-2025; Ord. 27911-08-2025, § 3, passed 8-26-2025)
Cross-reference:
Aviation advisory board, see §
3-20
DIVISION 5: THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
§ 2-84 RESERVED.
§ 2-85 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.
   The community development council shall have such members and purposes as
defined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 8, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2-86 ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT.
   Staff support of the community development council will be as assigned by
the city manager.
(Ord. 24709-02-021, § 1, passed 2-23-2021)
§ 2-87 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The community development council shall review, hold public hearings
on, and make recommendations to the city council concerning proposals for
funding with grant monies from the grant programs specified in §
2-84.
   (b)   Funding recommendations made by the community development council
shall be advisory only and not be binding on the city council.
(Ord. 24709-02-021, § 1, passed 2-23-2021)
§§ 2-88—2-95 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: DEPARTMENTS UNDER CONTROL OF THE CITY MANAGER
Cross-reference:
City police department, see §§
27-21 et seq.
Park and recreation department, see §§
24-36 et seq.
DIVISION 1: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS
§ 2-96 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.
   An information technology solutions department (“department”) is hereby
established. The department shall be supervised by a director (“director”), who
shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager, and overseen
by an executive steering committee, which shall consist of the city manager and
all assistant city managers. The director’s salary shall be set by the city
manager in accordance with the city’s compensation plan.
(Ord. 14031, § 1, passed 12-21-1999)
§ 2-97 DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES.
   The director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and remove
assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems necessary for
the efficient administration of the department’s affairs and the execution of
the department’s duties and obligations. The director shall prescribe the
duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and other personnel.
(Ord. 14031, § 1, passed 12-21-1999)
§ 2-98 DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   (a)   The department shall provide strategic and operational planning on a
city-wide basis for all of the city’s information technology.
   (b)   The department shall manage the procurement of information technology
used by the city, including without limitation, telephone, radio and computer
systems, internet and intranet based systems and software application systems.
The department shall also provide operational support and services for this
information technology.
   (c)   The department shall construct and operate the city’s shared
information technology infrastructure and establish standards therefor.
   (d)   The department shall develop and/or acquire new information technology
services as necessary in order to support the city’s strategic directions and
operations.
(Ord. 14031, § 1, passed 12-21-1999)
§ 2-99 EXECUTIVE STEERING COMMITTEE.
   (a)   An executive steering committee, consisting of the city manager and
all assistant city managers is hereby established. The executive steering
committee shall from time to time:
      (1)   Review and oversee the development by the department of information
technology strategic plans for the city;
      (2)   Establish priorities for the implementation of the city’s
information technology strategic plans;
      (3)   Recommend adoption of final strategic plans by the city council;
and
      (4)   Provide general directions to the department regarding information
technology issues.
   (b)   The executive steering committee may adopt rules for the conduct of
its business at the discretion of the city manager.
(Ord. 14031, § 1, passed 12-21-1999)
DIVISION 2: DEPARTMENT OF DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
Editor’s note:
   Department of Diversity and Inclusion were suspended per Resolution 6126-08-
05, passed August 5, 2025.
§ 2-100 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   A Department of Diversity and Inclusion is hereby established to promote the
values of diversity, equity, inclusion, and access as they apply to the City's
employee and labor relations, its provision of municipal services and capital
investments, and the quality of life that all Fort Worth residents experience.
The department shall be supervised by a director ("director"), who will be
subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The director's salary
shall be set by the city manager in accordance with the city's compensation
plan.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 5, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-101 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and
remove assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems
necessary for the efficient administration of the department's affairs and the
execution of the department's duties and obligations. The director shall
prescribe the duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and
other personnel.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 5, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-102 DUTIES.
   The department shall enforce civil rights laws as they pertain to fair
housing, fair employment, and equal access to public accommodations; by raising
public awareness of Fort Worth's diverse cultures and their contributions to
the community's social and economic vitality; by fostering harmonious human
relations among Fort Worth residents; and by coordinating efforts to eliminate
racial, ethnic, and gender disparities in criminal justice, economic
development, education, governance, health, housing, and transportation as
identified in the 2018 final report of the Task Force on Race and Culture. The
department shall also have the following responsibilities:
   (a)   Producing annual reports on the City's enforcement of civil rights
laws;
   (b)   Ensuring the City's own compliance with state and federal civil rights
laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act and Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination in programs receiving
federal financial assistance;
   (c)   Producing quarterly and annual reports on progress toward eliminating
racial, ethnic, and gender disparities;
   (d)   Producing, maintaining, and implementing the City's Equity Plan, which
shall identify any and all inequities in the provision of municipal services
and present strategies for addressing issues underlying those inequities;
   (e)   Administering the City's minority and women business enterprise
program;
   (f)   Training City employees on the values of mutual respect and diversity;
and
   (g)   Providing staff support to the Fort Worth Human Relations Commission.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 5, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 3: DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DATA ANALYTICS
§ 2-103 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   (a)   A Department of Planning and Data Analytics is hereby established is
to assist the City Manager, the City Council, and other City officials in
making sound policy decisions by collecting and analyzing data about all
aspects of municipal operations and thereby providing decision makers with
reliable information and advice.
   (b)   The department shall be supervised by a director who will be subject
to appointment and removal by the city manager. The director's salary shall be
set by the city manager in accordance with the city's compensation plan.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 6, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-104 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget the director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and remove
assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems necessary for
the efficient administration of the department's affairs and the execution of
the department's duties and obligations. The director shall prescribe the
duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and other personnel in
accordance with the city's compensation plan.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 6, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-105 DUTIES.
   (a)   The department shall assign priority to policy issues associated with
the city's long-term growth and development, the creation of a balanced and
sustainable tax base, the efficient and effective delivery of municipal
services, and the allocation of financial resources for those services.
   (b)   The department shall be responsible each year for producing four
mutually consistent policy documents:
      (1)   A long-range Comprehensive Plan that forecasts Fort Worth's
population and economic growth during the subsequent twenty-year period, sets
forth a common vision for the city's future development, and presents the
policies, programs, and projects by which the City intends to realize that
vision;
      (2)   A five-year Strategic Plan that describes the City's goals and how
the organization intends to achieve them, thereby guiding the preparation of
each department's annual business performance plan;
      (3)   A five-year Capital Improvements Program that serves to implement
the Comprehensive Plan and the Strategic Plan by scheduling capital projects
for which the City has identified appropriate funding sources; and
      (4)   The City's annual Budget.
   (c)   The Comprehensive Plan, the Capital Improvements Program, and the
Budget shall be subject to review and adoption by the City Council through a
process of full and meaningful public participation. The Strategic Plan, being
oriented around the management of City government, shall be subject to review
and approval by the City Manager. Beyond the production of these policy
documents, the department shall also be responsible for conducting various
planning, performance, and budget studies addressing critical policy issues in
accordance with an annual work program to be approved by the City Manager.
   (d)   In addition to the duties set forth in the Fort Worth City Charter, as
prescribed by the city council, and as directed by the city manager, the
Department of Planning and Data Analytics shall also have the following duties
and responsibilities:
      (1)   Developing and monitoring the city's operating budgets;
coordinating, establishing, monitoring, reporting and projecting the city's
budgetary expenses and revenues; recommending and assisting with implementation
of budget goals and objectives, performing analytical and evaluative studies
and completing research and special projects;
      (2)   City-wide tracking and reporting of the capital improvement program
(CIP) and other capital projects, capital projects research and policy
development; grant writing and research; and special projects as needed;
      (3)   Monitoring of all city grants, auditing and contract compliance;
and
      (4)   Providing research and recommendations to the city council on the
city's franchised utilities, reconciling the city's electric billing for
accuracy and performing utility studies/research.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 6, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 4: DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
§ 2-106 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   A Department of Development Services is hereby established, which department
shall be under the supervision of the Director of Development Services, who
shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of
the director shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 7, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-107 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director shall have the power to appoint, employ and remove
such employees and personnel according to authorized budgeted positions or
authorized personnel overages for the efficient administration of the affairs
of the department and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority and
qualifications. Unless appointed by the city manager, the director shall
appoint a building official.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 7, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-108 DUTIES.
   The director and his or her employees shall be responsible for matters
involving zoning and platting; buildings and associated systems and sites
development-related public infrastructure; easements and rights-of-way; and
annexation and municipal boundaries and s/he shall make appropriate
recommendations to the city council, cognizant boards and commissions and the
city manager regarding these matters. The director or his or her designee shall
serve as executive secretary to the city plan commission, zoning commission,
boards of adjustment and other related boards and commissions; and s/he shall
have full care, custody and control of all official records and memoranda
belonging to such boards and commissions.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 7, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-109 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   Unless appointed by the city manager, the director shall appoint a building
official. The building official shall be responsible, generally, for the
issuance or revocation of building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and sign
permits and the enforcement of all related ordinances.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 7, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-110 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES
Editor’s note:
Ord. 13444, § 1, adopted May 12, 1998, amended Div. 2, §§
2-111 through
2-114, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2,
§§
2-111 through
2-114, pertained to fiscal services. Subsequently, Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 2,
adopted September 30, 2008, amended Div. 2 to read as herein set out.
Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2 pertained to the department of
finance. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 2-111 ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   Pursuant to
Chapters VIII and
IX of the Fort Worth City Charter, there is hereby created a financial
management services department. This department shall be charged with the
administration of the financial affairs of the city as required by the City
Charter, as further required by the city council by ordinance, and as directed
by the city manager.
(Ord. 13444, § 1, passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 2-112 DIRECTOR APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION.
   The financial management services department shall be under the supervision
of the director of financial management services, who shall be subject to
appointment and removal by the city manager. The financial management services
director must be a person knowledgeable and experienced in governmental finance
and public administration. The salary of the director of financial management
services shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 13444, § 1, passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 2-113 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   As provided by the city budget, and in accordance with established personnel
procedures, the financial management services director shall have the power to
appoint, employ and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel
as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the
financial management services department and to prescribe and fix their duties,
scope of authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 13444, § 1, passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 2-114 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The financial management services director shall prescribe the form of
all accounts showing the financial transactions of all departments and offices
of the city as well as reports rendered to and by the financial management
services department. Accounting practices and financial reporting shall conform
to generally accepted accounting principles as promulgated by appropriate
regulatory bodies.
   (b)   The financial management services director shall appoint, with the
approval of the city manager, the city treasurer for the city who shall be an
employee of the financial management services department. The city treasurer
shall have custody of all public moneys, funds, notes, bonds and other
securities belonging to the city. Pursuant to state statute, the city council
shall, in cooperation with the city treasurer and city manager, select and
designate a depository for the moneys and funds of the city. Before assuming
the duties of his or her office, the city manager or the city council may
require the city treasurer to execute a bond with a responsible surety company
acceptable to the city council in such amount as may be required by the city
council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties of his
or her office, the premium of which bond shall be paid by the city.
   (c)   The financial management services director shall appoint, with the
approval of the city manager, the city assessor and collector who shall be an
employee of the financial management services department, or upon approval of
the city council, the city manager may contract with an outside contractor or
entity to perform such designated services. The city assessor and collector
will have charge of the collection of all special assessments for public
improvements, the assessment of all taxable property in the city, the
preparation of the tax rolls and the collection of all taxes and assessments
under the Charter and ordinances of the city now or hereafter to be enacted.
The assessor and collector may be required to make bond with a responsible
surety company acceptable to the city council in such amount as the city
council and the law may require, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of his or her office, the premium of which shall be paid by the
city.
   (d)   In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other
department or office, it shall be the duty of the financial management services
director to promote, secure and preserve the financial and property interests
of the city. The financial management services director shall:
      (1)   Exercise general supervision over all offices of the city regarding
the proper management of fiscal concerns of their respective offices; and
      (2)   Report the default of any officer of the city to the city manager,
who shall confer with the city attorney concerning the institution of legal
measures for the recovery of the amount for which such officer may be in
default.
(Ord. 13444, § 1, passed 5-12-1998; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008)
§§ 2-115, 2-116 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 2 of Ord. 11653, adopted August 23, 1994,repealed §§ 2-115 and 2-116.
Formerly, § 2-115 pertained to employees and general duties of director and
derived from § 41-5 of the 1964 Code and § 1 of Ord. 7280, adopted December 29,
1975; § 2-116 pertained to divisions within department and derived from § 41-
6 of the 1964 Code; § 1 of Ord. 7280, adopted December 29, 1975; § 1 of Ord.
9007, adopted January 3, 1984; § 2 of Ord. 9089, adopted May 8, 1984; § 1 of
Ord. 9899, adopted June 30, 1987; § 2 of Ord. 9915, adopted July 28, 1987; § 1
of Ord.11353, adopted July 6, 1993; § 1 of Ord. 11466, adopted December 14,
1993.
§ 2-117 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   In addition to any other authorized penalty or interest, there is hereby
established a service charge of $25 per check for any checks returned as
nonnegotiable/noncashable to any department, division or entity of the city.
(1964 Code, § 41-7) (Ord. 8958, § 2, passed 10-25-1983; Ord. 10031, § 1, passed
12-22-1987; Ord. 11083, § 1, passed 4-28-1992)
§ 2-118 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 25 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted
February 4, 2020, repealed § 2-118, which pertained to Department Duties; City
Budget.
See also the Code Comparative Table.
DIVISION 6: DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
§ 2-119 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   A department of human resources is hereby established. The department shall
be under the supervision of the director of human resources, who shall be
subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the
director of human resources shall be in accordance with the compensation plan
of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 8, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-120 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and
remove assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems
necessary for the efficient administration of the department's affairs and the
execution of the department's duties and obligations. The director shall
prescribe the duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and
other personnel.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 8, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-121 DUTIES.
   The director of human resources shall act to coordinate activities within
the department. The director shall provide overall management functions for the
department, including fiscal control, human resource programs and
administration of the city's human resource management program in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and the state civil service law for
firefighters and police officers, and in cooperation with other city
departments.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 8, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 7: DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
§ 2-122 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   Pursuant to
Chapter VII, Section 1 of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, the property
management department ("department") is hereby established. The department
shall be charged with the administration of the real property and fleet assets
of the city, as required by the city council by ordinance, and as directed by
the city manager. The department shall be supervised by a director
("director"), who will be subject to appointment and removal by the city
manager. The director's salary shall be set by the city manager in accordance
with the city's compensation plan.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 9, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-123 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and
remove assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems
necessary for the efficient administration of the department's affairs and the
execution of the department's duties and obligations. The director shall
prescribe the duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and
other personnel in accordance with the city's compensation plan.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 9, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-124 DUTIES.
   In addition to the duties as prescribed by the city manager, the department
shall also have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   The department shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The acquisition, disposition, and leasing of real property
interests, including the acquisition of utility easements and rights-of-way and
the lease and sale of city-owned property surrounding Lake Worth;
      (2)   The management of tax foreclosed properties;
      (3)   Mineral leasing of city property; and
      (4)   Other real property issues related to the city.
   (b)   The department shall provide facilities maintenance and repair to
city-owned and city-operated properties, buildings, and facilities as directed
by the city manager, and except as specifically delegated otherwise by the City
Code.
   (c)   The department shall provide space planning and allocation for the
efficient utilization of existing city facilities by city departments.
   (d)   The department shall be responsible for acquiring, monitoring,
servicing, and repairing motor vehicles and equipment used by all city
departments. Fuels and lubricants shall be researched, purchased, and
distributed by the department. The department shall establish charges for
classes of equipment and vehicles and shall recommend to the budget office
amounts to charge user departments.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 9, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 8: DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION
§ 2-125 ESTABLISHMENT, SUPERVISION AND FUNDING.
   (a)   A department of aviation is hereby established, which department shall
be under the supervision of the director of aviation, who shall be subject to
appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the director of
aviation shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
   (b)   The aviation department shall be operated as an enterprise fund of the
city and as such shall be appropriated all receipts and revenues from the
operation of the airports. In addition, the city council may, in its
discretion, appropriate other revenues to the aviation department. The city
council may choose to assess the aviation department for services provided by
other city departments. The funds allocated to the aviation department shall be
managed and disbursed in accordance with all applicable statutes, Charter,
ordinances or other regulations governing same.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 10, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-126 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of aviation shall have the power to appoint, employ
and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as he or she may
deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the
department of aviation and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of
authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 10, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-127 DUTIES.
   The director of aviation shall be responsible for planning, managing,
leasing and operating the city's aviation facilities. The director of aviation
shall additionally perform any other function assigned by the city manager to
the extent authorized under the Charter of the city and within the guidelines
as have been or may be from time to time be adopted by the city council
applicable to the operation of aviation facilities.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 10, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 9: DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT SERVICES
§ 2-128 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION.
   A department of municipal court services is hereby established which
department shall be under the supervision of the director, who shall be subject
to appointment and removal by the city manager and shall be paid a salary
established in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 11, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-129 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of municipal court services, subject to the
provisions of §
10-4, Creation of a Department of Municipal Court Services, Creation of the
Office of Director of Municipal Court Services, Duties of the Director of
Municipal Court Services, Creation of the Office of Clerk of the Municipal
Court, of
Article 1, General, Chapter 10, Courts shall have the power to appoint, employ
and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as such director
may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the department of
municipal court services and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of
authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 11, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-130 DUTIES.
   (a)   The director of municipal court services shall be responsible for the
administrative functions of the municipal court system, which shall include
responsibility to assure the system functions within and in consonance with
personnel and other procedures governing the operation of all other city
departments generally as promulgated by the city manager and shall specifically
include all of the fiscal affairs of the municipal courts.
   (a)   The director of municipal court services shall submit annually to the
city manager a budget estimate of the revenues of the municipal courts and the
expenses of conducting the affairs thereof for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 11, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 10: FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-131 ESTABLISHED.
   A fire department is hereby established which shall be under the control of
the fire chief who is charged with responsibility to provide the highest level
of protection against fire damages to lives and property of the citizens of the
city. The department shall also provide continuous service in the areas of fire
prevention, fire control, field management areas of hazardous materials,
emergency medical service and related public education functions and shall
enforce all municipal ordinances and laws, state and federal, with whose
enforcement it is charged. The fire department shall be administered by the
fire chief, who shall be designated by the city manager and confirmed by the
city council. The fire chief shall be responsible for the proper administration
and operation of the fire department, subject to the supervision of the city
manager and subject to all regulations, policies and ordinances of the city,
and the fire chief shall promulgate all rules, regulations and orders for the
governing of the fire department.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 12, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-132 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   The fire chief will have exclusive control of the stationing, transfer
and work scheduling of all firefighters and other officers and employees of the
fire department in accordance with civil service law and city rules and
regulations.
   (b)   Executive Assistant Chief.
      (1)   The fire chief may designate one officer from the classification
immediately below that of fire chief, who, in addition to that officer's
regular duties, will be assigned the duties of executive assistant chief, and
who will perform the following specialized functions with the department:
         a.   Serve as acting fire chief when the fire chief is absent from the
city or is temporarily unable to fulfill the duties of the office of fire
chief;
         b.   Represent the fire department in matters pertaining to budget,
personnel, legal and administrative matters;
         c.   Represent the fire chief at public functions when fire chief is
unable to attend;
         d.   Assist the fire chief in evaluation of departmental employees and
performance;
         e.   Assist the fire chief in inter-city and intra-city agency and
department relations; and
         f.   Perform other specialized duties, as assigned by the fire chief.
      (2)   The officer who performs the above specialized functions shall
receive the sum of $500 per month as assignment pay. Such payment shall be in
addition to the officer's regular pay.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 12, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-133 DUTIES.
   The fire chief shall have the exclusive right to discipline any of the
officers or employees of the department in accordance with the Revised Civil
Statutes, Article 1269m, as amended, city rules and regulations, and fire
department rules and regulations and orders. The fire chief shall have the
power to negotiate agreements with other governmental subdivisions for mutual
aid in fire protection subject to the approval of the city manager.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 12, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 11: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES
§ 2-134 ESTABLISHED; SUPERVISION.
   A department of public libraries is hereby established, which department
shall be under the supervision of a librarian, who shall be subject to
appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the librarian shall
be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 13, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-135 DUTIES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the librarian shall have the power to appoint, employ and remove
such assistants, employees and personnel as deemed necessary for the efficient
administration of the affairs of the department of public libraries, and to
prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority and qualifications in
accordance with the annual budget of the department of public libraries as
finally adopted by the city council and the classification and compensation
plan established by the city council. All assistants, employees and personnel
of the department of public libraries shall be governed by the same personnel
rules and classification and compensation plan as is established for all other
employees of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 13, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-136 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   The librarian shall have charge of the central library and all branch
libraries and shall be responsible for the care, classification and arrangement
of all library materials, and keep same catalogued and indexed consistent with
approved library techniques and practices. The librarian shall promptly report
any delinquencies, keep exact account of all moneys from all fines and other
amounts collected by the department, process all moneys received in accordance
with established city policies, and perform and discharge such other duties as
may be prescribed by the city manager. The librarian shall be responsible to
the city manager for administration and implementation of the policies
established by the city council for the operation of the department of public
libraries.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 13, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 12: DEPARTMENT OF PARK AND RECREATION
§ 2-137 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a park and recreation department, which
department shall be under the supervision of the park and recreation director,
who shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary
of the park and recreation director shall be in accordance with the
compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-138 DUTIES.
   Subject to the approval of the city manager, the park and recreation
director shall be responsible for determining the overall policies, regulations
and programs governing acquisition, improvement, maintenance and operation of
all public parks, parkways, lakes and other recreational areas, and the grounds
surrounding all municipal buildings owned or controlled by the city. In
addition, the director shall perform such other tasks and administer such
programs as may be assigned by the city manager from time to time for the
purpose of promoting the well-being of the community and the citizens of the
city. The park and recreation director shall be responsible to the city manager
for administration and implementation of the policies established by the city
council in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-139 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the park and recreation director shall have the power to appoint,
employ and remove such other officers, assistants, employees and personnel as
he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of
the park and recreation department, and to prescribe and fix their duties,
scope of authority and qualifications in accordance with the annual budget of
the park and recreation department as finally adopted by the city council and
the classification and compensation plan established by the city council. All
officers and employees of the parks and community service department shall be
governed by the same personnel rules and classification and compensation plan
as is established for all other employees of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 13: POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-140 ESTABLISHED.
   A police department is hereby established, charged with maintaining peace
and order in the community and protecting the citizens of the city. The
department shall provide continuous patrol services, response to citizens'
calls for assistance, investigate criminal offenses, apprehend offenders,
provide traffic enforcement and enforce all municipal ordinances and laws,
state and federal, the enforcement of which it is charged with. The police
department shall be administered by the office of the chief of police, who
shall be designated by the city manager.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 15, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-141 DUTIES.
   The office of the chief of police shall be responsible for the proper
administration and operations of the police department, subject to the
supervision of the city manager, and subject to all regulations, policies and
ordinances of the city and he or she shall promulgate all rules, regulations
and orders for the governing of the police department. The chief of police
shall have the exclusive right to discipline any of the officers or employees
of the department in accordance with state civil service law, city rules and
regulations, police department general and interim orders, and the police
department code of conduct. In case of the disability of the chief of police or
the executive assistant chief, by reason of sickness, absence from the city or
other cause, the city manager shall designate one of the assistant chiefs or
deputy chiefs within the police department to act as chief of police during
such disability, and the officer so designated shall serve without additional
compensation.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 15, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-142 EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (a)   The police chief may designate one officer from the classification
immediately below that of police chief, who, in addition to that officer's
regular duties, will be assigned the duties of executive assistant chief, and
who will perform the following specialized functions with the department:
      (1)   Serve as acting police chief when the police chief is absent from
the city or is temporarily unable to fulfill the duties of the office of police
chief;
      (2)   Represent the police department in matters pertaining to budget,
personnel, legal and administrative matters;
      (3)   Represent the police chief at public functions when the police
chief is unable to attend;
      (4)   Assist the police chief in evaluation of departmental employees and
performance;
      (5)   Assist the police chief in inter-city and intra-city agency and
department relations; and
      (6)   Perform other specialized duties, as assigned by the police chief.
   (b)   The officer who performs the above specialized functions shall receive
the sum of $500 per month as assignment pay. Such payment shall be in addition
to the officer's regular pay.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 15, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 14: DEPARTMENT OF CODE COMPLIANCE
§ 2-143 ESTABLISHED.
   A department of code compliance is hereby established. The department shall
be under the supervision of the director of code compliance who shall be
subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the
director of code compliance shall be in accordance with the compensation plan
of the city. The director of code compliance shall be in charge of the
department of code compliance and shall be responsible for enforcement of this
chapter and of the city's environmental, health, housing and zoning codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-144 DUTIES.
   The department of code compliance shall have the following duties.
   (a)   The director of the department shall act to coordinate activities
within the department. The director shall provide overall management functions
for the department, including contract management, fiscal control and
personnel/safety programs.
   (b)   The director shall designate employees to enforce city code
provisions. The code enforcement personnel shall be responsible for performing
recurring inspections of properties in order to cause abatement of
environmental, health, zoning and housing nuisances. These employees shall
prepare cases for review by the building standards commission and the city
council. They will initiate and participate in legal action, when required, to
be processed through the municipal court and the Tarrant County court system
and in nuisance abatement actions performed by the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-145 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of code compliance shall have the power to appoint,
employ and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as he or
she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the
department of code compliance and to prescribe and fix their duties and scope
of authority within the budget approved by the city council.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 14, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 15: DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS
Cross-reference:
Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
Water and sewers,
Ch. 35
§ 2-146 ESTABLISHED.
   A department of public works is hereby established, which department shall
also be known as the department of transportation and public works.
(1964 Code, § 42-1) (Ord. 8658, § 1, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 2,
passed 9-30-2008)
§ 2-147 DIRECTOR—APPOINTMENT; SALARY; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The department of transportation and public works shall be under the
supervision of the director of transportation and public works, who shall be
subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the
director of transportation and public works shall be in accordance with the
compensation plan of the city.
(1964 Code, §§ 42-1, 42-2) (Ord. 8658, § 1, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 18319-09-
2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 23503-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2-148 SAME—POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The director of the department of transportation and public works
shall be the custodian of and responsible for maintaining all maps, plans,
profiles and field notes, grid coordinates and other records and memoranda
belonging to the city pertaining to his or her office and the work thereof, all
of which he or she shall keep in proper order and condition, with full indexes
thereof. All maps, plans, profiles, field notes, grid coordinates, estimates
and other memoranda of professional work made or done by him or her or under
his or her direction and control shall be the property of the city.
   (b)   The director of transportation and public works shall have charge of
the opening, construction, paving, lighting, signing, marking, maintenance,
reconstruction and repair of all streets, boulevards, alleys, sidewalks,
thoroughfares, stormwater facilities and public ways other than those solely
serving or within water and sanitary sewer facilities. He or she shall have
charge of the development and implementation of all city transportation
programs to provide for the efficient mobility needs of Fort Worth citizens in
all areas of public transportation. He or she shall have charge of the
planning, design, construction, maintenance and repair of all public facilities
owned and operated by the city except those specifically delegated to the
Property Management Department, the water department or otherwise by this
chapter. He or she shall have the right to delegate this responsibility in
writing to other departments, under mutually agreed terms, where special
circumstances deem such action appropriate.
   (c)   The city engineer shall be a professional engineer registered and
licensed to practice in the State of Texas. If the director of the department
of transportation and public works is a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, he or she may serve as the city engineer or he or she may
appoint a duly licensed employee of the department to serve as the city
engineer. The city engineer shall approve or accept all plans and
specifications relating to the construction, reconstruction, repair or
maintenance of public or private facilities located on, under, above or along
city property and rights-of-way, such approval or acceptance to be evidenced by
his or her signature on such plans and specifications. No such work shall be
commenced unless and until such approval or acceptance has been obtained.
   (d)   The city traffic engineer shall be a professional engineer registered
and licensed to practice in the State of Texas. If the director of
transportation and public works is a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, he or she may also serve as the city traffic engineer or he or
she may appoint a duly licensed employee of the department to serve as the city
traffic engineer. The city traffic engineer shall exercise the powers and
duties so provided in
Chapter 22 of this code and other ordinances of the city relative to traffic.
   (e)   The director of transportation and public works shall act to
coordinate activities within the department. The director shall provide overall
management functions for the department, including contract management, fiscal
control, personnel/safety programs and administration of the city’s
infrastructure improvement projects in cooperation with other city departments.
   (f)   The department shall be responsible for enforcing compliance with city
construction contract provisions and specifications by performing recurring
inspections during the construction of city projects.
   (g)   The department of transportation and public works shall be responsible
for providing planning, design, construction inspection, project management and
related engineering services for city infrastructure improvement projects as
requested in cooperation with other city departments and which are not
otherwise covered in
Chapter 35 of the code.
   (h)   The department shall be structured, in part, as an internal services
fund for the provision of services to other city departments. As such, the
department will establish rates to recover the cost of service from the other
city departments. Costs will be allocated to other city departments based upon
actual level of services provided by the department of transportation and
public works for the respective departments.
   (i)   The department of transportation and public works shall be responsible
for providing survey services as requested by other city departments.
(1964 Code, §§ 42-2, 42-3) (Ord. 8658, § 1, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 18319-09-
2008, § 2, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 21650-02-2015, §§ 3, 5, passed 2-17-2015;
Ord. 23503-12-2018, § 2, passed 12-11-2018; Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 2, passed 5-
7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 2-149 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   The director of transportation and public works shall have the power to
appoint, employ and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel
as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs
of the department of transportation and public works and to prescribe and fix
their duties, scope of authority and qualifications.
(1964 Code, § 42-4) (Ord. 8658, § 1, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 2,
passed 9-30-2008)
DIVISION 16: DEPARTMENT OF WATER
§ 2-150 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a waterworks department which shall also be
known as the department of water, which department, under the supervision of
the director of the water department, shall be responsible for planning,
constructing, operating and maintaining water and sanitary sewerage systems
serving the city and such others as the city council may approve and direct.
The department shall be under the supervision of the director of the water
department, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The salary of the
director shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 17, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-151 DUTIES.
   Such responsibility of the water department shall include, but not be
limited to, engineering for the planning, design and construction of water and
sewer facilities; developing programs for expenditures for capital improvements
of such water and sewerage systems; providing for establishment of appropriate
business procedures, personnel and equipment to ensure adequate record keeping,
billing and collection of charges for services rendered; developing rate
structures for services rendered to ensure adequate revenue for the full
financing of all necessary expenses of carrying out all water department
responsibilities; providing personnel, equipment and material as necessary to
conduct, reconstruct, operate and maintain water and sanitary sewer systems'
piping, pumping and treating facilities; and such other undertakings as may be
deemed appropriate by the city council.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 17, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-152 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of water shall have the power to appoint, employ and
remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as he or she may deem
necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the department of
water and to prescribe and fix their duties and scope of authority within the
budget approved by the city council.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 17, passed 2-4-2020)
DIVISION 17: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
§ 2-153 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a department of communications and public
engagement under the supervision of the director of the department of
communications and public engagement who shall be responsible for oversight of
the City's website, cable communications office, call center and the community
engagement team. The department shall be under the supervision of the director
of the communications and public engagement, who shall be appointed by the city
manager. The salary of the director shall be in accordance with the
compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 18, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-154 DUTIES.
   Such responsibility of the department of communications and public
engagement shall include, but not be limited to, working with a variety of
stakeholders to share city messages across a variety of communications channels
and take feedback and ideas from the community back to city officials to create
an inclusive and responsive city government. The department is also responsible
for:
   (a)   Coordinating media relations activities and handling media inquiries
for the City of Fort Worth;
   (b)   Working with residents on building neighborhood capacity and the
developing communication networks of city stakeholders. These include faith-
based groups, neighborhood associations, schools and nonprofit organizations;
   (c)   Managing the call center that answers calls for various city
departments and switchboard calls for the City Manager's Office, initiating
work orders for residents, and educating and clarifying city services and
regulations; and
   (d)   Maintaining and managing the content on the city's website.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, §§ 18, 19, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-155 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of communications and public engagement shall have
the power to appoint, employ and remove such officers, assistants, employees
and personnel as he or she may deem necessary for the efficient administration
of the affairs of the department of communications and public engagement and to
prescribe and fix their duties and scope of authority within the budget
approved by the city council.
(Ord. 24030-02-2020, §§ 18, 19, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 2-156—2-160 RESERVED.
DIVISION 18: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC EVENTS
Cross-reference:
Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
§ 2-161 ESTABLISHED; DIRECTOR.
   A department of public events is hereby established, which department shall
be under the supervision of the director of public events, who shall be subject
to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the director of
public events shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(1964 Code, § 2-60) (Ord. 8698, § 1, passed 12-7-1982)
§ 2-162 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   The director of public events shall have the power to appoint, employ and
remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as he or she may deem
necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the department of
public events and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority and
qualifications.
(1964 Code, § 2-61) (Ord. 8698, § 1, passed 12-7-1982)
§ 2-163 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The director of public events shall be responsible for the leasing and
operation of the facilities, buildings and space within buildings at the Will
Rogers Memorial Complex. The director of public events shall additionally
perform any other function assigned by the city manager to the extent
authorized under the Charter of the city and within the guidelines as have been
or may be from time to time adopted by the city council applicable to the lease
of city-owned facilities.
(1964 Code, § 2-62) (Ord. 8698, § 1, passed 12-7-1982)
DIVISION 19: DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Editor’s note:
Section 1 of Ord. 21650-02-2015, adopted February 17, 2015, repealed former
Div. 6, §§ 2-164 through 2-166, which pertained to the department of housing
and economic development, and derived from § 2 of Ord. 17522, adopted April 24,
2007, as amended by § 2 of Ord. 18320-09-2008, passed September 30, 2008.
Subsequently, Ord. 21652-02-2015, adopted February 17, 2015, enacted this new
Div. 6, §§ 2-164 through 2-166, as set forth below.
§ 2-164 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.
   Pursuant to Chapter VIII, § 1 of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, the
economic development department (“department”) is hereby established. The
department shall be supervised by a director (“director”), who will be subject
to appointment and removal by the city manager. The director’s salary shall be
set by the city manager in accordance with the city’s compensation plan.
(Ord. 21652-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2-165 DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES.
   The director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and remove
assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems necessary for
the efficient administration of the department’s affairs and the execution of
the department’s duties and obligations. The director shall prescribe the
duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and other personnel in
accordance with the city’s compensation plan.
(Ord. 21652-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2-166 DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   (a)   The department shall oversee projects designed to increase investment
in all areas of the City of Fort Worth in order to expand the city’s economy
and tax base and to increase local employment.
   (b)   The department shall endeavor to provide a positive business
environment in which local businesses can grow, flourish and create high-paying
jobs with benefits for citizens of the City of Fort Worth.
   (c)   The department shall use incentives as allowed by law to encourage new
investment and business expansion in the City of Fort Worth as designated from
time to time by the city council.
   (d)   The department shall provide skills development, technical advice, and
financial assistance to small and medium-sized businesses and entrepreneurs in
the City of Fort Worth.
   (e)   The department shall promote international trade from and to the City
of Fort Worth and employ various initiatives to increase local awareness of
global economic issues and opportunities.
   (f)   The department shall conduct and participate in activities that
promote job opportunities for citizens of the City of Fort Worth.
   (g)   The department shall encourage close cooperation with other local
jurisdictions, chambers of commerce, and organizations interested in promoting
the economic well-being of areas within the City of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 21652-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
§§ 2-167—2-170 RESERVED.
DIVISION 20: DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES
Editor’s note:
Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 1, adopted September 30, 2008, repealed former Div. 7, §§
2-171 through 2-174, which pertained to engineering. Subsequently, Ord. 21651-
02-2015, adopted February 17, 2015, enacted this new Div. 7, §§ 2-171 through
2-173, as set forth below. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 2-171 ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.
   A neighborhood services department (“department”) is hereby established. The
department shall be supervised by a director (“director”), who will be subject
to appointment and removal by the city manager. The director’s salary shall be
set by the city manager in accordance with the city’s compensation plan.
(Ord. 21651-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2-172 DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES.
   The Director shall have the authority to appoint, employ and remove
assistants, employees and other personnel as the Director deems necessary for
the efficient administration of the Department’s affairs and the execution of
the Department’s duties and obligations. The Director shall prescribe the
duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees and other personnel in
accordance with the City’s compensation plan.
(Ord. 21651-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2-173 DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   (a)   The department shall provide for the administration of programs and
the expenditure of funds for housing and neighborhood revitalization with both
public funds, public and private grants, and private donations.
   (b)   The department shall coordinate the implementation of neighborhood and
community development projects endorsed by the city council.
   (c)   The department shall oversee projects designed to increase investment
in the central city areas of Fort Worth and other targeted areas.
   (d)   The department shall use incentives as allowed by law to encourage new
investment and business expansion in targeted areas of the City of Fort Worth
as designated from time to time by the city council.
   (e)   The department shall manage City of Fort Worth special corporate
entities created for the furthering of economic development and affordable
housing activities.
   (f)   The department shall conduct and participate in activities that
promote job opportunities for citizens of the City of Fort Worth in targeted
areas as designated from time to time by the city council.
(Ord. 21651-02-2015, § 1, passed 2-17-2015)
DIVISION 21: DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
§ 2-174 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES.
   The department of environmental services is hereby established. The
department shall be under the supervision of the director of environmental
services, who shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager.
The salary of the director of environmental services shall be in accordance
with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 27042-08-2024, § 2, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 2-175 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director of environmental services shall have the power to
appoint, employ and remove such employees and personnel according to authorized
budgeted positions or authorized personnel overages for the efficient
administration of the affairs of the department and to prescribe and fix their
duties, scope of authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 27042-08-2024, § 2, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 2-176 DUTIES.
   The director and his or her employees shall be responsible for
investigating, monitoring, inspecting, and auditing matters and issues
pertaining to environmental quality, consumer health, solid waste within the
City of Fort Worth, and other matters assigned by the city council or city
manager’s office.
(Ord. 27042-08-2024, § 2, passed 8-13-2024)
DIVISION 22: DEPARTMENT OF OFFICE OF MEDICAL DIRECTOR
§ 2-177 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF OFFICE OF MEDICAL DIRECTOR.
   The department of office of medical director is hereby established. The
department shall be under the supervision of the medical director, who shall be
subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the
medical director shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 27372-12-2024, § 2, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 2-177.1 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the medical director shall have the power to appoint, employ and
remove such employees and personnel according to authorized budgeted positions
or authorized personnel overages for the efficient administration of the
affairs of the department and to prescribe and fix their duties, scope of
authority and qualifications.
(Ord. 27372-12-2024, § 2, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 2-177.2 DUTIES.
   The medical director shall serve as the chief medical officer and medical
director of the City of Fort Worth’s EMS System and will report to the city
manager and assigned deputy or assistant city manager of Fort Worth. The
medical director and his or her employees shall be responsible for providing
independent medical direction and clinical oversight for the City of Fort Worth
EMS System and other matters assigned by the city council or city manager’s
office.
(Ord. 27372-12-2024, § 2, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 2-177.3—2-177.4 RESERVED.
DIVISION 23: DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND COMMUNICATIONS
§ 2-177.5 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
   The department of emergency management and communications is hereby
established. The department shall be under the supervision of a director, who
shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of
the director shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.6 APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
   In accordance with established personnel procedures and as provided by the
city budget, the director shall have the power to appoint, employ and remove
such assistants, employees and other personnel as the director deems necessary
for the efficient administration of the affairs of the department. The director
shall prescribe the duties of and compensation to such assistants, employees
and other personnel in accordance with the city's compensation plan.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.7 DUTIES.
   The director will report to the city manager and will carry out their duties
under the direction of the city manager and in support of the mayor as the
emergency management director, consistent with Tex. Government Code § 418.1015.
The director and his or her employees shall be responsible for directing the
activities of the department of emergency management and communications,
including comprehensive emergency management (mitigation, preparedness,
response, and recovery), public safety communications (excluding fire
communications unless otherwise authorized by law), and operational
coordination during emergency incidents. The director shall also be responsible
for ensuring compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws,
regulations, codes, and standards and shall coordinate with the Fort Worth
chief of police and Fort Worth fire chief to ensure a unified response
structure is maintained.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.8 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   Emergency communications is hereby created as a division of the
department of emergency management and communications. The division shall be
overseen by an administrator under the supervision and direction of the
director and is charged with carrying out the responsibilities outlined herein.
   (b)   The administrator's duties shall include oversight of the city's
emergency communications and 911 center, including all non-fire call takers, in
compliance with applicable state and local law. To the extent Fort Worth EMS
call takers are designated as firefighters under Texas law or local agreement,
they shall remain under the authority of the Fort Worth fire chief, but
operational coordination, facilities oversight, and systemwide communications
protocols shall remain the responsibility of this department.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.9 OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   The Office of Emergency Management, as described by §
11.5-5 of
Chapter 11.5 of the Code, shall be a division within the department of
emergency management and communications and report to the director.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.10 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The department of emergency management and communications is in
operational control of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC), and, upon a local
emergency declaration, the director shall serve as the city's lead coordinating
official for all emergency response and recovery activities in support of the
mayor as the city's emergency management director consistent with Tex.
Government Code § 418.1015. All communications to the public and external
partners from public safety agencies shall be coordinated through the EOC and
Joint Information Center (JIC), under the oversight of this department.
   (b)   The director shall ensure that all city personnel, including but not
limited to police, fire, and emergency medical services, integrate their
response efforts through the EOC structure and in alignment with the city's
adopted emergency management plans and protocols.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.11 INTERDEPARTMENTAL AND EXTERNAL COORDINATION.
   (a)   The department shall serve as the city's primary point of coordination
for all emergency preparedness, response, and recovery efforts involving
external partners, including but not limited to county governments, the North
Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG), the State of Texas, and
neighboring units of local government.
   (b)   The department shall be responsible for maintaining and executing
mutual aid agreements and interagency coordination frameworks to support public
safety and continuity of operations during emergencies.
(Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 2, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 2-177.12—2-177.14 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: HUMAN RESOURCES
Charter reference:
   Council to provide for establishment, etc., of merit system governing
personnel policies, see
Ch. XXIII, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Office of city traffic engineer created, see §
22-2
   Retired employees’ group death benefit fund, see §§
2.5-226
§ 2-178 MERIT SYSTEM.
   The city council shall establish a system of human resource management based
upon merit principles that meet the program needs of the city. This merit
system shall provide the means to recruit, select, develop and maintain an
effective and responsive work force and shall include policies and procedures
for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job
classification, salary administration, employment benefits, discipline,
discharge and other related employment activities.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (3), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-179 MERIT PRINCIPLES.
   (a)   Recruitment shall be from qualified individuals from all appropriate
sources and, after fair and open competition. Selection shall be on the basis
of job-related ability, knowledge and skills.
   (b)   All persons applying for employment and all employees shall receive
fair and equitable treatment in all aspects of human resource management
without regard to race, color, religion, national original, sex, marital
status, age, disability or political affiliation and with proper regard for
their privacy and their constitutional rights.
   (c)   Employee advancement shall be based on demonstrated ability and
quality of performance.
   (d)   Equitable compensation shall be provided for equivalent work, and
incentives may be provided for excellence in performance.
   (e)   Employees shall be retained on the basis of their performance;
training and development opportunities may be provided; inadequate performance
shall be corrected; employees shall be dismissed who cannot or will not improve
their performance to meet established standards.
   (f)   High standards of integrity and conduct shall be established which
shall be maintained by all employees.
   (g)   Employees shall be prohibited from using their official authority or
influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of a
nomination for public office or an election. Employees shall be protected from
coercion for political purposes.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (4), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-180 COVERAGE OF THE SYSTEM.
   This article shall apply to all officers and employees of the city and shall
apply to all such positions in the city service now existing or hereafter
established, except as provided below.
   (a)   The mayor, members of the city council and members of appointive
boards shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The following positions shall be exempt from the dismissal, suspension
and demotion section of this article:
      (1)   The city manager and the assistant city managers.
      (2)   The heads of departments, assistant heads of department, and
division heads;
      (3)   The judges of the municipal court system;
      (4)   The city internal auditor;
      (5)   The city secretary;
      (6)   Persons temporarily appointed to the city service;
      (7)   Employees in their initial probationary period;
      (8)   The city attorney and all deputy and assistance city attorneys in
the department of law;
      (9)   Aides to the city council members/district directors.
   (c)   Employees of the police department and fire department who are subject
to the provisions of the Fire and Police Civil Service Law (Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 143) are exempt from the section on dismissal,
suspension and demotion, and the section on political activities.
   (d)   The city manager’s secretary shall be subject to the dismissal,
suspension and demotion section of this article, save and except that, in the
event of an appeal by the city manager’s secretary of a disciplinary action,
all findings and recommendations of the disciplinary appeals board of its
designated hearing officer shall be made to the appropriate committee of the
city council for final decision rather than to the city manager.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (5), passed 4-18-1995; Ord. 25226-12-2021, § 1, passed 12-14-
2021)
§ 2-181 DISMISSAL, SUSPENSION OR DEMOTION.
   (a)   The director of a city department, or that individual’s designee, may,
for any cause specified in the Personnel Rules and Regulations concerning
disciplinary action, take any of the following adverse employment actions
against an employee:
      (1)   Dismissal;
      (2)   Suspension for more than ten business days; or
      (3)   Demotion in rank or position.
   (b)   Any adverse employment action taken under subsection (a) above against
an employee who is covered by this article shall be subject to the right of
appeal given to such employee under this article and under the relevant City of
Fort Worth Personnel Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (6), passed 4-18-1995; Ord. 21197-04-2014, § 1, passed 4-15-
2014, eff. 4-22-2014)
§ 2-182 DISCIPLINARY APPEALS PROCESS.
   (a)   An appeal from an adverse employment action under §
2-181(a) must comply with the requirements of this section and of the relevant
provisions of the City of Fort Worth Personnel Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   Timely filing of all requests for review and notices of appeal
required under the Personnel Rules and Regulations shall serve as conditions
precedent to jurisdiction over the appeal. If an employee fails to timely file
any request for review or notice of appeal, the appeal shall be automatically
dismissed by the human resources department, the appeal process shall be
immediately terminated, and any further appeal rights shall be forfeited.
   (c)   If all jurisdictional requirements of subsection (b) above and all
other requirements under the Personnel Rules and Regulations for an employee to
have an appeal hearing have been met, the human resources department shall
assign a hearing officer selected in accordance with §
2-183.
   (d)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the
procedures described in the Personnel Rules and Regulations.
   (e)   If an employee has been given proper notice of the date, time and
location of an appeal hearing and fails to appear, the hearing officer may
dismiss the appeal on motion of the city or the hearing officer’s own motion.
For purposes of this provision notice shall be considered to be proper if it
contains accurate information, is correctly addressed to the mailing address
that the employee (or his or her legal representative) most recently provided
to the human resources department, and is sent by first class United States
mail or common or contract carrier with postage or handling charges prepaid.
   (f)   After an appeal hearing has concluded, the hearing officer shall
prepare findings of fact and recommendations for disposition, which shall be
considered by the city manager. All such findings and recommendations must
comply with the requirements of this section.
   (g)   A hearing officer’s findings and recommendations shall be based solely
on the facts placed in evidence during the appeal hearing.
   (h)   A hearing officer’s findings of fact shall be limited to a
determination of whether it has been established by a preponderance of the
evidence that the facts that form the basis for the discipline occurred.
   (i)   If the hearing officer determines that the facts did occur, the
hearing officer shall, based on the evidence presented, recommend either that
the disciplinary action be upheld or, if applicable, be reduced to one of the
following actions: suspension, demotion, probation, written warning or oral
warning. If the hearing officer determines that the facts did not occur as
alleged, the hearing officer shall, based on the evidence presented, make
recommendations as to an appropriate course of action, which shall be limited
to reinstatement with or without back pay and benefits.
   (j)   In determining the amount of back pay and benefits to recommend, if
any, the hearing officer shall take into account an employee’s duty to mitigate
and shall consider the monetary value of any pay and/or benefits that the
employee actually earned or reasonably could have earned during the
disciplinary period.
   (k)   No punitive damages, attorney’s fees or other relief shall be
available to the employee, and a hearing officer may not recommend any remedy
unless it is explicitly provided for under subsection (i) above.
   (l)   The hearing officer shall, in accordance with the procedures and
deadlines outlined in the Personnel Rules and Regulations, forward his or her
findings and recommendations to the Human Resources Department for presentation
to the city manager.
   (m)   A hearing officer’s findings and recommendations are not binding on
the city manager. The city manager has the final authority to accept, modify or
reject any of the hearing officer’s findings or recommendations and to take
such action as the city manager determines is in the best interest of the city.
   (n)   This section applies to an employee’s exercise of the rights afforded
under this article. To the extent any law outside of this article or of the
city code provides an employee with different or additional rights and/or
establishes different requirements or deadlines, that other law shall govern
the disposition of claims made under it.
(Ord. 21197-04-2014, § 3, passed 4-15-2014, eff. 4-25-2014)
§ 2-183 DESIGNATION OF HEARING OFFICER.
   (a)   The human resources department shall make all reasonable efforts to
ensure that at all times the department maintains a roster of at least three
neutral, third-party hearing officers who meet the requirements of this section
and who have agreed to preside over disciplinary appeal hearings if available
and requested to do so.
   (b)   In determining whether to appoint an individual to the roster of
hearing officers, the human resources department shall consider the
individual’s training and experience and shall endeavor to select individuals
who: are familiar with legal requirements applicable to employers and employees
as well as the city’s Personnel Rules and Regulations; have good analytical
skills; have prior experience conducting administrative hearings or similar
quasi-judicial proceedings; have experience issuing written findings of fact
based on the evidence introduced; have experience issuing recommendations or
orders applying law or policy to adduced facts; and have a demonstrated ability
to write clearly and concisely and to put in writing how those facts show
compliance with or violation of the law or policy at issue. A hearing officer
may request to be removed from the roster. In addition, the director of the
human resources department or that individual’s designee may, in his or her
sole discretion, remove a hearing officer for any reason, including, but not
limited to, demonstrating bias, failing to comply with all applicable
requirements of this section and the Personnel Rules and Regulations,
cancelling or postponing hearings without providing the department and the
parties adequate advance notice, failing to meet deadlines, or producing
written recommendations that do not demonstrate the skills and abilities
described above.
   (c)   In selecting among qualified hearing officer candidates, the director
of the Human Resources Department or that person’s designee shall take into
account the composition of the city’s workforce and shall endeavor to provide a
roster that is fairly representative of both sexes and of the various racial
groups that comprise the employees of the city.
   (d)   An individual may not serve as a hearing officer if the individual or
the individual’s spouse or domestic partner is otherwise being compensated by
the city in exchange for serving as an official, employee, temporary contract
laborer or vendor.
   (e)   (1)   A hearing officer is disqualified to hear an appeal, and shall
disclose to the Human Resources Department in writing, if the hearing officer
is:
         a.   Acting in place of a parent for;
         b.   In a domestic partner relationship with; or
         c.   Related within the second degree by consanguinity or affinity to
any of the following individuals: the employee; the department head or designee
who imposed discipline; or any witness.
      (2)   A person is related within the second degree by consanguinity to
the person’s parents; grandparents; children; grandchildren; and the person’s
aunts, uncles, cousins, nieces, and nephews related by blood or adoption. A
person is related within the second degree by affinity to the person’s spouse;
step-parents; step-grandparents; stepchildren; step-grandchildren; parents-in-
law; children-in-law; and the person’s aunts, uncles, cousins, nieces and
nephews related by marriage.
   (f)   A hearing officer is intended to serve as neutral third party with no
allegiance or ties to the city or the employee. The human resources department
shall advise each hearing officer of the hearing officer’s duty of
impartiality. The department may, in its discretion, require a hearing officer
to issue an oath affirming awareness of and commitment to this duty.
   (g)   The human resources department shall establish and implement a written
process for maintaining the roster and assigning hearing officers to ensure
hearing officers are assigned on an impartial, rotating, random basis and to
ensure that neither party is allowed to request assignment or non-assignment of
a particular hearing officer or to otherwise attempt to influence the hearing
officer assignment process.
   (h)   A hearing officer shall preside over the assigned disciplinary appeal
hearing and shall have the power and authority to administer oaths; to admit or
exclude evidence; to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and
the production of documents; to issue other orders reasonably necessary for the
fair, impartial and efficient conduct of the assigned disciplinary appeal
hearing; and to issue findings and recommendations in accordance with §
2-182.
(Ord. 21197-04-2014, § 4, passed 4-15-2014, eff. 4-25-2014)
§ 2-184 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   In this article, the term PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS means the
policies, practices, guidelines and work rules adopted in accordance with the
terms of this section.
   (b)   In accordance with the city manager’s duty under the City Charter to
exercise control over city departments, the city manager or that individual’s
designee shall, with advice and assistance from the Human Resources Department,
develop, adopt and promulgate Personnel Rules and Regulations for all city
employees who are, directly or indirectly, under the city manager’s supervision
and control.
   (c)   All Personnel Rules and Regulations shall be unbiased and merit-based.
   (d)   One or more alternative bodies of Personnel Rules and Regulations may
be adopted for personnel who are governed by the state’s civil service laws to
the extent such alternate rules and regulations are required in order to comply
with state law or the terms of a binding labor agreement that has been
negotiated in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 21197-04-2014, § 5, passed 4-15-2014, eff. 4-25-2014)
§ 2-185 CERTIFICATION OF PAYROLL VOUCHERS.
   The human resources director or the director’s designee shall be responsible
for certifying that the persons named on the payroll vouchers have been
appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (11), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-186 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   EMPLOYEE means an employee of the City of Fort Worth.
      (2)   OFFICER means any person appointed by the Mayor or City Council to
a board, commission or committee established by charter, ordinance or state
law, including hearing officers as defined in the
Chapter 2, “Administration,”
Article VII, “Code of Ethics” of the Code of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, as
amended.
      (3)    The following are deemed not to be officers:
         a.   Municipal judges; and
         b.   Members of an advisory board, task force or any other committee
that functions only in an advisory or study capacity.
   (b)   Officers may not seek election to any public office or hold public
office during their appointment. Any officer who becomes a candidate for
nomination or election to any public office shall immediately forfeit his or
her position held with the city.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall prohibit an employee from becoming a candidate
for public office. No disciplinary action shall be taken against an employee,
including terminating the employment of the employee solely because the
employee becomes a candidate for public office. The employee must fulfill all
the duties and responsibilities associated with his or her employment.
   (d)   Except as provided by subsection (e) below, officers and employees may
solicit or receive subscription or contributions for any political party or for
any political purpose while off duty. Officers and employees shall not be
required to contribute to any political fund or person seeking a political
office; and no person shall be removed, reduced in classification or salary, or
otherwise prejudiced by refusing to do so.
   (e)   (1)   The following employees are prohibited from taking an active
part in another person’s campaign for city council:
         a.   Department heads;
         b.   Assistant city managers;
         c.   City attorney; and
         d.   City manager.
      (2)   Taking an active part includes, but is not limited to, making a
political speech, making financial contributions, distributing campaign
literature, writing a letter, signing a petition and actively seeking votes.
   (f)   No employee shall take an active part in any other person’s political
campaign for an elective position while on active duty or in uniform.
   (g)   Employees may actively participate in referendum elections while off-
duty. Employees may wear city-issued uniforms for an off-duty political
activity related to a referendum election if the employee was required to wear
the city uniform as part of his or her on-duty employment on the day of the
political activity.
   (h)   A employee shall not, directly or indirectly, induce or attempt to
induce any subordinate of the employee:
      (1)   To participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate
or political committee, or engage in any other political activity relating to a
particular party, candidate or issue; or
      (2)   To refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity.
   (i)   A general statement merely encouraging another person to vote does not
violate subsection (h) above.
   (j)   Except as provided by subsection (e) above, nothing contained in this
section shall affect the rights of officers and employees to support a
political party, to act as a precinct chairperson, to vote as they choose in
any election, to express their opinions on all political subjects and
candidates, to publicly endorse candidates, to maintain political neutrality or
to attend political meetings.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (11), passed 4-18-1995; Ord. 17849, § 1, passed 10-23-2007;
Ord. 18862-10-2009, § 1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 20934-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-
17-2013)
§ 2-187 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or
report with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any
provision of this article or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any
fraud preventing the impartial execution of the provisions of this article and
policies under this article.
   (b)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer,
solicit or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion to, or any
advantage in, a position in the city service.
   (c)   No employee of the human resources department, examiner or other
person shall deceive or obstruct persons in their right to examination,
eligibility, certification or appointment under this article or furnish to any
person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the
rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the city
service.
   (d)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with a subpoena issued by the
board or its designated hearing officer, in conducting a hearing on an employee
appeal.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (12), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-188 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person who willfully violates any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in §
1-6 of the city code.
   (b)   Persons convicted of a misdemeanor under this article shall, for a
period of five years, be ineligible for appointment to or employment in a
position in the city service. If at the time of their conviction they are an
officer or employee of the city, they shall automatically forfeit their office
or position.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (13), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-189 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES; STANDARDS FOR RESPONSE BY
CERTAIN CITY EMPLOYEES TO CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   City employees are required to reside within the United States of
America as a condition of employment.
   (b)   City employees are not required to reside within the city limits as a
condition of employment. This subsection (b) does not prohibit the
establishment of such a residency requirement for:
      (1)   The mayor, a city council member, a candidate for mayor or a
candidate for city council member.
      (2)   The city manager, city attorney, city secretary, city auditor,
parking bureau hearing officer or judges of the municipal courts.
   (c)   City employees who reside outside the city limits and are subject to
being called to respond to a civil emergency are required to reside at a
location which allows them to respond to such an emergency within 30 minutes
from the time the call is received. The response time shall be measured by the
time required for the employee to travel from their residence to the emergency
by automobile at posted speed limits in ordinary weekday traffic.
   (d)   Subsection (c) above shall not apply to city employees who reside
outside the city limits and were hired on or before April 1, 1992. Such
employees who are subject to the emergency response time requirement shall meet
the requirements of subsection (c) above within six months after they are
hired.
   (e)   When the city manager must fill a position which is subject to the
response time requirements of subsection (c) above but is not reasonably able
to find a person who meets such requirements, the city manager may grant an
exception therefrom. Such exception must be in writing and signed by the city
manager, and maintained in the employee’s personnel file.
(Ord. 11921, § 2 (14), passed 4-18-1995)
§ 2-190 RETIRED EMPLOYEE HEALTH COVERAGE.
   (a)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 172, the City of Fort
Worth may provide certain benefits, including group health coverage, to its
officers, employees and retirees, and to the dependents of officers, employees
and retirees. Pursuant to Article 16, § 66 of the Texas Constitution, such
benefits are not a constitutionally protected right, and may be changed or
discontinued at any time.
   (b)   Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 175 permits a person who is
entitled to receive pension coverage from the City of Fort Worth to purchase
continued health coverage for the person and the person’s dependents, as
defined by the city, if health benefit coverage is provided to employees, and
if the person is not eligible for group health coverage through another
employer. This chapter does not require the city to offer health coverage, and
does not require the city to pay any portion of the cost for health coverage if
it makes coverage available.
   (c)   The City of Fort Worth provides health benefit coverage for its
employees and retirees, and their dependents, and for surviving dependents of
retired and vested employees on a variable contribution basis. Although the
city is not required to pay any portion of the cost of this coverage, the city
will pay a percentage of the cost of health benefits for retired employees who
were hired prior to January 1, 2009, and their dependents, as approved by city
council.
   (d)   The city will not contribute to the cost of health benefits for
employees and their dependents upon the retirement of the employee if the
employee was hired on or after January 1, 2009.
   (e)   Coverage under subsection (c) above is not a contractual right, nor a
guarantee of future coverage. The city may change health benefits or
discontinue health benefits at any time. Additionally, city contributions to
health coverage in any fiscal year are contingent on sufficient funds being
allocated in the City of Fort Worth’s annual budget for that fiscal year.
   (f)   The city shall establish a separate account for the purpose of funding
the city’s retiree healthcare liability. City council shall determine the
amount to be allocated to this account in the City of Fort Worth’s annual
budget. The funds in this account may be invested as allowed by state and
federal law.
(Ord. 18287-09-2008, § 1, passed 9-16-2008)
§§ 2-191—2-200 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: RESERVED
DIVISION 1: EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20471-10-2012, adopted Oct. 23, 2012, repealed former Ch. 2, Art. VI
(“RETIREMENT”) in its entirety and enacted new
Ch. 2.5 pertaining to the same subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table.
§§ 2-201—2-235 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: CODE OF ETHICS
Cross-reference:
   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions,
Ch. 23
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, adopted December 18, 2012, amended this division in
its entirety as set forth below. Prior to the passage of that ordinance, this
division pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 10617, § 1
(1), adopted June 26, 1990. Prior to the passage of that ordinance, this
division pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1964 Code, § 43-1
(A) through (E); Ord. 7582, § 1, adopted July 26, 1977; Ord. 7704, § 1, adopted
February 21, 1978; Ord. 7830, § 1, adopted October 17, 1978; Ord. 8041, § 1,
adopted February 5, 1980 and Ord. 8778, § 1, adopted April 12, 1983.
§ 2-236 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper
operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees
be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city and
that governmental decisions and policy should be made in the proper channels of
the governmental structure. To implement such a policy, the city council deems
it advisable to enact this Code of Ethics for all officers, employees and
advisory board members, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve
not only as a guide for official conduct of the city’s public servants, but
also as a basis for discipline for those who fail to abide by its terms. This
Code of Ethics is cumulative of other ordinances, City Charter provisions and
state statutes defining and prohibiting conflict of interest. This §
2-236 is intended to reflect the general intent behind this Code of Ethics and
shall not be deemed to be a part of the Code of Ethics or serve as a basis for
a violation of this Code of Ethics.
   (b)   This Code of Ethics has five primary purposes:
      (1)   To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by
officers, employees and advisory board members;
      (2)   To establish minimum standards of conduct for officers, employees
and advisory board members;
      (3)   To establish an ethics review commission;
      (4)   To provide a process for the filing and resolution of complaints
asserting violations of this article; and
      (5)   To provide sanctions for violations of this Article.
   (c)   This Code of Ethics is not intended to be nor shall it be used as a
political weapon to intimidate or embarrass any person covered herein.
   (d)   Task forces, as defined in §
2-237, shall conduct their meetings in accordance with the requirements imposed
on a governmental body by the Texas Open Meetings Act, Tex. Government Code
Chapter 551.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-237 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Code of Ethics, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ADVISORY BOARD. A board, commission or committee that is intended to
function only in an advisory or study capacity on a permanent basis, whether
specified or implied.
   ARTICLE. 
Chapter 2, Article VII, Code of Ethics of the Code of the City of Fort Worth
Texas (1986), as amended.
   BENEFIT. Anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary gain or pecuniary
advantage, including benefit to any person in whom the beneficiary has a
substantial interest, but does not include a political contribution as defined
by Tex. Election Code Title 15.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity
recognized by law.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The city attorney and any assistant city attorney appointed
pursuant to
Chapter VI of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY SECRETARY. The city secretary and any assistant city secretary
appointed pursuant to
Chapter III of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   DOMESTIC PARTNER. An individual of the same or opposite gender as the person
referred to in this Article, who has lived in the same household as that person
for at least six months and shares resources of life in a close, personal
intimate relationship with that person, neither of whom is married or related
by blood, if, under Texas law, the individual would not be prevented from
marrying the person referred to in this Article on account of consanguinity or
prior undissolved marriage to another.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the city whether under civil service or not
(except firefighters and police officers who are covered by state civil service
laws), including those individuals on a part-time basis, but such term shall
not be extended to apply to any independent contractor.
   HEARING OFFICER. A resident attorney appointed by the city council pursuant
to
Division 3 of this article to hear appeals of determinations made by the ethics
review commission.
   INTENT or INTENTIONALLY. A person acts intentionally, or with intent, with
respect to the nature of his or her conduct or to a result of his or her
conduct when it is his or her conscious objective or desire to engage in the
conduct or cause the result.
   KNOWINGLY. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the
nature of his or her conduct or to circumstances surrounding his or her conduct
when he or she is aware of the nature of his or her conduct or that the
circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect
to a result of his or her conduct when he or she is aware that his or her
conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result.
   OFFICER. Any member of the city council and any person appointed by the
mayor or city council to a board, commission or committee established by
ordinance, Charter or state law, including hearing officers appointed pursuant
to
Division 3; provided, no member of an advisory board, task force or any other
committee that functions only in an advisory or study capacity shall be deemed
an officer.
   RESIDENT. A person whose home and fixed place of habitation to which that
person intends to return after any temporary absence is located within the
corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth, as determined in accordance with
Tex. Election Code § 1.015.
   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST.
      (1)   A person has a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST in a business entity if:
         a.   The interest is ownership of 10% or more of the voting stock or
shares of the business entity or ownership of either 10% or more or $15,000 or
more of the fair market value of the business entity; provided, however, that
if any ownership interests specified in Tex. Local Government Code § 171.002(a)
(1), or a successor statute conflict with any ownership interests specified
herein, Tex. Local Government Code § 171.002(a)(1), or the successor statute
shall control;
         b.   Funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 10%
of the person’s gross income for the previous year; provided, however, that if
any ownership interests specified in Tex. Local Government Code § 171.002(a)
(2), or a successor statute conflict with any ownership interests specified
herein, Tex. Local Government Code § 171.002(a)(2), or the successor statute
shall control;
         c.   The person holds a position as a member of the board of directors
or other governing board of the business entity;
         d.   The person serves as an elected officer of the business entity;
         e.   The person is an employee of the business entity;
         f.   The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of any person,
group or business entity in the amount of $5,000 or more; or
         g.   Property of the person has been pledged to a person, group or
business entity or is subject to a lien in favor of the person, group or
business entity in the amount of $5,000 or more.
   (2)   A person does not have a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST in a business entity if:
         a.   The person holds a position as a member of the board of directors
or other governing board of a business entity;
         b.   The person has been designated by the city council to serve on
such board;
         c.   The person receives no remuneration, either directly or
indirectly, for his or her service on such board; and
         d.   The primary nature of the business entity is either charitable,
nonprofit or governmental.
      (3)   A person has a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST in real property if the
interest is an equitable or legal ownership interest with a fair market value
of $2,500 or more; provided, however, that if the ownership interest specified
in Tex. Local Government Code § 171.002(b), or a successor statute conflict
with the ownership interest specified herein, Tex. Local Government Code §
171.002(b), or the successor statute shall control.
      (4)   A person has a SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST in a business entity or in real
property if a person related to the person in the first degree by consanguinity
or affinity or if the person’s domestic partner has a substantial interest in a
business entity or in real property under this article. A person is related in
the first degree by consanguinity to his or her father, mother, son and
daughter. A person is related in the first degree by affinity to his or her
spouse, stepchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law and daughter-in-
law.
   TASK FORCE. A board, commission or committee that functions only in a study
capacity in order to assist the city council in addressing a specific issue or
issues on a temporary or short-term basis and to conclude its business within a
limited amount of time, whether specified or implied, and that is not empowered
to take any final action other than the delivery of written or verbal reports
and recommendations to the city council, the city manager or another party
designated by the city council.
   WRITTEN OPINION OF THE CITY ATTORNEY. Any written or recorded communication
of the city attorney, including, but not limited to, a formal written opinion,
memorandum, report, handwritten notice, electronic mail communication,
facsimile communication or a communication preserved by audio or video
recording.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-238 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (a)   No officer, employee or advisory board member shall knowingly:
      (1)   Accept or solicit, or knowingly allow his or her spouse or domestic
partner to accept or solicit, any benefit from any person, group or business
entity that might reasonably tend to influence the officer, employee or
advisory board member in the discharge of his or her official duties;
      (2)   Grant in the discharge of his or her official duties any improper
benefit to any person, group or business entity;
      (3)   Accept or solicit, or knowingly allow his or her spouse or domestic
partner to accept or solicit, any benefit, including a promise of future
employment, of sufficient economic value that it might reasonably tend to
influence the officer, employee or advisory board member in the discharge of
his or her official duties, from any person, group or business entity:
         a.   That is licensed or has a substantial interest in any business
entity that is licensed by any city department, agency, commission or board on
which the officer, employee or advisory board member serves; or
         b.   That has a financial interest in any proposed ordinance or
decision upon which the officer, employee or advisory board member may or must
act or make a recommendation; provided, however, that any officer, employee or
advisory board member, and any spouse or domestic partner thereof, may accept
travel and related expenses and attend ceremonial functions, provided that such
acceptance and attendance have been approved by the city council prior to the
occurrence of the ceremonial function.
      (4)   a.   Disclose any confidential information gained by reason of the
position of the officer, employee or advisory board member concerning the
property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use such confidential
information to advance any personal interest, financial or otherwise, of such
officer, employee or advisory board member, or others.
         b.   This subsection (a)(4) shall not preclude disclosure of such
confidential information in connection with any investigation or proceeding
regarding whether there has been a violation of the standards of conduct set
forth in this article.
      (5)   Use one’s position or office of employment, or city facilities,
personnel, equipment or supplies for the private gain of the officer, employee
or advisory board member, or for the private gain of his or her spouse or
domestic partner.
      (6)   Engage or knowingly allow his or her spouse or domestic partner to
engage in any exchange, purchase or sale of property, goods or services with
the city, except:
         a.   Rendering services to the city as an officer, employee or
advisory board member;
         b.   The paying of taxes, fines, utility service or filing fees;
         c.   Subject to restrictions contained in the City Charter, executing
and performing any community facilities contract or plat in compliance with
laws and regulations applicable to any person; provided, however, that if any
city ordinance, rule or regulation allows any discretion by the appropriate
officers or employees in the interpretation or enforcement of such ordinance,
rule or regulation any such discretion shall be exercised in favor of the city
in connection with any such community facilities contract or plat; and
         d.   Members of advisory boards who are not otherwise officers or
employees of the city, may engage in any exchange, purchase or sale of
property, goods or services with the city, or enter into a contract with the
city, provided, however, that the board of which they are a member has no
advisory function or cognizance, direct or indirect, present or prospective,
with respect to the transaction in which such advisory board member engages or
proposes to engage.
   (b)   No salaried officer or employee shall knowingly represent, directly or
indirectly, any person, group or business entity:
      (1)   Before the city council or any department agency, board or
commission of the city;
      (2)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in
any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board or commission
thereof is a party; or
      (3)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal courts of the city
which was instituted by an officer or employee in the course of official
duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any officer or employee is a material
witness for the prosecution.
   (c)   No member of a city board or commission, other than a task force,
shall knowingly represent, directly or indirectly, any person, group or
business entity:
      (1)   Before the board or commission of which he or she is a member;
      (2)   Before a board or commission which has appellate jurisdiction over
the board or commission of which he or she is a member;
      (3)   Before the city council in a matter over which the board or
commission of which he or she is a member has authority or an advisory
function, direct or indirect, present or prospective, provided that a member of
an advisory board who has been elected or appointed to serve as chair or acting
chair may present a recommendation to the city council on a matter over which
the advisory board has authority if a majority of the members of the advisory
board have voted in favor of such recommendation;
      (4)   In any action or proceeding against the interests of the city or in
any litigation in which the city or any department, agency, board or commission
thereof is a party; or
      (5)   In any action or proceeding in the municipal courts of the city
which was instituted by an officer or employee in the course of official
duties, or a criminal proceeding in which any officer or employee is a material
witness for the prosecution.
   (d)   No member of a task force shall knowingly represent, directly or
indirectly, any person, group or business entity:
      (1)   Before a board or commission which has appellate jurisdiction over
the task force of which he or she is a member; or
      (2)   Before the city council in a matter over which the task force of
which he or she is a member has an advisory function, provided that a member of
task force who has been elected or appointed to serve as chair or acting chair
may present a recommendation to the city council on a matter over which the
task force has authority if a majority of the members of the task force have
voted in favor of such recommendation.
   (e)   The restrictions in this section do not prohibit the following:
      (1)   An employee or member of a city board or commission (other than
city council), or his or her spouse or domestic partner, appearing before the
city council or a city department, agency, board or commission to represent
himself or herself in a matter affecting his or her property: provided,
however, that no such person, or his or her spouse, shall appear before the
board or commission of which he or she is a member;
      (2)   An employee or officer of an employee organization appearing before
the city council or a city department, agency, board or commission to address
employment matters;
      (3)   Otherwise eligible employees or their spouses or domestic partners
from participating in federal or state-funded programs administered through the
City of Fort Worth where the benefits of such programs are available to members
of the general public and where the employee has no administrative, evaluative
or decision-making authority concerning the program in which he or she wishes
to participate;
      (4)   A partner, associate or relative of a member of the city council,
or of a salaried officer or employee, from representing a person, group or
business entity in an action or proceeding in the municipal courts of the city
which was instituted by an officer or employee in the course of official
duties, or in a criminal proceeding in which an officer or employee is a
material witness for the prosecution; or
      (5)   A member of a task force from participating in or voting on any
matter before the task force to which the member has been appointed,
notwithstanding any other provision of this section.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-239 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   (a)   If any officer, employee or advisory board member has a substantial
interest in any business entity or real property directly and particularly
involved in any decision pending before such officer, employee, or advisory
board member, or the body of which he or she is a member, such officer,
employee or advisory board member shall disclose such interest as provided in
subsection (c) below and shall not, except as provided in subsection (b) below,
vote or otherwise participate in the consideration of the matter.
   (b)   If any of the following interests are directly and particularly
involved in any decision pending before any officer, employee or advisory board
member, or the body of which he or she is a member, such officer, employee or
advisory board member must disclose such interest as provided in subsection (c)
below, but he or she shall be permitted to vote on and participate in the
consideration of such matter:
      (1)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution from
which the officer, employee or advisory board member has a home mortgage,
automobile loan or other installment loan, if the loan is not currently in
default, was originally for a term of more than two years and cannot be
accelerated except for failure to make payments according to the terms thereof;
      (2)   A decision concerning a bank or other financial institution in
which the officer, employee or advisory board member holds a savings account,
checking account or certificate of deposit and which is fully insured by the
U.S. government or an agency thereof;
      (3)   A decision concerning a business entity with which the officer,
employee or advisory board member has a retail or credit card account;
      (4)   A decision concerning the approval of substitution of collateral by
a city depository bank;
      (5)   A decision concerning real property in which the officer, employee
or advisory board member has a substantial interest if it is not reasonably
foreseeable that such decision would have a special economic effect on the
value of the property, distinguishable from the effect on the public (see Tex.
Local Government Code § 171.004);
      (6)   A decision concerning the refund of property taxes to a business
entity in which the officer, employee or advisory board member has a
substantial interest, if such refund is required because of a double payment of
taxes or a judicially or administratively determined reduction in the valuation
of the taxed property;
      (7)   A decision concerning a business entity with which the officer,
employee or advisory board member has a stock brokerage or securities account;
and
      (8)   A decision concerning whether the city should accept a gift from a
business entity in which the officer, employee or advisory board member has a
substantial interest.
   (c)   A officer, employee or advisory board member shall disclose the
existence of any substantial interest in any person, business entity or real
property involved in any decision pending before such officer, employee or
advisory board member, or the body of which he or she is a member. To comply
with this subsection (c), an officer or advisory board member shall, prior to
any discussion or determination of the matter, either file an affidavit of
disclosure as required by Tex. Local Government Code § 171.004 or, if not so
required, shall publicly disclose in the official records of the body or of the
city secretary the nature of the interest. To comply with this subsection (c),
an employee shall notify his or her superior in writing of the nature of any
substantial interest he or she may have in a person, business entity or real
property which would be affected by an exercise of discretionary authority by
the employee and such superior shall assign the matter to another employee.
   (d)   The provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) above shall not apply
in the following circumstances:
      (1)   When an officer, employee or advisory board member, or the body of
which he or she is a member, is involved in a decision concerning the levy of a
special improvement district assessment against real property which is owned by
a person, group or business entity in which the officer, employee or advisory
board member has a substantial interest if:
         a.   Assessments are levied at a uniform rate throughout the district;
and
         b.   Such rate is applied to the value of the real property as shown
on current Tarrant appraisal district appraisal rolls.
      (2)   When a task force member is involved in any matter or decision
before the task force to which the member has been appointed.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-239.1 EFFECT OF WRITTEN OPINION OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, a person does not
violate any provision of this division for conduct undertaken in reasonable
reliance, either directly or indirectly, upon a written opinion of the city
attorney that was either provided prior to the conduct complained against or
requested prior to the conduct complained against and provided not later than
15 business days following the date of such request.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
DIVISION 2: ETHICS REVIEW COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, adopted December 18, 2012, amended this division in
its entirety as set forth below. Prior to the passage of that ordinance, this
division pertained to the Ethics Review Committee and derived from Ord. 10617,
§ 1(3), adopted June 26, 1990.
§ 2-240 CREATION AND ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created an Ethics Review Commission ("ERC").
The ERC shall be composed of five persons, one of whom shall be an attorney
appointed in accordance with subsection (b). The remaining four persons shall
be selected by random draw method from certain existing city boards and
commissions in accordance with subsection (c).
   (b)   Attorney appointee to the ERC.  The city council shall appoint by
majority vote an attorney who is in good standing with the State Bar of Texas
and has been licensed to practice law in the State of Texas for at least five
consecutive years. The attorney shall not be appointed for a definite fixed
time and may be removed by the city council at any time and for any reason by
majority vote. The attorney appointed pursuant to this subsection (b) may not
be a member of another city board, commission or committee if the ERC has
jurisdiction under this article to review the conduct of that person as a
member of such other board, commission or committee. This provision does not
prohibit other persons selected pursuant to subsection (c) and who are also
licensed attorneys from serving on the ERC.
   (c)   Other appointees to the ERC.
      (1)   The remaining four persons shall be selected to serve on the ERC in
accordance with the process outlined in this subsection (c) in the following
circumstances:
         a.   A sworn complaint is filed with the city secretary's office
alleging that a violation of Division I of this article has occurred, and the
city secretary acknowledges in accordance with §
2-247(c) that the complaint substantially complies with the requirements of §
2-247; or
         b.   The city council by majority vote or the city manager of his or
her own volition requests the city secretary to convene the ERC for purposes of
exercising any other of its delegated powers under §
2-241.
      (2)   Upon the occurrence of one of the qualifying events set forth in
subsection (c)(1), the city secretary shall compile the names of all then-
current members of the zoning commission, the plan commission, and the boards
of adjustment and then use a random draw method to select four persons on those
boards to serve as members of the ERC. Each of the four persons selected must
be Residents of different city council districts. If the city secretary draws
the name of a person who resides in the same city council district as a person
whose name already has been drawn, the city secretary shall discard that name
and proceed to draw another name until four persons who are residents of
different city council districts have been selected. The city secretary
promptly shall notify in writing the four persons selected to serve on the ERC
for that complaint and shall also provide written notice of those selections to
the city council, the city manager, and the city attorney.
      (3)   If the ERC is being convened to hear an ethics complaint, the four
persons selected to serve on the ERC pursuant to this subsection (c) shall
serve until that complaint has been fully adjudicated by the ERC pursuant to
and in accordance with §
2-251 and, if applicable, §
2-252. If the ERC is being convened to exercise any other of its delegated
powers under §
2-241, the four persons selected to serve on the ERC pursuant to this
subsection (c) shall serve until the ERC has fulfilled the stated purpose for
its assembly. There is no limit to the number of times a person may serve on
the ERC pursuant to the selection process outlined in this subsection (c).
      (4)   If the ERC is being convened to hear an ethics complaint, and the
person who filed the complaint or the person complained against is a member of
the zoning commission, the plan commission, or the boards of adjustment, the
persons selected to serve on the ERC pursuant to this subsection (c) may not be
members of those boards.
      (5)   If the ERC is being convened to hear an ethics complaint, and the
person who filed the complaint or the person complained against is a member of
the city council, the persons selected to serve on the ERC pursuant to this
subsection (c) may not be residents of the city council district represented by
the city council member who is involved in the complaint.
      (6)   If a person selected to serve on the ERC pursuant to this
subsection (c) cannot fulfill his or her duties as a member of the ERC due to
illness, travel, or another bona fide reason, or otherwise refuses to serve on
the ERC, that person shall be requested to confirm that fact with the city
secretary in writing within 15 calendar days of receipt of the service
notification. In this event, the city secretary shall repeat the process
outlined in subsection (c)(2) until a substitute has been selected.
   (d)   Qualifications. All members shall be residents of the city who are at
least 18 years of age. Additionally, no member of the ERC may be:
      (1)   A member of the city council or the spouse or domestic partner of a
member of the city council;
      (2)   An employee or the spouse or domestic partner of an employee;
      (3)   An elected public official; or
      (4)   A candidate for elected public office.
   (e)   Chairperson; quorum; number of members necessary to act. Once the ERC
is convened, it shall at its first meeting thereafter elect a chairperson and a
vice-chairperson to serve in that capacity until the ERC has concluded its
business. The vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson in the absence of the
chairperson. Three or more members of the ERC shall constitute a quorum. No
action of the ERC shall be of any force or effect unless it is adopted by the
favorable votes of three or more of the members.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 23992-12-
2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 2-241 JURISDICTION AND POWERS; MEETINGS.
   (a)   Jurisdiction. The ERC shall have jurisdiction to review and make
findings and conclusions concerning an alleged violation of
Division 1 of this article and, if a violation of
Division 1 of this article is determined to have occurred pursuant to the
process outlined herein, to levy sanctions in accordance with
Division 4.
   (b)   Powers. Once the ERC is convened in accordance with and subject to the
purposes set forth in §
2-240(c), the ERC shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To establish rules and procedures governing its own internal
organization and operations, consistent with this article and the city’s
Charter and ordinances;
      (2)   To prescribe forms for reports, statements, notices and other
documents required by this article;
      (3)   To cause sufficient copies of this ordinance, and other ordinances,
City Charter provisions and state statutes defining and prohibiting conflicts
of interest, to be prepared and published and see that the same are made
available to officers, employees, advisory board members, elected officials and
the general public;
      (4)   To provide or assist in providing orientations to officers,
employees and advisory board members concerning the provisions of this article;
      (5)   To review all statements and reports filed with the ERC in order to
obtain compliance with this article;
      (6)   To direct the city secretary to preserve statements and reports
filed with the ERC for a period of five years from the date of receipt;
      (7)   To review this article when deemed necessary and make appropriate
recommendations to the city council;
      (8)   To request the city attorney’s interpretation of or opinion on any
provision of this article except in cases involving a complaint filed in
accordance with this article, in which case §
2-248 shall apply;
      (9)   In accordance with this article, to review, conduct hearings and
make determinations regarding all sworn complaints alleging violations of
Division 1 of this article by persons other than members of the city council;
      (10)   In any hearing conducted pursuant to this article, to administer
oaths and affirmations, take evidence, request and issue subpoenas for
witnesses to attend and testify, and request and, subject to §
2-255, issue subpoenas for the production of books, papers, records, or other
evidence needed for the performance of the ERC’s duties or the exercise of its
powers;
      (11)   To request the city council and city manager to provide such
assistance as the ERC may require in the discharge of its duties;
      (12)   On the ERC’s own motion or at the request of the city council, to
report to the city council when deemed necessary concerning the activities of
the ERC; and
      (13)   To exercise such other powers and duties as may be established by
this article.
   (c)   Meetings. The ERC shall meet as necessary to fulfill its
responsibilities. The city secretary, the chairperson, or any three members of
the ERC may call a meeting provided that notice is given to each member and
written notice is posted in accordance with provisions of the Texas Open
Meetings Act, Tex. Government Code Chapter 551.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 23992-12-
2019, § 2, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 2-242 STAFFING.
   The city attorney shall provide such assistance to the ERC as the ERC shall
request except in cases involving a complaint filed in accordance with this
article.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-243 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: HEARING OFFICERS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, adopted December 18, 2012, enacted this division
and amended and renumbered former Division 3, “Disposition of Alleged
Violations; Hearings,” as current Division 4, as set forth below.
§ 2-244 APPOINTMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose. The city council will appoint one or more hearing officers
each year to hear appeals of determinations made by the ERC in the disposition
of complaints alleging a violation of
Division 1 of this article and to make recommendations to the city council
regarding those appeals.
   (b)   Qualifications. A hearing officer shall be a resident who is an
attorney in good standing with the state bar of Texas and has been licensed to
practice in the State of Texas for at least ten consecutive years. No hearing
officer may be:
      (1)   A member of the city council or the spouse or domestic partner of a
member of the city council;
      (2)   An employee or the spouse or domestic partner of an employee;
      (3)   An elected public official;
      (4)   A candidate for elected public office; or
      (5)   A member of another city board, commission or committee if the ERC
has jurisdiction under this article to review the conduct of that person as a
member of such other board, commission or committee.
   (c)   Terms. The city council will appoint hearing officers each at its
first meeting in January of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable. The
city council shall set the prescribed compensation, if any, that hearing
officers are to receive during their terms of service. A hearing officer shall
serve a term of one year or until his or her successor is duly appointed, and
may be reappointed at the pleasure of the city council. A hearing officer may
be removed at any time and for any reason by majority vote of the city council,
except that a hearing officer that has initiated the hearing of an appeal of a
determination made by the ERC in the disposition of a complaint shall continue
to serve until final disposition of the matter before him or her.
   (d)   Selection of hearing officer to hear complaint or appeal. If the city
council appoints more than one hearing officer to serve during a particular
year, the city secretary shall maintain a list of such hearing officers in
order of appointment. In the event that the service of a hearing officer is
required under this article to hear the appeal of a determination made by the
ERC in the disposition of a complaint, the city secretary shall designate a
hearing officer from such list on a rotation basis.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-245 JURISDICTION AND POWERS.
   (a)   Jurisdiction. Hearing officers shall have jurisdiction to review and
make findings and recommendations to the city council concerning an alleged
violation of
Division 1 of this article.
   (b)   Powers. Hearing officers shall have the following powers:
      (1)   In accordance with this article, to hear appeals of determinations
made by the ERC complaints alleging violations of
Division 1 of this article, to hear arguments from and pose questions to the
person filing the appeal as well as the person responding to the appeal if
those persons have elected to make a statement at the hearing, and to make
findings, determinations and recommendations to the city council as to the
disposition of such appeals in accordance with the standards of review set
forth herein;
      (2)   In any de novo hearing conducted pursuant to §
2-253, to administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence, request and issue
subpoenas for witnesses to attend and testify, and request and, subject to §
2-255, issue subpoenas for the production of books, papers, records or other
evidence needed for the performance of the ERC’s duties or the exercise of its
powers; and
      (3)   To exercise such other powers and duties as may be established by
this article.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-246 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: DISPOSITION OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS; HEARINGS
Editor’s note:
   This division was formerly codified as Division 3 of this article and
derived from Ord. 10617, § 1(3). It was renumbered as this Division 4 and
amended in its entirety by Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, adopted December 18, 2012.
That ordinance also renumbered former Division 4, “Financial Disclosure by
Officers and Candidates,” as current
Division 5 of this article.
§ 2-247 COMPLAINTS.
   (a)   Filing. Any resident or nonresident owner of taxable real property
within the corporate limits of the city who believes that there has been a
violation of
Division 1 of this article may file a sworn complaint with the city secretary’s
office. The complaint must be filed within two years after the alleged
violation occurred. For purposes of this provision, a complaint shall be
considered filed when it has been accepted by the city secretary as complete as
to form in accordance with subsection (c) below. If a complaint is dismissed by
the ERC but permitted to be re-filed in accordance with this Division, the re-
filed complaint shall be deemed to have been filed on the date that the initial
complaint was accepted by the city secretary. A complaint must be in writing
and contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, street or mailing address and telephone number of the
complainant;
      (2)   The name and position or title of the person complained about;
      (3)   The date and nature of the alleged violation and the specific
provision of
Division 1 of this article alleged to have been violated;
      (4)   A statement of the facts on which the complaint is based and the
date(s) on which the violation occurred;
      (5)   The sources of evidence or information that are relevant to the
complaint, including, if possible, copies of all relevant documents or
materials that are available to the complainant.
   (b)   Sworn nature. A complaint must be accompanied by an affidavit stating
that the complaint is true and correct or that the complainant has good reason
to believe and does believe that the facts alleged constitute a violation of
Division 1 of this article. The complainant shall swear to the facts by oath
before a notary public or other person authorized by law to administer oaths
under penalty of perjury.
   (c)   Acceptance by the city secretary. If a complaint does not
substantially comply with the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a)
above or does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b) above, the
city secretary shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, return the
complaint to the complainant with a letter stating the defects in the
complaint. If a complaint substantially complies with the filing requirements
set forth in subsection (a) above and complies with the requirements of
subsection (b) above, the city secretary shall acknowledge to the complainant
that the complaint is complete as to form and provide a copy of the complaint
to the city attorney, ERC and the person complained against.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-248 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (a)   Counsel for the person complained against. If requested by the person
complained against, the city council shall provide legal counsel selected by
the person complained against to represent the person complained against,
provided that fee arrangements with any such independent outside legal counsel
must first be approved by the city council.
   (b)   Counsel for the ERC. If requested by the ERC, the city council shall
provide outside legal counsel selected by the ERC to represent the ERC,
provided that fee arrangements with any such independent outside legal counsel
must be first be approved by the city council.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-249 RESERVED.
§ 2-250 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (a)   Objectivity. Members of the ERC are subject to this article. Members
of the ERC shall maintain objectivity in discharging their duties. If any
member of the ERC has any reason to believe that he or she cannot be impartial
and intellectually honest in the discharge of the duties of the ERC, such
member shall disclose the facts and circumstances of that belief and shall not
vote or otherwise participate in consideration of the matter.
   (b)   Prohibition of ex parte communications. After a complaint has been
filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the ERC, a member of the
ERC may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about
any issue of law or fact regarding the complaint except at a meeting of the
ERC. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit communications between
members of the ERC and the ERC’s attorney, or between members of the ERC
concerning whether to call a hearing.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-251 HEARINGS.
   (a)   Scheduling. Not later than 15 business days after both acceptance of a
complaint and assembly of the ERC selected to hear the complaint, the city
secretary shall notify in writing the ERC, the complainant and the person
complained against of the date, time and location of a hearing on the
complaint. Such written notice shall be sent to the complainant and the person
complained against by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the hearing
is not held within 45 business days after receipt of the complaint, the city
secretary shall notify both the complainant and the person complained against
of the reasons for the delay.
   (b)   Hearing rules. All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
Texas Open Meetings Act, Tex. Government Code Chapter 551. The ERC shall have
the right to establish time limits and other rules of procedure for a hearing
and relating to the participation of any person in the hearing, subject to
subsections (c) and (d) below. All proceedings of the hearing shall be reduced
to writing by a court reporter, who shall file the transcript of the hearing
with the city secretary within such time as is specified by the ERC.
   (c)   Rights of the person complained against. The person complained against
has the right to attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, the right
to present witnesses and the right to be represented by legal counsel or
another advisor.
   (d)   Rights of the complainant. The complainant has the right to attend the
hearing, the right to make a statement, the right to present witnesses and the
right to be represented by legal counsel or another advisor.
   (e)   Order of business.
      (1)   Once a quorum of the ERC convenes the hearing, the order of
business shall be as follows:
         a.   To ascertain whether the complainant and the person complained
against are present;
         b.   To determine whether the complaint alleges conduct which, based
on substantially the same facts asserted in the complaint, the ERC has already
determined is not a violation of
Division 1 of this article;
         c.   To determine whether the conduct complained against occurred
within two years of the date on which the complaint was filed;
         d.   To determine whether the complaint alleges conduct which would be
a violation of
Division 1 of this article;
         e.   To determine whether conduct complained against was in reasonable
reliance upon an opinion of the city attorney, whether verbal or written;
         f.   To hear evidence and statements as to whether the person
complained against violated a provision of
Division 1 of this article as alleged in the complaint;
         g.   To deliberate and determine whether the person complained against
violated
Division 1 of this article as alleged in the complaint; and
         h.   To deliberate and determine a sanction to be imposed.
      (2)   In the ERC’s sole discretion and as permitted by the Texas Open
Meetings Act, Tex. Government Code Chapter 551, the ERC shall have the right to
recess and continue the hearing one or more times. However, any member of the
ERC who is not present at a hearing or continued hearing on a particular
complaint may not participate in any discussion, voting or disposition of that
complaint in any further continued hearing on that complaint.
   (f)   Ascertaining presence of the parties.
      (1)   If the complainant fails to appear at the hearing, the ERC shall
dismiss the complaint and adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the
ERC shall deliver to the complainant, the person complained against and the
city secretary a written notice of the ERC’s dismissal. The ERC’s dismissal of
a complaint for failure to appear at the hearing is final and may not be
appealed. If the ERC dismisses a complaint for failure of the complainant to
appear at the hearing, the complainant may not file another complaint alleging
a violation of
Division 1 of this article for substantially the same conduct unless the
complainant files a written request for a rehearing within 30 calendar days of
the date of the hearing explaining why the complainant did not appear at the
hearing and the ERC determines, on the basis of such written request, that
there was good cause for the complainant not to appear at the hearing.
      (2)   If the complainant appears at the hearing but the person complained
against does not, the ERC may proceed with the hearing in that person’s
absence, provided that the city secretary has a certified mail receipt that the
person complained against received notice of the date, time and location of the
hearing.
   (g)   Preliminary testimony by the complainant. In order to address the
preliminary procedures set forth in subsections (h), (i), (j) and (k) below,
the ERC shall hear preliminary testimony of the complainant, who shall state
the alleged violation and describe in narrative form the testimony and other
evidence that he or she is prepared to present to prove the alleged violation
as stated in the complaint. Such testimony shall be under oath.
   (h)   Determining whether the complaint alleges conduct which, based on
substantially the same facts asserted in the complaint, the ERC has already
determined is not a violation of
Division 1 of this article. If the ERC finds that the complaint alleges conduct
which, based on substantially the same facts asserted in the complaint, the ERC
has already determined is not a violation of
Division 1 of this article and such previous determination was not reversed on
appeal pursuant to this article, the ERC shall dismiss the complaint and
adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the ERC shall deliver to the
complainant, the person complained against and the city secretary a written
notice of the ERC’s determination, which shall include the reasons for such
decision. The ERC’s dismissal of a complaint on such grounds is final and may
not be appealed.
   (i)   Determining whether the conduct occurred within two years of the
complaint. If the ERC determines that the conduct which the complainant alleges
to be a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred more than two years prior to the date on
which the complaint was filed, the ERC shall dismiss the complaint. Within ten
business days, the ERC shall deliver to the complainant, the person complained
against and the city secretary a written notice of the ERC’s determination,
which shall include the reasons for such decision. The ERC’s dismissal of a
complaint on such grounds is final and may not be appealed.
   (j)   Determining whether a complaint is insufficient.
      (1)   In order to determine whether a complaint sufficiently alleges
conduct which would be a violation of
Division 1 of this article, the ERC shall hear the testimony of the
complainant, who shall state the alleged violation and describe in narrative
form the testimony and other evidence that the complainant is prepared to
present. Such testimony shall be under oath, but the ERC shall not permit
testimony by other witnesses, cross-examination or any findings of fact.
Members of the ERC may question the complainant. The person complained against
shall have the opportunity, but is not required, to describe in narrative form
the testimony and other evidence that he or she is prepared to present in order
to dispute or rebut the alleged violation.
      (2)   If the ERC determines that there are no reasonable grounds to
believe that a violation of
Division 1 of this article has occurred, the ERC shall dismiss the complaint
and adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the ERC shall deliver to the
complainant, the person complained against and the city secretary a written
notice of the ERC’s determination, which shall include the reasons for such
decision. The ERC’s dismissal of a complaint on such grounds shall be final
unless appealed in accordance with §
2-253.
   (k)   To consider whether conduct complained against was in reasonable
reliance on a city attorney opinion. The ERC shall give the person complained
against the opportunity to testify if the person complained against asserts
that the conduct alleged in the complaint was undertaken in reasonable reliance
upon an opinion of the city attorney, provided that the person complained
against first waives the attorney-client privilege with respect to the opinion.
Such testimony shall be under oath, and any such testimony shall constitute a
waiver of the attorney-client privilege with respect to the opinion. Any
testimony that the conduct of the person complained against was undertaken in
reasonable reliance upon a written opinion of the city attorney, or upon a
verbal opinion of the city attorney that was followed by a written opinion of
the city attorney within 15 business days following the date such written
opinion was requested, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the conduct
of the person complained against did not violate a provision of
Division 1 of this article. The ERC shall then determine the extent to which
the conduct of the person complained against was undertaken in reasonable
reliance upon an opinion of the city attorney.
      (1)   If the ERC determines that all of the conduct of the person
complained against was undertaken in reasonable reliance, either directly or
indirectly, upon a written opinion of the city attorney that was either
provided prior to the conduct complained against or requested prior to the
conduct complained against and provided not later than 15 business days
following the date of such request, the ERC shall dismiss the complaint and
adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the ERC shall deliver to the
complainant, the person complained against and the city secretary a written
notice of the ERC’s determination, which shall include the reasons for such
decision. The ERC’s dismissal of a complaint on such grounds shall be final
unless appealed in accordance with §
2-253. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the ERC believes that the city
attorney’s opinion may be incorrect or no longer valid, the ERC may include in
such written notice of dismissal a request that the city attorney reconsider
the opinion, but the ERC shall not have the right to overrule the opinion or
substitute its own opinion.
      (2)   If the ERC determines that some, but not all, of the conduct of the
person complained against was undertaken in reasonable reliance, either
directly or indirectly, upon a written opinion of the city attorney that was
either provided prior to the conduct complained against or requested prior to
the conduct complained against and provided not later than 15 business days
following the date of such request, the ERC shall dismiss complaint and adjourn
the hearing. Within ten business days, the ERC shall deliver to the
complainant, the person complained against and the city secretary a written
notice of the ERC’s determination, which shall include the reasons for such
decision. In this event, the complainant shall be permitted one opportunity to
amend and resubmit the complaint within ten calendar days citing only that
portion of the conduct that the person complained against undertook without
reasonable reliance upon a written opinion of the city attorney that was either
provided prior to the conduct complained against or requested prior to the
conduct complained against and provided not later than 15 business days
following the date of such request. Otherwise, the ERC’s dismissal of a
complaint on such grounds shall be final unless appealed in accordance with §
2-253. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the ERC believes that the city
attorney’s opinion may be incorrect or no longer valid, the ERC may include in
such written notice of dismissal a request that the city attorney reconsider
the opinion, but the ERC shall not have the right to overrule the opinion or
substitute its own opinion.
      (3)   If the ERC determines that some or all of the conduct of the person
complained against was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a verbal opinion
of the city attorney but that the person complained against requested that the
city attorney supplement that opinion with a written opinion, and such request
was made 15 or fewer business days prior to the date of the hearing, the ERC
shall recess the hearing and reconvene on a date after the expiration of at
least 15 business days following the date the written opinion was requested.
      (4)   If the ERC determines that none of the conduct of the person
complained against was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon an opinion of the
city attorney, or that some or all of the conduct complained against was
undertaken in reasonable reliance only upon a verbal opinion of the city
attorney that was not followed by a written opinion provided in accordance with
§
2-239.1, the ERC shall proceed with the hearing.
   (l)   Evidentiary proceeding. Unless the ERC dismisses the complaint in
accordance with §
2-251 (f), (h), (i), (j) or (k), the ERC shall determine whether a violation of
Division 1 of this Article, as alleged in the complaint, has occurred. All
statements and testimony of the complainant, the person complained against, and
any witnesses shall be under oath. After hearing any statements of the
complainants and the person complained against and any other evidence presented
in accordance with this Article, the ERC shall make its determination based on
the preponderance of the evidence (the greater weight and degree of the
credible evidence and testimony). At the conclusion of the hearing, the ERC
shall announce its determination and, if the ERC determines that a violation of
Division 1 of this Article has occurred, identify the particular provision or
provisions that were violated and announce any sanction to be imposed or
recommended in accordance with §
2-252. Within ten business days the ERC shall deliver to the complainant, the
person complained against and the city secretary a written notice of the ERC’s
determination. The ERC’s determination and sanction (if applicable) shall be
final unless appealed in accordance with §
2-253. In lieu of such evidentiary proceeding, the person complained against
may acknowledge that he or she has committed a violation of
Division 1 of this article, in which case the ERC shall consider the sanction
to be imposed or recommended in accordance with §
2-252.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 23992-12-
2019, § 3, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 2-252 SANCTIONS TO BE IMPOSED OR RECOMMENDED.
   If the ERC determines that a violation of
Division 1 of this article has occurred, it shall proceed directly to
determination of the appropriate sanctions. The ERC may receive additional
testimony or statements before considering sanctions but is not required to do
so.
   (a)   Sanctions. If the ERC determines that a violation of
Division 1 of this article has occurred, it may impose the following sanctions:
      (1)   a.   A letter of notification shall be the appropriate sanction
when:
            1.   The violation is clearly unintentional;
            2.   The conduct of the person complained against was done in
reliance upon an opinion of the city attorney that was not in writing; or
            3.   The violation may have been unintentional but the ERC does not
consider the level of offense to be severe.
         b.   A letter of notification shall advise the person to whom it is
directed of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations.
      (2)   A letter of admonition shall be the appropriate sanction in those
cases in which the ERC finds that the violation:
         a.   May have been unintentional; or
         b.   The violation was clearly unintentional but the ERC considers the
level of offense to be severe.
      (3)   A letter of reprimand shall be the appropriate sanction when the
ERC finds that a violation has been committed intentionally or through reckless
disregard of
Division 1 of this article. A letter of reprimand directed to an employee shall
also be sent to the city manager and included in the employee’s personnel file.
   (b)   Recommendations. In addition to the sanctions that may be imposed
pursuant to subsection (a) above, the ERC may make the following
recommendations:
      (1)   Disciplinary action against persons other than the mayor or members
of the city council. If the ERC finds that the person complained against (other
than the mayor or a member of the city council) committed a serious or repeated
violation of
Division 1 of this article intentionally or through culpable disregard of
Division 1 of this article, the ERC may issue a written recommendation for
disciplinary action. If the person who committed the violation is an employee
(other than an employee appointed by the city council), the ERC may issue a
recommendation to the city manager that the city manager suspend or terminate
the employee. If the person who committed the violation is an employee
appointed by the city council, the ERC may issue a recommendation to the city
council that the city council suspend or terminate the employee. If the person
who committed the violation is an officer (other than a member of the city
council) or member of an advisory board or task force, the ERC may issue a
recommendation to the city council that the officer, advisory board or task
force member be removed from his or her position.
      (2)   Censure of mayor or members of the city council. If the person
complained against is the mayor or a member of the city council, and the ERC
finds that such person committed a serious or repeated violation of
Division 1 of this article intentionally or through culpable disregard of
Division 1 of this article, the ERC may issue a letter of censure. The letter
of censure may include a recommendation of recall or a recommendation to
institute proceedings for removal from office. A letter of censure, and any
recommendation of recall or to institute proceedings for removal from office,
shall be transmitted to the city secretary and to the mayor and city council.
Any recall proceedings shall be subject to the procedures specified in the City
Charter. Any proceedings for removal from office shall be in compliance with
provisions of the City Charter and state law.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-253 APPEAL OF CERTAIN DETERMINATIONS.
   (a)   Determinations that may be appealed. The following determinations of
the ERC may be appealed in accordance with this §
2-253:
      (1)   The dismissal of a complaint for failure to allege conduct which
would be a violation of
Division 1 of this article, pursuant to §
2-251(j);
      (2)   The dismissal of all or any portion of a complaint on grounds that
the conduct alleged was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a written
opinion of the city attorney, pursuant to §
2-251(k); or
      (3)   The determination as to whether a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred, as alleged in a complaint heard by the
ERC, pursuant to §
2-251(l).
   (b)   Eligibility requirements and filing deadline. Only a party against
whom a determination of the ERC described in §
2-253(a) was made may file an appeal. The appeal must be in writing and filed
with the city secretary within ten calendar days after the ERC’s determination.
   (c)   Filing requirement. The appeal must state sufficient facts to show
that the ERC committed a material error in its deliberations.
   (d)   Sworn nature. An appeal must be accompanied by an affidavit stating
that the person filing the appeal has good reason to believe and does believe
that the facts alleged in the appeal are true and correct. The appellant shall
swear to the facts by oath before a notary public or other person authorized by
law to administer oaths under penalty of perjury.
   (e)   Acceptance by the city secretary. If an appeal does not comply with
all of the eligibility requirements and filing deadline requirements of
subsection (b) above or the requirements of subsection (d) above, or does not
substantially comply with the requirements of subsection (c) above, the city
secretary shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, return the appeal
to the person filing the appeal with a letter stating the defects in the
appeal. If an appeal complies with all of the eligibility requirements and
filing deadline requirements of subsections (b) and (d) above and substantially
complies with the requirements of subsection (c) above, the city secretary
shall acknowledge to the person filing the appeal that the appeal is complete
as to form and provide a copy of the appeal to the city council, the city
attorney and the person complained against.
   (f)   Designation of hearing officer and scheduling of evidentiary hearing.
Not later than 15 business days after acceptance of an appeal, the city
secretary shall designate the hearing officer in accordance with §
2-244(d) and notify in writing the hearing officer, the person filing the
appeal and the person responding to the appeal of the hearing’s date, time and
location. Such written notice shall be sent to the person filing the appeal and
the person responding to the appeal by certified mail, return receipt
requested. If the hearing is not held within 30 business days after designation
of the hearing officer, the city secretary shall notify both the person filing
the appeal and the person responding to the appeal of the reasons for the
delay.
   (g)   Hearing rules. The hearing shall be based solely on the record of the
ERC’s hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open
Meetings Act, Tex. Government Code Chapter 551. The hearing officer shall have
the right to establish time limits and other rules of procedure for the hearing
and relating to the participation of any person in the hearing, subject to
subsections (h) and (i) below. All proceedings of the hearing shall be reduced
to writing by a court reporter, who shall file the transcript of the hearing
with the city secretary within such time as is specified by the hearing
officer. All costs of preparing and filing such transcript shall be borne by
the appellant.
   (h)   Rights of appellee. The person responding to the appeal has the right
to attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, the right to present
witnesses, and the right to be represented by legal counsel or another advisor.
   (i)   Rights of appellant. The person filing the appeal has the right to
attend the hearing, the right to make a statement, the right to present
witnesses and the right to be represented by legal counsel or another advisor.
   (j)   Order of business. The order of business before the hearing officer
shall be as follows:
      (1)   To ascertain whether the person filing the appeal and the person
responding to the appeal are present;
      (2)   To determine whether the appeal is based on a determination of the
ERC described in §
2-253(a);
      (3)   To review the record, hear statements from both the person filing
the appeal and the person responding to the appeal as to whether the record
shows that the ERC materially erred in its determination as to the issue on
appeal, and, based on the particular standard of review set forth below, to
determine whether the ERC materially erred in such determination;
      (4)   To make a recommendation to the city council as to whether the
person originally complained against violated
Division 1 of this article as alleged in the complaint originally filed; and
      (5)   If the recommendation to the city council is to find that the
person complained against did violate
Division 1 of this article as alleged in the complaint, also to recommend a
sanction for the city council to impose in accordance with §
2-252.
   (k)   Ascertaining presence of the parties.
      (1)   If the person filing the appeal fails to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall dismiss the appeal and adjourn the hearing. Within ten
business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the person filing the
appeal, the person responding to the appeal, the ERC, and the city secretary a
written notice of the hearing officer’s dismissal. The hearing officer’s
dismissal of an appeal for failure to appear at the hearing is final unless the
person filing the appeal petitions the hearing officer in writing within 30
calendar days following delivery of the dismissal to reconsider on grounds that
the person had good cause to not appear and the hearing officer grants such
request. Any petition for reconsideration filed by the appellant must include a
statement that explains in detail why the person filing the appeal did not
appear.
      (2)   If the person filing the appeal appears at the hearing but the
person responding to the appeal does not, the hearing officer may proceed with
the hearing in that person’s absence provided that the city secretary has a
certified mail receipt that the respondent received notice of the date, time
and location of the hearing.
   (l)   Determining whether there is a sufficient basis for the appeal. If the
hearing officer finds that the appeal is not based on a determination of the
ERC described in §
2-253(a), the hearing officer shall deny the appeal in its entirety. Within ten
business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the person filing the
appeal, the person responding to the appeal and the city secretary a written
notice of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall include the reasons
for such decision. The hearing officer’s denial of an appeal on such grounds is
final and will not be considered by the city council pursuant to subsection (q)
below.
   (m)   Determining whether the appeal is sufficient. If the hearing officer
finds that the appeal does not state sufficient facts to satisfy any of the
requirements of §
2-253(b), the hearing officer shall deny the appeal in its entirety. Within ten
business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the person filing the
appeal, the person responding to the appeal and the city secretary a written
notice of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall include the reasons
for such decision. The hearing officer’s denial of an appeal on such grounds is
final and will not be considered by the city council pursuant to subsection (q)
below.
   (n)   Review of determination that complaint does not allege conduct which
would be a violation of
Division 1. If the appeal is based on the ERC’s dismissal of a complaint for
failure to allege conduct which would be a violation of
Division 1 of this article, pursuant to §
2-251(j), the hearing officer shall review the record and determine whether the
ERC materially erred in its determination that the complaint did not allege
conduct which would be a violation of
Division 1. The hearing officer’s determination as to whether the ERC
materially erred in its determination that the complaint did not allege conduct
which would be in violation of
Division 1 shall be based on a de novo review of the record. If, based on such
standard of review, the hearing officer determines that the ERC did err
materially in its determination that the complaint did not allege conduct which
would be a violation of
Division 1, the hearing officer shall remand the complaint to the ERC, and the
ERC shall proceed to consider the complaint in accordance with the remaining
order of business set forth in §
2-251. If the hearing officer determines that the ERC did not err materially,
the hearing officer shall deny the appeal and adjourn the hearing. Within ten
business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the person filing the
appeal, the person responding to the appeal and the city secretary a written
notice of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall include the reasons
for such decision. The hearing officer’s denial of an appeal on such grounds is
final and will not be considered by the city council pursuant to subsection (q)
below.
   (o)   Review of determination that conduct alleged was undertaken in
reasonable reliance upon a written opinion of the city attorney. If the appeal
is based on the ERC’s dismissal of a complaint on grounds that the conduct
alleged was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a written opinion of the
city attorney, pursuant to §
2-251(k), the hearing officer shall review the record and determine whether the
record shows that the ERC materially erred in its determination that the
conduct alleged in the complaint was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a
written opinion of the city attorney. The hearing officer’s determination as to
whether the ERC materially erred in its determination that the conduct alleged
in the complaint was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a written opinion
of the city attorney shall be based on the substantial evidence standard of
review of the record. If, based on such standard of review, the hearing officer
determines that the ERC did err materially in its determination that the
conduct alleged in the complaint was undertaken in reasonable reliance upon a
written opinion of the city attorney, the hearing officer shall remand the
complaint to the ERC, and the ERC shall proceed to consider the complaint in
accordance with the remaining order of business set forth in §
2-251. If the hearing officer determines that the ERC did not err materially in
its determination, the hearing officer shall deny the appeal and adjourn the
hearing. Within ten business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the
person filing the appeal, the person responding to the appeal and the city
secretary a written notice of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall
include the reasons for such decision. The hearing officer’s denial of an
appeal on such grounds is final and will not be considered by the city council
pursuant to subsection (q) below.
   (p)   Review of ERC’s determination based on the evidentiary proceeding. If
the appeal is based on the ERC’s determination at the conclusion of its
evidentiary proceeding conducted pursuant to §
2-251(l) as to whether a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred, the hearing officer shall review the
record and determine whether the ERC materially erred in its determination as
to whether a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred. The hearing officer’s determination as to
whether the ERC materially erred in its determination shall be based on the
substantial evidence standard of review of the record. The hearing officer’s
determination shall proceed as follows:
      (1)   If the ERC found that a violation of
Division 1 of this article did not occur, and the hearing officer determines
that the ERC did not err materially in such determination, the hearing officer
shall deny the appeal and adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the
hearing officer shall deliver to the person filing the appeal, the person
responding to the appeal, the city secretary and each member of the city
council a written copy of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall
include the reasons for such decision. The hearing officer’s determination in
this regard shall be final and will not be considered by the city council
pursuant to subsection (q) below.
      (2)   If the ERC found that a violation of
Division 1 of this article did occur, and the hearing officer determines that
the ERC materially erred in such determination, the hearing officer shall
uphold the appeal. Within ten business days, the hearing officer shall deliver
to the person filing the appeal, the person responding to the appeal, and the
city secretary a written copy of the hearing officer’s determination, which
shall include the reasons for such decision and recommend that the city council
accept the hearing officer’s determination that a violation of
Division 1 of this article did not occur and that no sanction should be imposed
upon the person complained against.
      (3)   If the ERC found that a violation of
Division 1 of this article did occur, and the hearing officer determines that
the ERC did not err materially in such determination, the hearing officer shall
deny the appeal and adjourn the hearing. Within ten business days, the hearing
officer shall deliver to the person filing the appeal, the person responding to
the appeal, and the city secretary a written copy of the hearing officer’s
determination, which shall include the reasons for such decision and recommend
that the city council accept the ERC’s determination that a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred and the sanction to be imposed or
recommended in accordance with §
2-252.
      (4)   If the ERC found that a violation of
Division 1 of this article did not occur, and the hearing officer determines
that the ERC materially erred in such determination, the hearing officer shall
uphold the appeal and, based on a de novo standard of review of the record,
announce any sanction to be imposed or recommended in accordance with §
2-252. Within ten business days, the hearing officer shall deliver to the
person filing the appeal, the person responding to the appeal, and the city
secretary a written copy of the hearing officer’s determination, which shall
include the reasons for such decision and recommend that the city council
accept the hearing officer’s determination that a violation of
Division 1 of this article occurred and the sanction to be imposed or
recommended in accordance with §
2-252.
   (q)   City council hearing. Within 45 calendar days following the date on
which the hearing officer provides the city secretary with a copy of any
recommendations of the hearing officer pursuant to subsection (p)(2), (p)(3) or
(p)(4) above, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, the city secretary shall
deliver to the city council a written copy of the hearing officer’s
determination and recommendations, as well as the transcripts of the hearings
of both the ERC and the hearing officer, and shall schedule a hearing before
the city council to consider such recommendations. The written determination
and recommendations of the hearing officer, as well as the transcripts of the
proceedings before the ERC and the hearing officer, shall form the sole
evidentiary basis for the city council hearing. No other evidence or testimony
shall be presented at the hearing before the city council. However, the person
filing the appeal and the person responding to the appeal shall each be
entitled to make a statement to the city council as to whether the city council
should adopt, reject or modify the recommendations of the hearing officer. Each
statement shall be subject to any time limitation imposed by the presiding
officer of the city council. No rebuttal statements may be made. Following any
such statements and a review by the city council of the transcript of the
testimony and evidence presented to the hearing officer as well as the hearing
officer’s determination and recommendations, the city council shall, by
majority vote, adopt, reject or modify the determination and any
recommendations of the hearing officer. If any adopted determination includes a
recommended sanction against an employee, the city manager will be solely
responsible for considering, imposing and carrying out such sanction in
accordance with the city manager’s authority under
Chapter V of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, Texas. If any adopted
determination includes a recommended sanction against an officer other than a
member of the city council, the city council, by majority vote, will be
responsible for considering, imposing and carrying out such sanction. Within
ten business days, the city secretary shall deliver to the person filing the
appeal and the person responding to the appeal a written copy of the city
council’s determination.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-254 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Except where otherwise provided by state law or in §
2-255, it is not the intention of the city council in adopting this article
that violations thereof be subject to criminal penalties.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-255 SUBPOENAS.
   (a)   The ERC or hearing officer, at their discretion, may issue one or more
subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers,
records or other evidence needed for the performance of their duties or
exercise of their powers. The subpoena shall be issued on the sworn application
(of either the complaining party or the person complained against) stating that
the applicant in good faith believes that such item exists, and stating in
detail a description of any such items, sufficient to be able to identify such
item, that the party requesting the subpoena has not been able to obtain such
item otherwise, and that the applicant in good faith believes that the item is
in the possession or control of a person or entity whose name and address is
specified in the sworn application.
   (b)   The ERC or hearing officer may issue any such subpoena upon terms and
conditions that they deem applicable.
   (c)   The party requesting the subpoena, or the party to the proceeding
opposing it, and the person or business entity against whom the subpoena is
sought each has the right to appeal to the city council any decision by the ERC
or hearing officer concerning the request for subpoena. Such appeal shall be
made in writing within ten calendar days after the ERC or hearing officer’s
decision (which must be in writing) by filing such appeal with the city
secretary. All proceedings before the ERC or hearing officer shall be stayed
until after the city council acts on the appeal.
   (d)   If the city council denies such an appeal or the time for an appeal
has expired, any person who is subpoenaed by the ERC or hearing officer to give
testimony or to produce books, papers, records or other evidence needed for the
performance of the ERC or hearing officer’s duties or the exercise of their
powers, willfully makes default or refuses to answer any question pertinent to
the proceedings before the ERC or hearing officer, or refuses to obey any
subpoena or fails to produce books, papers and other evidence required by the
ERC or hearing officer, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-256 EVIDENCE OF CRIMINAL CONDUCT.
   During the performance of their duties under the provisions of this article,
if the ERC, hearing officer, city manager or city council receives evidence of
criminal conduct, the ERC, hearing officer, city manager or council may provide
such evidence to the prosecuting attorney having jurisdiction of such matter
for appropriate action.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§ 2-257 POSTPONEMENT OF HEARINGS IN CERTAIN CASES.
   If a complaint alleges facts concerning a possible violation of
Division 1 of this article and such facts are involved in a criminal
investigation or a criminal proceeding before a grand jury or the courts, the
ERC, hearing officer, city manager or city council may, when they deem
appropriate, postpone any hearing or any appeal concerning such complaint until
after the criminal investigation or criminal proceedings are terminated.
(Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-18-2012, eff. 12-22-2012)
§§ 2-258—2-260 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE BY OFFICERS AND CANDIDATES
Editor’s note:
This division, formerly codified as Division 2 of this article, derived from
1964 Code, §§ 43-5 through 43-9, Ord. 7650, § 1, adopted October 25, 1977 and
Ord. 7784, § 1, adopted August 15, 1978. This division was renumbered as
Division 4 of this article by Ord. 10617, § 1(2), adopted June 26, 1990, and as
this Division 5 by Ord. 20548-12-2012, § 2, adopted December 18, 2012.
This division was amended and reorganized by § 1 of Ord. 21845-08-2015, adopted
August 25, 2015, which repealed § 2-265. See also Code Comparative Table.
§ 2-261 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section.
   CANDIDATE. Every person who declares for or files for any office of the city
to be filled by election.
   OFFICER. The mayor, a member of the city council, the city manager, the city
attorney, the city secretary, the city internal auditor, the chief financial
officer and the judges of the municipal court.
(1964 Code, § 43-5) (Ord. 7650, § 1, passed 10-25-1977; Ord. 7784, § 1, passed
8-15-1978; Ord. 10617, § 1 (2), passed 6-26-1990; Ord. 20837-08-2013, § 1,
passed 8-6-2013; Ord. 21845-08-2015, § 1, passed 8-25-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 2-262 PERSONAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
   (a)   Every officer shall file a verified personal financial statement with
the city secretary in the same form as required by Chapter 145 of the Texas
Local Government Code, except that a newly appointed officer shall file the
verified personal financial statement with the city secretary within 30 days
from the date he or she is sworn into office.
   (b)   The reporting period for the personal financial disclosure for newly
appointed officers is 12 months preceding the date the officer is sworn into
office.
   (c)   Every candidate shall file a verified personal financial statement
with the city secretary in the same form as that required by Chapter 145 of the
Texas Local Government Code not later than the earlier of:
      (1)   The 20th day after the deadline for filing an application for a
place on the ballot in the election; or
      (2)   The fifth day before the date of the election.
   (d)   The reporting period for a statement required under this subsection
shall be the 12 months preceding January 1 of the year in which the election is
held.
(1964 Code, § 43-6) (Ord. 7650, § 1, passed 10-25-1977; Ord. 10617, § 1 (2),
passed 6-26-1990; Ord. 16265, § 1, passed 1-18-2005; Ord. 21845-08-2015, § 2,
passed 8-25-2015)
§ 2-263 FORMS FOR STATEMENTS.
   (a)   Persons filing financial disclosure statements shall use the form
designed by the Texas Ethics Commission as required by Chapter 572, Texas
Government Code.
   (b)   The city secretary shall provide copies of the forms required by this
division to:
      (1)   Officers and candidates as required by state law; and
      (2)   Newly appointed officers upon their swearing in and no later than
the tenth day before the deadline.
(1964 Code, § 43-7) (Ord. 7650, § 1, passed 10-25-1977; Ord. 10617, § 1 (2),
passed 6-26-1990; Ord. 21845-08-2015, § 2, passed 8-25-2015)
§ 2-264 PUBLIC RECORDS; INSPECTION.
   (a)   The city secretary shall maintain all statements required to be filed
with the city secretary under this division as public records and retain them
for a period of three years after which time he or she shall return them to the
person filing them or destroy them.
   (b)   The financial disclosure statement file maintained by the city
secretary under this section shall be kept in alphabetical order for each year
in which statements are filed. Such files shall be open to public inspection
during normal business hours. The city secretary shall maintain a list of all
persons requesting to inspect such files identifying the file or files
inspected.
(1964 Code, § 43-8) (Ord. 7650, § 1, passed 10-25-1977; Ord. 10617, § 1 (2),
passed 6-26-1990)
§ 2-265—2-275 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12027, adopted July 11, 1995, repealed §§ 2-276 through 2-
280. Formerly, said sections pertained to microfilming and retention of records
in administrative departments and agencies of the city, and derived from §§ 2-
63 through 2-67 of the 1964 Code, and § 1 of Ord. 8700, adopted December 14,
1982.
§ 2-276 POLICY.
   (a)   The city recognizes that the citizens of Fort Worth have a right to
expect, and the city has an obligation to foster, efficient and cost-effective
government and further recognizes the central importance of city records in the
lives of its citizens.
   (b)   It is the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and
effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance,
use and disposition of all records of the city. This policy will be implemented
through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of
records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the local government records act or any successor statute and
accepted records management practice.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-277 SCOPE.
   All city records shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance
with this article and all policies and procedures established pursuant to this
article, and in no other manner.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-278 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article and all policies and procedures established
pursuant to this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
   APPROVED RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A records control schedule that has been:
      (a)   Reviewed by the department director and the records management
policy committee;
      (b)   Adopted by the records management policy committee; and
      (c)   Approved by the director and librarian of the Texas state library.
   CITY RECORD. Every document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or
video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium or other
information recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under state or
federal law, that is created or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business. A CITY
RECORD does not include extra identical copies of documents created only for
convenience of reference or research; notes, journals, diaries and similar
documents created for the employee’s personal convenience; library or museum
material acquired solely for reference, exhibit or display; or stocks of
publications, advertisements or other unsolicited written materials received by
the city or any of its officers or employees that does not involve public
business.
   DEPARTMENT. Any department, office, agency, division, program, commission,
bureau, board, committee, task force, ad hoc committee or similar entity of the
city.
   DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR. The officer who by Charter, ordinance, order or
administrative policy is in charge of a department or an office of the city
that creates or receives city records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any city record necessary to:
      (a)   The resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an
emergency or disaster;
      (b)   The recreation of the legal and financial status of the city; or
      (c)   The protection and fulfillment of obligations to the citizens of
the city.
   HISTORICAL CITY RECORD. Any city record that is adjudged worthy of permanent
preservation for reference and research purposes and suitable for deposit in
the municipal archive.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACT. Tex. Local Government Code, Title 6, subtitle
C, as amended.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any city record for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the records management officer that describes recurring records or records
series on a continuing basis, indicating for each record or records series:
      (1)   The length of time the record or records series is to be
maintained;
      (2)   When and if the record or records series may be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of; and
      (3)   Other records disposition information that the records management
program may require.
   RECORDS DISPOSITION.
      (1)   The destruction of a city record that has passed its minimum legal
retention period and no longer has value to the city; or
      (2)   Permanent storage of a permanent city record.
   RECORDS INVENTORY. The process of locating, identifying and describing in
detail the records of a department.
   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICER. Any person designated under §
2-289 of this article.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of city
records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
record keeping. The term includes:
      (1)   The development of records control schedules;
      (2)   The management of filing and information retrieval systems;
      (3)   The protection of essential and permanent records;
      (4)   The economical and space-effective storage of inactive records;
      (5)   The control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports
and correspondence; and
      (6)   The management of micrographic, electronic and other records
storage systems.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The city employee serving in the position of
records manager.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under §
2-287 of this article.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY COMMITTEE. The committee established under §
2-286 of this article.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a city record, or after the fulfillment of certain
actions associated with a city record, before the record is eligible for
destruction.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 15336, § 1, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 2-279 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
   (a)   There is hereby created a records management program in the city
secretary’s office for the purpose of administering an active and continuing
city-wide records management program.
   (b)   The records management program will be headed by the records manager,
who shall be appointed by and work under the direction of the city secretary.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 15336, § 2, passed 11-19-2002; Ord.
17251, § 1, passed 10-31-2006; Ord. 18157-07-2008, § 1, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 2-280 MUNICIPAL ARCHIVE.
   (a)   There is hereby created a municipal archive in the Fort Worth public
library for the purposes of housing, arranging, describing, preserving and
making available for research the historical city records transferred from city
departments.
   (b)   The municipal archive shall be headed by the municipal archivist, who
shall be appointed by and work under the supervision of the library director.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-281 CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   Every city record is the property of the city. No city officer or
employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right
to a city record even though the city officer or employee may have developed or
compiled the record. The unauthorized alteration, destruction, removal from
files or use of a city record is prohibited. A city record exempted from public
disclosure under state or federal law is not made subject to disclosure by its
designation as city property under this section.
   (b)   A city record shall not be sold, loaned, given away, destroyed or
otherwise alienated from the city’s custody unless done in accordance with the
provisions of this article or unless destroyed as directed by an expunction
order issued by a district court pursuant to state law. This section does not
apply to a city record that is temporarily transferred to a contractor for
purposes of microfilming, duplication, conversion to electronic media,
restoration or a similar records management and preservation procedure if the
transfer is authorized by the records management officer.
   (c)   Legal custody of a city record created or received by a department
during the course of business remains with the department director or with the
department director of any designated successor of the department. The legal
custodian, as guardian of the record, does not relinquish responsibility for
the care, preservation or legal disposition of the record even though physical
custody of the record for maintenance and preservation purposes may be held by
another department or agency. An original city record may not leave the custody
of the department concerned when being used by a member of the public.
   (d)   Every officer or employee shall deliver to any successor all city
records pertaining to the office held by the city officer or employee.
   (e)   A city record that has continuing historical value to the city may be
transferred to the municipal archive upon agreement between the department
director, the records management officer and the municipal archivist. Custody
of the record will be known subsequently as archival custody, and ownership of
the record remains with the city.
   (f)   The city shall maintain legal and physical custody of all city records
belonging to any defunct department that does not have a named successor.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 15336, § 3, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 2-282 PROHIBITIONS ON DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
   The destruction of a city record involved in a pending request under Tex.
Government Code Chapter 552, pending litigation or a pending audit is
prohibited, even if the destruction of the record is authorized by an approved
records control schedule.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-283 DUTIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The city council shall:
   (a)   Establish, promote and support an active and continuing program for
the efficient and economical management of all city records; and
   (b)   Be subject to the same duties and responsibilities required of a
department by this article, any policy or procedure established under this
article, and state law.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-284 DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   The city manager shall:
   (a)   Cause policies and procedures to be developed for the administration
of the program under the direction of the records management officer;
   (b)   Facilitate the creation and maintenance of city records containing
adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures and essential transactions of the city and designed to
furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of
the city, the state and persons affected by the activities of the city;
   (c)   Facilitate the identification and preservation of city records that
are of permanent value; and
   (d)   Facilitate the identification and protection of essential records.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-285 RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   The city council hereby designates the position of records manager to
serve as records management officer for the city.
   (b)   When the individual serving as the records management officer changes,
that person shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the
Texas state library within 30 days after the date of assuming office.
   (c)   The records management officer shall perform those duties assigned in
the policies and procedures established pursuant to this article, all duties
established by state law, and shall:
      (1)   Administer the city’s record management program under the direction
of the city secretary and provide advice and assistance to department directors
in its implementation;
      (2)   Assist and advise the records management policy committee in
establishing and developing policies and procedures for the city’s records
management program;
      (3)   Prepare and submit for approval records control schedules for all
departments in accordance with §
2-289.1 of this article;
      (4)   In cooperation with department directors, identify essential
records and establish a disaster and recovery plan for the records of each
department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to
reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
      (5)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued
by the Texas state library and archives commission to determine if the records
management program and the city’s records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations;
      (6)   Disseminate to the city council, the city manager, the department
directors and the records management policy committee information concerning
state laws and administrative rules relating to city records;
      (7)   Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies
and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records
management program;
      (8)   Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct
of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control
schedules as required by state law and this article;
      (9)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, electronic
storage, destruction and other disposition of city records is carried out in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
and the requirements of state law;
      (10)   Maintain statistics on the volume of city records destroyed under
approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition;
      (11)   Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the
records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of
the statistical and fiscal data compiled under §
2-287 of this article;
      (12)   Bring to the attention of the records management policy committee
any noncompliance by a department director or other personnel with the policies
and procedures of the records management program or state law;
      (13)   Review and submit departmental requests for authorization for
electronic storage of city records to the director and librarian of the Texas
state library as required by state law; and
      (14)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 15336, § 4, passed 11-19-2002; Ord.
17251, § 1, passed 10-31-2006; Ord. 18157-07-2008, § 1, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 2-286 RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICY COMMITTEE.
   (a)   The committee shall consist of the city attorney, city auditor, city
secretary, director of information technology solutions and risk manager, or
their designees.
   (b)   The committee shall select and maintain a chairperson. The chairperson
shall be responsible for calling meetings of the committee and presiding over
the meetings as needed.
   (c)   The records management officer shall serve as the executive secretary
of the committee, coordinate its actions, provide recommended policies and
procedures, and assist the committee in carrying out its functions.
   (d)   The committee shall:
      (1)   Establish policies and procedures necessary for the implementation
and administration of the city’s records management program;
      (2)   Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and
propose changes and improvements if needed;
      (3)   Review, approve and adopt records control schedules submitted by
the records management officer; and
      (4)   Actively support and promote the records management program
throughout the city.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 14934, § 2, passed 1-22-2002; Ord.
15336, § 5, passed 11-19-2002; Ord. 17251, § 1, passed 10-31-2006; Ord. 18157-
07-2008, § 1, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 2-287 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (a)   The records management officer and the records management policy
committee shall develop a city-wide records management plan. The plan shall be
designed to enable the records management officer to carry out duties as
prescribed by state law and this article.
   (b)   The records management plan shall establish policies, procedures and
criteria for:
      (1)   The reduction of costs and improvement of the efficiency of records
keeping;
      (2)   The adequate protection of the essential records of the city;
      (3)   The proper preservation of city records that are of historical
value;
      (4)   The determination of the eligibility of records for microfilming;
      (5)   The microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that
all microfilming is done in accordance with state law and the standards and
procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in
rules of the Texas state library and archives commission;
      (6)   The regulation of the operations and use of inactive records
storage areas, which shall serve as the depositories of inactive records of
continuing value to the city, unless the records have been transferred to the
municipal archive for purposes of preservation as historical city records; and
      (7)   The maintenance, preservation and storage of the electronic records
of the city, including policies to ensure that all electronic storage of city
records is done in accordance with state law.
   (c)   The records management plan shall be binding on all city officers and
employees and on all departments, offices, agencies, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, task forces, ad hoc committees and
similar entities of the city.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-288 DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR DUTIES.
   (a)   In addition to other duties assigned in this article and by state law,
every department director shall:
      (1)   Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established by the city for the efficient and
economical management of city records and in carrying out the requirements of
this article;
      (2)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs, and duties for which the department director and department
staff are responsible;
      (3)   Maintain city records in the department director’s custody and
carry out the preservation, microfilming, electronic storage, destruction and
other disposition of those records only in accordance with the policies and
procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements
of this article;
      (4)   Review and approve records control schedules and requests to
dispose of city records that are prepared and submitted by the records
management officer; and
      (5)   Notify the records management officer within 24 hours of the
discovery of any loss, theft or damage to a city record.
   (b)   No city ordinance or policy relating to the duties, record keeping
requirements or other responsibilities of a department director shall exempt
the department director or city records in the department director’s custody
from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted
under this article, nor shall such a law or policy be used by the department
director as a basis for refusing to participate in the records management
program of the city.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-289 DEPARTMENTAL RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS.
   (a)   Each department director shall designate in writing to the records
management officer a member of the department director’s staff to serve as the
records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management
program in the department. If the records management officer determines that
more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department,
the department director shall designate the number of records liaison officers
specified by the records management officer. The department director may serve
as records liaison officer for a department.
   (b)   A person designated as a records liaison officer shall be thoroughly
familiar with, and have full access to, all city records created and maintained
by the department.
   (c)   If a person designated as a records liaison officer resigns, retires
or is removed by action of the department director, the department director
shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy.
   (d)   In addition to other duties assigned in this article or by state law,
a records liaison officer shall:
      (1)   In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and
implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in the
department;
      (2)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records
management program; and
      (3)   In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate the
records inventory of the department.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-289.1 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES.
   (a)   The records management officer, in cooperation with department
directors and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules
on a department by department basis that describe and establish the retention
periods for all city records created or received by each department.
   (b)   A records control schedule must contain such other information
regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may
require. Every city record identified on a records control schedule, or any
amendment to the schedule, or in any request for destruction of a record shall
be specifically described.
   (c)   Any records control schedule, amendment to a schedule, or request for
destruction of a record that contains general terms such as “miscellaneous” and
“various” to describe any record identified in such a document will not be
submitted to the records management policy committee for consideration.
   (d)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed
by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that the
schedule is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that the schedule continues to reflect the record keeping procedures and
needs of the department and the records management program of the city.
   (e)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department director.
   (f)   A records control schedule shall be submitted by the records
management officer to, and accepted for filing by, the director and the
librarian of the Texas state library, as provided by state law, before the
schedule may be implemented.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 15336, § 6, passed 11-19-2002)
§ 2-289.2 DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   The department director and records liaison officer of a department
for which a records control schedule has been approved and adopted shall
implement the schedule in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
records management plan.
   (b)   A department director or records liaison officer shall notify the
records management officer when a city record is eligible for destruction.
   (c)   Before a city record is destroyed under an approved records control
schedule, the records management officer must obtain authorization for the
destruction from the records management policy committee, unless the approved
schedule specifies that the record may be destroyed without additional review
or authority of the records management policy committee.
   (d)   A city record whose retention period has expired on an approved
records control schedule must be destroyed unless:
      (1)   A request for the record is pending under Tex. Government Code
Chapter 552;
      (2)   The subject matter of the record is pertinent to pending litigation
or audit; or
      (3)   The department director requests in writing to the records
management officer that the record be retained for an additional period.
   (e)   A city record that is obsolete or that has not been identified on an
approved records control schedule may be destroyed if:
      (1)   Its destruction has been approved in the same manner required by
this article for the destruction of a record that is identified on an approved
records control schedule; and
      (2)   The records management officer has submitted to and received from
the director and librarian of the Texas state library an approved request for
destruction authorization.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-289.3 CITY RIGHT TO CITY RECORDS.
   The city may demand and receive from any person any city record in private
possession that was created or received by the city, the removal of which was
not authorized by law.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
§ 2-289.4 CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
   (a)   An officer or employee of the city who knowingly or intentionally
violates this article or a policy or procedure adopted under this article
commits a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $500.
   (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code, § 202.008, an officer or
employee of the city commits a Class A misdemeanor if the officer or employee
knowingly or intentionally violates the local government records act or the
rules adopted under said act, by destroying or alienating a local government
record in contravention of the act or by intentionally failing to deliver
records to a successor in office. A Class A misdemeanor is punishable by a fine
of up to $4,000, confinement in jail for up to one year, or both.
(Ord. 12027, § 1, passed 7-11-1995)
ARTICLE IX: PERSONAL LIABILITY INDEMNITY PLAN
§ 2-290 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article:
   ACTUAL DAMAGES. Compensatory damages only and interest, if any, which has
accrued thereon but does not include punitive or exemplary damages, fines or
penalties.
   AUTHORIZED OFF-DUTY OPERATION. Operation of a city vehicle by a plan member
in accordance with department policy while not in the scope of employment for
the purpose of:
      (1)   Commuting to and from work and home; or
      (2)   Commuting to and from the work place and an off-site parking
facility.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The city attorney of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, or any of
his or her assistants.
   CITY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle leased or owned by the City of Fort Worth.
   COMMUTING. Direct travel in a city vehicle to or from the worksite(s) of a
plan member, including to or from an off-site parking facility including
returns to the worksite(s) outside of the plan member's normal work hours.
Commuting is not in the scope of employment.
   OFF-SITE PARKING FACILITY. City facilities and other locations along the
plan member's reasonable commute route to and from the worksite(s) that are
determined to be adequately secure by the authorizing department and are
approved for the purpose of parking a city vehicle during non-work hours.
Selection of an off-site parking facility is made based in part on the
convenience of the facility to an individual plan member. Travel between an
off-site parking facility and a plan member's worksite(s) is not in the scope
of employment.
   PLAN. The Personal Liability and Indemnity Plan defined and governed by this
article.
   PLAN MEMBER.
      (1)   Any employee, volunteer or elected or appointed officer of the
city, any former employee, volunteer or officer of the city, or the estate of
an employee, volunteer or officer or former employee, volunteer or officer; and
      (2)   Any member or former member of a city board, commission or
committee created by Charter, ordinance or resolution of the city, or the
estate of said member.
   REMOTE PARKING FACILITY. A city facility or other approved location at which
a plan member is directed to park a city vehicle due to limitations at the
primary site or for the operational convenience of the city. Selection of a
remote parking facility is made without regard to the convenience of the
facility to an individual plan member. Travel between a remote parking facility
and a plan member's worksite(s) is in the scope of employment.
   SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT. Has the same meaning as set out in the Texas Tort
Claims Act, being Tex. Civ. Practice and Remedies Code, Chapter 101, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   VOLUNTEER. Only a person who has been approved as a volunteer by the city
and who is working under the direction and supervision of an employee or
officer of the city.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 14577, § 1, passed 4-4-2001; Ord. 22767-
06-2017, § 1, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-291 COVERAGE.
   (a)   The city shall pay the actual damages, in accordance with and as
limited by the terms of the plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay
arising from any claim, lawsuit or judgment against a plan member, whether or
not the city is a party defendant, if said damages:
      (1)   (a)   Result from an act or omission of the plan member while in
the scope of his or her employment with the city or during assigned volunteer
work with the city; or
         (b)   Relate to authorized off-duty operation of a city vehicle for
which coverage is provided under §
2-299; and
For the purpose of this section, travel between a worksite and an assigned
remote parking facility is in the scope of employment.
      (2)   Arise from a cause of action for negligence.
   (b)   This section shall apply only to acts or omissions occurring or
alleged to have occurred after the effective date of this article and to acts
or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred prior to the effective date
of this article which are not barred by any statute of limitations. This
section shall not apply to any lawsuit pending on the effective date of this
article.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 14577, § 2, passed 4-4-2001; Ord. 22767-
06-2017, § 2, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-292 COOPERATION OF PLAN MEMBER REQUIRED.
   (a)   To be entitled to coverage, a plan member must:
      (1)   Notify risk management within five days after receipt of any
written notice of claim;
      (2)   No later than five days after receipt of a lawsuit, notify the city
attorney and request in writing legal representation by the city attorney;
      (3)   Assist and cooperate with the city and its authorized
representatives in the investigation of such claim or lawsuit;
      (4)   Assist and cooperate in the defense of the lawsuit, including
attending hearings, depositions, and trials; securing and giving evidence; and
cooperating in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity;
      (5)   Not give any oral or written statement concerning a lawsuit or
claim, except upon the advice of the city attorney or a representative from the
risk management division of finance or when questioned by a police office at
the scene of an accident; and
      (6)   Not voluntarily make any payment, assume or admit any liability,
settle or agree to settle any claim or lawsuit, incur any expense or assume any
obligation with respect to a claim or lawsuit, except upon advice and consent
of the city attorney or risk management.
   (b)   The failure or refusal of a plan member to comply with any of the
above requirements may be grounds for denial of coverage or legal
representation under this article.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 14934, § 3, passed 1-22-2002; Ord.
22767-06-2017, § 3, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-293 LIMITS OF COVERAGE.
   Except as provided by § 2-299 related to City Vehicle Coverage, the city
will pay the actual damages that a plan member is legally obligated to pay for
any claim, lawsuit or judgment covered by this article, provided that payments
under this article by the city will not exceed $100,000 per occurrence.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 17652, § 1, passed 7-17-2007; Ord.
22767-06-2017, § 4, passed 6-20- 2017)
§ 2-294 EXCLUSIONS.
   (a)   This article shall not apply to:
      (1)   Claims or lawsuits brought by the city against a plan member;
      (2)   Claims or lawsuits for official misconduct;
      (3)   Acts or omissions constituting gross negligence, criminal
negligence or recklessness;
      (4)   Damages arising out of a willful violation of a penal statute or
ordinance committed by or with the knowledge or consent of the plan member;
      (5)   Damages arising out of acts committed by or at the direction of the
plan member with affirmative dishonesty, or actual intent to injure, deceive or
defraud;
      (6)   Any act or omission committed by a plan member while the plan
member is operating a city vehicle without permission or authority;
      (7)   Liability assumed by the plan member under a contract or agreement,
unless the contract or agreement has been entered into with the consent or at
the request of the city;
      (8)   Any obligation for which the city may be liable under the Texas
Workers’ Compensation
Act, being Tex. Labor Code, Title 5, unemployment compensation laws or any
similar law;
      (9)   Any act or omission which occurs during a period of time in which
the plan member is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual
services to someone other than the city;
      (10)   Any claim or lawsuit alleging violations of constitutional rights,
civil rights or federal law;
      (11)   Any plan member who is already covered by an insurance contract or
other plan of self-insurance authorized by statute for acts or omissions
occurring while in the scope of employment, up to the limits of said insurance
contract or plan.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city, in its discretion, on
a case by case basis, from providing legal representation and paying damages,
court costs and attorney's fees that a plan member is legally obligated to pay
in any claim or lawsuit, to the extent and in the amount provided for by the
plan, unless otherwise prohibited by state law.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 10780, § 1, passed 2-5-1991; Ord. 14577,
§ 3, passed 4-4-2001; Ord. 17652, § 2, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 22767-06-2017, §
5, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-295 SUBROGATION.
   The city shall be subrogated to the plan member’s rights of recovery against
any person, firm, corporation or organization, and the plan member shall
execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to
secure those rights and shall do nothing to prejudice those rights.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987)
§ 2-296 DEFENSE AND LEGAL REPRESENTATION.
   (a)   The city shall defend any claim or lawsuit against the plan member
seeking damages to which this article applies even if any of the allegations of
the claim or suit are groundless, false or fraudulent.
   (b)   The city attorney shall provide the legal representation to a plan
member in any claim or lawsuit in which the plan member is covered by this
article.
   (c)   If the city attorney determines that there is a conflict of interest
for the city attorney in representing a plan member, and the plan member is
entitled to coverage under this article, the city will pay the reasonable fees
of outside legal counsel to represent the plan member. The outside counsel
shall be selected by the city attorney.
   (d)   In any lawsuit where the city attorney is providing legal
representation to a plan member, the plan member may hire or retain additional
legal counsel; however, the city shall not pay or reimburse said plan member
for the services of said legal counsel.
   (e)   The city shall not be liable for any settlement of any claim or
lawsuit effected without its consent.
   (f)   The city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any
settlement it deems expedient.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 14577, § 4, passed 4-4-2001)
§ 2-297 NO DEFENSES WAIVED.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving any defense, immunity
or jurisdictional bar available to the city or plan member.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987; Ord. 22767-06- 2017, § 6, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-298 NO CREATION OF CAUSE OF ACTION.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as creating a cause of action
against the city or plan member nor as the giving of any right to institute or
maintain any suit or action which would not otherwise exist or be cognizable
under law as a legal claim against the city or a plan member.
(Ord. 9943, § 1, passed 9-1-1987)
§ 2-299 CITY MOTOR VEHICLE COVERAGE.
   The city will pay the actual damages for any claim, lawsuit or judgment that
a plan member is legally obligated to pay arising out of any act or omission
committed in connection with the authorized off-duty operation of a city
vehicle, provided that payments under this provision will not exceed the
minimum coverage limits required by Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 601, as
hereafter amended.
(Ord. 22767-06-2017, § 7, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 2-300 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
Section 1 of Ord. 21652-02-2015, adopted February 17, 2015, repealed former
Art. X, §§ 2-301 through 2-304, which had pertained to the department of
equipment services, and derived from § 1 of Ord. 14697, adopted July 17, 2001.
Section 1 of Ord. 21652-02-2015 also enacted this new Art. X, §§ 2-301 through
2-303, as set forth below. Sections 2-301, 2-302, and 2-303 were then repealed
by § 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§§ 2-301—2-303 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 2-310
through 2-313, which pertained to the Planning and Development Department. See
also the Code Comparative Table.
§§ 2-310—2-320 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: FEE SCHEDULES
§ 2-321 DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION FEES.
   (a)   For services rendered, the following schedule of fees and charges is
hereby adopted; provided, however, that such fees may be waived or refunded by
action of the city council in accordance with policies adopted by the city
council:
Application Fees
Application Fees
Alarm system permits
   Residential                     $50.00
   Other alarm system locations    $100.00
Alcohol
   Variance request to City Council$562.50
   Distance check                  $112.50
Annexation
   75 acres or less                $787.50
                                     (Fee waived for commercial/industrial use
                                      only of 25 acres or less)
   More than 75 acres              $787.50*
                                   (*Plus $11.25 per acre over 75 acres)
   Limited purpose annexation      $3,375.00
Appeals
   Downtown Design Review Board    $337.50
   Historic and Cultural Landmarks $337.50
Commission
   Urban Design Commission         $337.50
City Plan Commission
   Concept plan                    $1,012.50
   Plats:
      Preliminary plat          $956.25*
                                     (*Plus $33.75 per each acre
                                      nonresidential)
                                     (*Plus $16.87 per lot residential)
      Final plat                $433.12*
                                   (*Plus $33.75 per lot residential)
                                     (*Plus $28.12 per acre nonresidential)
      Re-plat (with public heari$562.50*
                                     (*Plus $28.12 per lot residential)
                                     (*Plus $28.12 per acre nonresidential)
 
Application Fees
Application Fees
City Plan Commission (cont’d)
      Minor plat and re-plat (no public hearin$478.12*
                                                   (*Plus $28.12 per lot
                                                    residential)
                                                   (*Plus $28.12 per acre
                                                    nonresidential)
      Conveyance plat                         $225.00
      Plat revisions after first revision     $247.50
      Plat correction                         $56.25
      Plat vacation                           $450.00
   Waivers and other matters of business         $247.50
   Filing fees with the county: Collection of filing fees for the appropriate
county will be in addition to the fee rates above
Agreements Application Fees
   Community Facilities Agreement and amendments $2,508.75
   Stormwater Facilities Management Agreement    $714.37
   Transportation Impact Fee Credit Agreement    $1,125.00
   Easements and Vacations by Separate Instrument$787.50
                                                   (Fee for processing
                                                    application)
Credit Access Business                              $112.50
                                                   (Application and renewal)
Comprehensive Plan Inconsistency                    $675.00
                                                    (For a change in zoning
                                                   that is incompatible with
                                                    the city comprehensive
                                                    plan and future land use)
Hearing Continuance                                 $675.00*
   * At applicant’s request (after public notice) of board of adjustment,
city plan commission and zoning commission public hearings
Inspection and Testing Fees
   a.   Administrative Material Testing Servic$27.56 per test
   b.   Construction Inspection Service Fee   $337.50 per day
   c.   Water Testing Lab Fee                 $33.75 per test
Infrastructure Plan Review Center
                                                             The total number
                                                    $435.37  of detail pages
   Design Review Fee: Cost Per Design Page       per page shall be
                                                             considered one
                                                             page
   IPRC Pre/Post Submittal Conference            $1,125.00
Stormwater Development Services
   Drainage Study Review                         $1,406.25
                                                   (Plus $11.25 per acre
                                                    over 1 acre)
Transportation Development Review
   Transportation Impact Analysis Review         $1,125.00
Master Thoroughfare Plan - Amendment                $787.50
Small Scale Infrastructure Program (Miscellaneous
Projects)
   Application Fee                               $1,687.50
   Review Fee                                    $435.37 per design sheet
   Project Management Fee                        $1,500.00
 
Application Fees
Application Fees
Newsracks
   Permit Fees                                                                    $31.50
   Application fee per applicant plus, per newsrack                               $11.25
Paper Filing Fee                                                                     $56.25*
   * Additional fee assessed for any development application that can be submitted online
Parkway Permit
   Commercial                                                                     $281.25
   Residential                                                                    $253.12
   Reinspection                                                                   $28.12
Pre-submittal Meeting                                                                $281.25
Private ETJ Release                                                                  $450.00
Sexually Oriented Businesses; Application for Specialized Certificate of Occupancy
   Amended, modified, renewal or transfer                                         $1,125.00
   New                                                                            $1,125.00
Special Districts (MUDS/WCIDS)
   Petition                                                                       $16,875.00
   Agreement amendments                                                           $11,250.00
Street Name Change                                                                   $787.50
Street Use Permit
   Commercial                                                                     $281.25
   Residential                                                                    $253.12
   Reinspection                                                                   $28.12
Technology Fee for all Permits                                                       $16.87
Traffic Control Review Plan                                                          $112.50
"CR," "C," and "D" Zoning Districts Site Plan
   New                                                                            $675.00
   Revised                                                                        $337.50
Unified Sign Agreement                                                               $1,687.50
Urban Forestry
   Application fee for staff review                                                
      Base fee - First five acres (up to 5.00 acres), including one revision   $281.25*
      Additional acreage - 5.01 acres and over, per acre above base fee        $16.87*
      Additional revisions (each)                                              $112.50*
      After-the-fact base fee - First five acres (up to 5.00), including one   $562.50*
revision
      After-the-fact additional acreage - 5.01 acres and over, per acre above b$33.75*
fee
      *   The acreage will be based on the preliminary plat or site plan, whichever is
appropriate, at the time of submission of the urban forestry plan
      Vesting Letters                                                          $225.00
      Permit Renewal                                                           $140.62
      Developer Agreement                                                      $1,687.50
   Application fee for appeal hearing before urban design commission:
      Waivers to Urban Forestry Ordinance; waiver from tree planting and       $618.75
nonprotected trees
      Waiver from preservation of protected trees                              $1,125.00
      Waiver from preservation of significant trees or large trees - city wide $5,625.00
      Waiver from preservation of significant tree or large trees east of I35 ($3,375.00
threshold)
 
Application Fees
Application Fees
Vacations or Closures, ROW, Emergency and Public Access Easements
   Public access or emergency easement vacation                                   $450.00
   Street and alley vacations                                                     $787.50
Zoning Board of Adjustment
   Interpretation request                                                         $450.00
   Variance                                                                        
      Nonresidential/other residential                                         $843.75
                                                                                     Plus an
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     $450.00 for
                                                                                     each
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     variance
                                                                                     requested in
                                                                                    same
                                                                                     application
                                                                                     for
                                                                                     nonresidential
                                                                                     property or
                                                                                     other
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     property.
      Residential (owner-occupied)                                             $562.50
                                                                                     Plus an
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     $281.25 for
                                                                                     each
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                    variance
                                                                                     requested in
                                                                                     the same
                                                                                     application
                                                                                     for owner-
                                                                                     occupied
                                                                                     residential.
      Sign - Nonresidential/other residential                                  $1,125.00
                                                                                     Plus an
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     $1,125.00 for
                                                                                     each
                                                                                    additional
                                                                                     variance
                                                                                     requested in
                                                                                     the same
                                                                                     application.
   Special exception
      Nonresidential/other residential                                         $1,687.50
                                                                                     Plus an
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     $337.50 for
                                                                                     each
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     special
                                                                                     exception
                                                                                    requested in
                                                                                     the same
                                                                                     application
                                                                                     for
                                                                                     nonresidential
                                                                                     property or
                                                                                     other
                                                                                     residential
                                                                                     property.
      Residential (owner-occupied)                                             $843.75
                                                                                     Plus an
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     $168.75 for
                                                                                     each
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     special
                                                                                    exception
                                                                                     requested in
                                                                                     same
                                                                                     application
                                                                                     for owner-
                                                                                     occupied
                                                                                     residential.
                                                                                     $675.00 for
                                                                                     first waiver,
   Multifamily Dwelling (MFD/PD) Waiver                                           $337.50 for
                                                                                     each next
                                                                                     waiver
Zoning Commission (cont’d)
   Administration site plan amendment                                             $281.25
   “CD” Conservation District overlay rezoning                                No fee
   “HC”, “HSE” and “DD” Historic and Cultural Landmarks District overlNo Feeoning
   Planned Development (PD) site plan review*                                     $900.00*
      0—5 acres                                                              $1,350.00
      For application requests of less than one acre in size, when down zoning to a
one- or two-family districts that is consistent with the most current adopted
Comprehensive Plan, a fee of $506.25 is required.
      5.01—10 acres                                                          $3,037.50
 
Application Fees
Application Fees
Zoning Commission
      10 acres or more acres*                                                  $3,712.50
                                                                                     (Plus $84.37
                                                                                    per acre, not
                                                                                     to exceed
                                                                                     $10,125.00)
      PD or CUP Waiver Fee                                                     $843.75
                                                                                     (PD or CUP
                                                                                     with
                                                                                    requested
                                                                                     development
                                                                                     standard
                                                                                     waivers)
   Vendor permit: holiday and 10-day                                              $56.25
                                                                                     Designated
                                                                                     fee shall be
                                                                                     twice the
                                                                                     amount shown
                                                                                     when double
                                                                                     noticing and
                                                                                     special city
                                                                                     council
                                                                                     consideration
                                                                                     is required
   Zoning Application:                                                            or requested,
                                                                                     apart from
                                                                                     the normal
                                                                                     processing
                                                                                     schedule.
                                                                                     Double fee
                                                                                     charge is not
                                                                                     exempt of
                                                                                     incentive
                                                                                     programs
                                                                                     granted to
                                                                                     the project.
      Less than 1 acre*                                                        $1,350.00
      For application requests of less than one acre in size, when down zoning to a
one- or two-family districts that is consistent with the most current adopted
Comprehensive Plan, a fee of $506.25 is required.
      1—5 acres*                                                             $2,025.00
      5.01—10 acres*                                                         $3,037.50
      10.01—25 acres*                                                        $3,712.50
      25.01 or more acres (base fee)*                                          $3,712.50
                                                                                     (Plus $84.37
                                                                                    per acre, not
                                                                                     to exceed
                                                                                     $10,125.00)
                                                                                     $675.00 for
                                                                                     the first
   Multi Family Dwelling (MFD/PD)                                                 waiver
                                                                                     $337.50 each
                                                                                     additional
                                                                                     waiver
   Zoning verification letter:
      10-day letter                                                            $56.25
      3-day letter                                                             $112.50
   Notes:
   *In addition to Zoning Change Application Fee
 
   (b)   No final approval of a plat shall be given by the city plan commission
of the city unless and until a receipt is furnished to the secretary of such
commission showing that the fee provided for in this section has been paid; no
petition shall be docketed with the zoning commission of the city unless and
until a receipt has been furnished to the secretary of such commission showing
that the fee provided for in this section has been paid; no application for
relief shall be docketed with the board of adjustment of the city unless and
until a receipt is furnished the secretary of such board showing that the fee
provided for in this section has been paid and no petition shall be docketed
with other boards and commissions of the city unless and until a receipt has
been furnished to the secretary of such commission and boards showing that the
fee provided for in this section has been paid.
(Ord. 17522, § 4, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17718, § 1, passed 8-21-2007; Ord.
18460-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009; Ord. 20426-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-25-2012,
eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 21190-04-2014, § 1, passed 4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord.
22373-08-2016, § 1, passed 8-30-2016; Ord. 23383-09-2018, § 1, passed 9-18-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018; Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 3, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019;
Ord. 23820-09-2019, § 1, passed 9-10-2019, eff. 10-1-2019; Ord. 24449-09-2020,
§ 1, passed 9-22-2020, eff. 4-1-2021; Ord. 25772-09-2022, § 1, passed 9-27-
2022, eff. 10-1-2022; Ord. 25816-11-2022, § 1, passed 11-8-2022; Ord. 27191-09-
2024, § 1, passed 9- 24-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
§ 2-322 PENALTIES AND MITIGATION FEES.
   (a)   For violations of section 6.302, “Urban Forestry” of the Zoning
Ordinance, Appendix A of the City Code or development activities requiring
mitigation, the following schedule of penalties and mitigation fees is hereby
adopted; provided, however, that such fees may be waived or refunded by action
of the city council in accordance with policies adopted by the city council.
   (b)   Urban forestry penalties and mitigation fe .        
                                                                    Notes
                                                                  
   a.   Penalties                                            
                                                         $600.00/  Funds
                                                         d iameter deposited
      1.   Unauthorized removal of non-significainch or   into Park and
                                                         $15.00/   Recreation
                                                         canopy sf Department
                                                                   Tree Fund
                                                         $1,200.00 Funds
                                                         /diameter deposited
      2.   Unauthorized removal of significant tinch or   into Park and
                                                         $30.00/   Recreation
                                                         canopy sf Department
                                                                   Tree Fund
                                                                   Funds
                                                                   deposited to
                                                                   the
                                                                   Development
                                                         $500.00/  Services
      3.   Administrative fee assessed on penaltcase      Department to
                                                                   cover staff
                                                                   investigative
                                                                   and
                                                                   enforcement
                                                                   costs
   b.   Mitigation Fees                                      
                                                                   See section
                                                         $300.00/  6.302(g)(5).
                                                         diameter  Funds
      1.   Removal of significant trees         inch or   deposited
                                                         $7.50/    into Park and
                                                         canopy sf Recreation
                                                                   Department
                                                                   Tree Fund.
 
(Ord. 23820-09-2019, § 1, passed 9-10-2019, eff. 10- 1-2019; Ord. 27616-04-
2025, § 1, passed 4-22-2025, eff. 8-22-2025)
CHAPTER 2.5: RETIREMENT
   Article
      
I.   EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND
      
II.   RETIRED EMPLOYEES’ GROUP DEATH BENEFIT FUND
      
III.   SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT ORDINANCE
Charter reference:
   Employees’ retirement fund, see
Ch. XXVII, § 36
Cross-reference:
   Human resources, see §§
2-176 et seq.
   Retired employee health coverage, see §
2-190
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20471-10-2012, adopted Oct. 23, 2012, repealed former Ch. 2, Art. VI
(“RETIREMENT”) in its entirety and enacted new provisions designated as
Ch. 2.5, §§
2.5-1 through
2.5-235, pertaining to the same subject matter.
Section
Article I: Employees’ Retirement Fund
Division 1: General Provisions
   
2.5-1   Definitions
   
2.5-2   Membership in the fund
   
2.5-3   Contributions
   
2.5-4   Credited service
   
2.5-5   Administration
   
2.5-6   Annual actuarial valuations
   
2.5-7   Disability pension
   
2.5-8   Cost of living adjustment
   
2.5-9   Deferred retirement option program (DROP)
   
2.5-10   Payment of benefits
   
2.5-11   Exemption of benefits from judicial process
   
2.5-12   Amendment of ordinance
   
2.5-13   Controlling power of ordinance
   
2.5-14   Prerequisites to ordinance
   
2.5-15   Limitation of legal rights
   
2.5-16—2.5-19   Reserved
Division 2: Provisions for Group III Members (Police Officers Hired Prior to
January 1, 2013)
   
2.5-20   Applicability
   
2.5-21   Earnings
   
2.5-22   Retirement dates
   
2.5-23   Compensation base for determining benefits
   
2.5-24   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-25   Retirement pension (pension benefits)
   
2.5-26   Disability pension
   
2.5-27   Death benefit
   
2.5-28—2.5-29   Reserved
Division 3: Provisions Applicable to Group IV Members (Police Officers Hired on
or After January 1, 2013)
   
2.5-30   Applicability
   
2.5-31   Earnings
   
2.5-32   Retirement dates
   
2.5-33   Compensation base for determining benefits
   
2.5-34   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-35   Retirement pension (benefit)
   
2.5-36   Disability pension
   
2.5-37   Death benefit
   
2.5-38, 2.5-39   Reserved
Division 4: Provisions Applicable to Group I  Members (General Employees Hired
Prior to July 1, 2011)
   
2.5-40   Applicability
   
2.5-41   Earnings
   
2.5-42   Retirement dates for group I general members
   
2.5-43   Compensation base for determining benefits
   
2.5-44   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-45   Retirement pension (benefit)
   
2.5-46   Disability pension
   
2.5-47   Death benefit
   
2.5-48—2.5-49   Reserved
Division 5: Provisions for Group II Members  (General Employees Hired on or
After July 1, 2011)
   
2.5-50   Applicability
   
2.5-51   Earnings
   
2.5-52   Retirement dates
   
2.5-53   Compensation base for determining benefits for group II members
   
2.5-54   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-55   Retirement pension (benefit)
   
2.5-56   Disability pension
   
2.5-57   Death benefits
   
2.5-58—2.5-59   Reserved
Division 6: Provisions Applicable to Group V  Firefighters (Firefighters Hired
Prior to January 10, 2015) Only
   
2.5-60   Applicability
   
2.5-61   Earnings
   
2.5-62   Retirement dates for group V firefighters
   
2.5-63   Compensation base for determining benefits
   
2.5-64   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-65   Retirement pension for group V firefighters
   
2.5-66   Disability pension
   
2.5-67   Death benefits for group V firefighters
   
2.5-68—2.5-69   Reserved
Division 7: Provisions for Group VI Firefighters  (Firefighters Hired on or
after January 10, 2015)
   
2.5-70   Applicability
   
2.5-71   Earnings
   
2.5-72   Retirement dates for group VI firefighters
   
2.5-73   Compensation base for determining benefits for group VI firefighters
   
2.5-74   Termination benefits and vesting
   
2.5-75   Retirement pension for group VI members
   
2.5-76   Disability pension
   
2.5-77   Death benefit
   
2.5-78—2.5-225   Reserved
Article II: Retired Employees Group Death Benefit Fund
   
2.5-226   Continuation of death benefit fund
   
2.5-227   Appropriations to fund
   
2.5-228   Definitions
   
2.5-229   Entitlement to death benefit
   
2.5-230   Executive director of death benefit fund
   
2.5-231   Board of trustees
Article III: Supplemental Retirement Ordinance
   
2.5-232   General provision
   
2.5-233   Definitions
   
2.5-234   Eligibility and benefits
   
2.5-235   Administration and miscellaneous
ARTICLE I: EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2.5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, as
amended, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The masculine pronouns,
wherever used herein, shall include both male and female persons.
   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT AND ACTUARIALLY EQUIVALENT. Equality in value of the
aggregate amounts expected to be received under different forms of payment
based upon the actuarial factors and assumptions used by the actuary with the
approval of the board.
   ACTUARIAL TABLES. Such tables of mortality, interest rates, turnover
discounts, salary scales, etc., as shall be used by the actuary with approval
of the board.
   ACTUARY. The technical advisor regarding the operations, which are based on
mortality, service and compensation experience, who makes periodic valuations
of the assets and liabilities of the fund and other evaluations as requested by
the board and the governing body.
   ALTERNATIVE PENSION BENEFIT. Shall have the meaning as set forth in the
following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-25 for group III members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-35 for group IV members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-45 for group I members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-55 for group II members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-65 for group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-75 for group VI firefighters.
   BASE PENSION. The annual life pension a member receives as set forth in the
following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-25 for group III members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-35 for group IV members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-45 for group I members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-55 for group II members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-65 for group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-75 for group VI firefighters.
   BENEFICIARY. Any person in receipt of a retirement benefit or any other
benefit provided under this chapter.
   BOARD. The board of trustees of the employees’ retirement fund of the City
of Fort Worth.
   BUILT-IN OVERTIME. The overtime earned as a result of suppression
firefighters working their regular schedules, that is, the hours worked in
excess of 212 hours in the city’s regular 28-day pay cycle for firefighters.
This definition does not include constant staffing overtime (CSOT) or emergency
callback overtime (ECOT). In each 28-day pay cycle, a suppression firefighter
is scheduled to work either 216, 224 or 232 hours. The number of hours in each
28-day pay cycle that are in excess of 212 is the BUILT-IN OVERTIME that the
suppression firefighter will earn for that particular 28-day pay cycle. Thus,
the maximum amount of BUILT-IN OVERTIME that a suppression firefighter can earn
per 28-day pay cycle is four hours (when the suppression firefighter is
scheduled to work 216 hours), or 12 hours (when the suppression firefighter is
scheduled to work 224 hours), or 20 hours (when the suppression firefighter is
scheduled to work 232 hours).
   BUY BACK INTEREST. The assumed rate of return as adopted by the board of
trustees of the City of Fort Worth Employees’ Retirement Fund for the annual
actuarial valuation of the fund.
   CASH BALANCE ACCOUNT. The individual nominal account established for general
employees hired on or after July 1, 2011, to account for overtime contributions
made to the fund.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CODE. The United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and any successor
thereof.
   COMPENSATION BASE. Shall have the meanings set forth in the following
sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-23 for group III members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-33 for group IV members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-43 for group I members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-53 for group II members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-63 for group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-73 for group VI firefighters.
   CREDITED SERVICE. The number of years (treating each complete month of
service as one-twelfth of a year) in which an employee has participated in the
employees’ retirement fund of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, including unused
accumulated sick leave and major medical leave pursuant to §
2.5-4. Service for 15 or more calendar days in any month shall constitute a
complete month of service; service for less than 15 calendar days in any month
shall constitute a complete month of absence. Notwithstanding the preceding
provisions of this definition of CREDITED SERVICE, the period of time following
a member’s effective DROP election shall not be included when determining a
member’s credited service. A member may have his or her proof of credited
service increased through the purchase of permissive service credits as
provided in §
2.5-4(c).
   DROP. The deferred retirement option program as set forth in §
2.5-9.
   DROP ACCOUNT. The account created pursuant to §
2.5-9(d) for a member who has made a DROP election.
   DROP ELECTION. The election made by a member pursuant to §
2.5-9 to participate in the DROP.
   EARNED INCOME. For purposes of §
2.5-7, those wages, salaries, tips, commissions, monetary bonuses or
professional fees, and other amounts received as compensation for personal
services actually rendered, including any compensation deferred under a
deferred compensation program.
   EARNINGS. Shall have the meaning set forth in the following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-21 for group III members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-31 for group IV members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-41 for group I members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-51 for group II members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-61 for group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-71 for group VI firefighters.
   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The individual appointed by the board to supervise the
administrative affairs of the fund and carry out the business of the fund.
   FISCAL YEAR. The period from October 1 of one year through September 30 of
the following year.
   FUND. The employees’ retirement fund of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   GENERAL EMPLOYEE. A member of the fund who is not a police officer or
firefighter.
   GOVERNING BODY. The city council for the City of Fort Worth.
   GROUP I MEMBER. A general employee hired prior to July 1, 2011.
   GROUP II MEMBER. A general employee hired on or after July 1, 2011.
   GROUP III MEMBER. A police officer hired prior to January 1, 2013.
   GROUP IV MEMBER. A police officer hired on or after January 1, 2013.
   GROUP V FIREFIGHTER.
      (1)   A firefighter member hired prior to January 10, 2015.
      (2)   Any member of the Fort Worth fire department, hired prior to
January 10, 2015 who was hired in substantial compliance with Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 143, or as modified by the provisions of the city’s
collective bargaining agreement with the Fort Worth Professional Firefighters
Association IAFF Local 440, and any firefighter trainee who is employed by the
city for the sole purpose of attending the City of Fort Worth fire department’s
training academy.
   GROUP VI FIREFIGHTER.
      (1)   A firefighter member hired on or after January 10, 2015.
      (2)   Any member of the Fort Worth fire department, hired on or after
January 10, 2015, who was hired in substantial compliance with Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 143, or as modified by the provisions of the city’s
collective bargaining agreement with the Fort Worth Professional Firefighters
Association IAFF Local 440, and any firefighter trainee who is employed by the
city for the sole purpose of attending the City of Fort Worth fire department’s
training academy.
   LEGITIMATE CHILDREN. Those children legitimate to their respective parent
(s), as legitimacy is defined by the Texas Family Code and the Texas Probate
Code, as amended.
   LINE OF DUTY. In the course of the operation usual to a member’s employment,
including all operations necessary, incident or appurtenant thereto or
connected therewith, whether such operations are conducted at the usual place
of employment or elsewhere.
   MEMBER. A “participating member” as defined by Tex. Revised Civil Statutes
Article 6243i, § 1.02(4).
   NET EARNINGS FROM SELF- EMPLOYMENT. Shall constitute, for purposes of §
2.5-7, the NET EARNINGS FROM SELF- EMPLOYMENT as reflected upon the Internal
Revenue Form Schedule SE and its successors, which schedule is attached to
Internal Revenue Form 1040 and its successors.
   NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE. Shall have the meaning set forth in the following
sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-22 for group III members/group III police members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-32 for group IV members/group IV police members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-42(a) for group I members/group I general members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-52 for group II members/group II general members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-62(a) for group V members/group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-72(a) for group VI members/group VI firefighters.
   PERMISSIVE SERVICE CREDITS. A member’s voluntary purchase of additional
periods of credited service pursuant to §
2.5-4(c).
   POLICE OFFICER. A member of the City of Fort Worth police department, who
has acquired civil service status pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 143, as amended, as well as a beginning employee of the City of Fort
Worth police department currently serving a one-year probationary period
pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 143, as amended.
   REGULAR INTEREST. Two-year Treasury Bill rate on the last pay date of the
calendar year. Regular Interest will be compounded annually. Regular Interest
will not be applied to any year in which the member is not an active employee
on the last pay date of the calendar year.
   RETIREMENT BENEFIT. A pension for life, as provided in this chapter, payable
each year in 12 equal monthly installments, beginning as of the date approved
by the board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   STANDARD PENSION BENEFIT. Shall have the meaning set forth in the following
sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-25 for group III members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-35 for group IV members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-45 for group I members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-55 for group II members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-65 for group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-75 for group VI firefighters.
   TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT. Complete severance of employment of any member as
an employee of the city by any act or means except death, disability or
retirement.
   TRUSTEE. A person appointed or elected to administer the fund.
   VESTED. The rights accrued under this article by a member of the fund who
has been a member for five years or more, or who has attained his or her
retirement date, as described in this chapter. Such rights shall also accrue to
all members of the fund at the time of termination of the fund, at the time of
any complete discontinuance of the city’s contributions to the fund, and to
members affected at the time of any partial termination of the fund, but only
to the extent that the benefits of such members have been funded.
   VESTED TERMINATED. When used to describe a member in any group shall mean a
member who:
      (1)   Voluntarily or involuntarily separates from the city prior to
retirement;
      (2)   Is vested at the time of separation; and
      (3)   Does not receive a refund of any part of his contribution.
   VESTED TERMINATED PENSION. Shall have the meaning as set forth in the
following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-24(b) for group III members/group III police officers;
      (2)   Section
2.5-34(b) for group IV members/group IV police officers;
      (3)   Section
2.5-45(b) for group I members/group I general members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-54(b) for group II members/group II general members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-65(b) for group V members/group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-75(a) or (c) for group VI members/group VI firefighters.
   VESTED TERMINATED RETIREMENT DATE. Shall have the meaning set forth in the
following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-22(b) for group III members/group III police members;
      (2)   Section
2.5-32(b) for group IV members/group IV police members;
      (3)   Section
2.5-42(c) for group I members/group I general members;
      (4)   Section
2.5-52(b) for group II members/group II general members;
      (5)   Section
2.5-62(c) for group V members/group V firefighters; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-72(c) for group VI members/group VI firefighters.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 1, passed 9-
16-2014; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1,
passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 23034-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 23516-12-
2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-2 MEMBERSHIP IN THE FUND.
   (a)   Membership in the fund shall be based on the requirements set forth in
Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6243i, § 2.01, provided however, that
membership in the fund shall be a condition of employment for all employees who
are eligible to be members unless otherwise provided in subsection (a-1).
   (a-1)   An individual who is eligible to be a member may elect not to become
a member of the fund only if all of the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The individual has, for at least one full pay period prior to
making the election, been serving in a position that is part of a class of
position that is not eligible to be a member of the fund but that is
participating in the city’s social security alternative plan, also known as the
FICA alternative plan.
      (2)   The class of position described in subsection (1) is being
eliminated and replaced with a class of position that will be eligible to be a
member of the fund.
      (3)   The contribution rate under the FICA alternative plan for the class
of position being eliminated and the contribution rate under the fund for the
replacement class of position are the same at the time of the election and will
continue to be the same thereafter.
      (4)   An individual who elects not to become a participating member of
the fund shall be required to continue participating in and making
contributions to the FICA alternative plan.
      (5)   An election is offered and may be made no more than once.
      (6)   The election is required to be and actually is made prior to first
date for which a contribution under the fund is schedules to be made for the
replacement class of position.
      (7)   The election is irrevocable.
   (b)   An individual who fails to make an election or whose attempt to elect
does not fully comply with all conditions listed in subsection (a-1) shall
become a member of the fund effective as of the first date for which a
contribution under the fund is made for the replacement class of position.
   (c)   If a group I member terminates employment with the city after vesting,
takes a refund of contributions, and then returns to service with the city
after July 1, 2011, then the group I member will be treated as if he or she was
hired after July 1, 2011, even if the member purchases permissive service
credits pursuant to §
2.5-4.
   (d)   If a group I member terminates employment with the city after vesting,
does not take a refund of contributions, and then returns to service with the
city after July 1, 2011, then the group I member will be treated as if he or
she was hired prior to July 1, 2011.
   (e)   If a group I member terminates employment with the city prior to
vesting, and then returns to service with the city after July 1, 2011, then the
group I member will be treated as if he or she was hired after July 1, 2011,
even if he or she purchases permissive service credits pursuant to §
2.5-4, or failed to take a refund of contributions.
   (f)   For pension purposes, if a group III member terminates employment with
the city after vesting, takes a refund of contributions, and then returns to
service with the city after January 1, 2013, then the group III member will be
treated as if the group III member was hired after January 1, 2013, even if the
group III member purchases permissive service credits pursuant to §
2.5-4.
   (g)   For pension purposes, if a group III member terminates employment with
the city after vesting, does not take a refund of contributions, and then
returns to service with the city after January 1, 2013, then the group III
member will be treated as if the group III member was hired prior to January 1,
2013.
   (h)   For pension purposes, if a group III member terminates employment with
the city prior to vesting, and then returns to service with the city after
January 1, 2013, the group III member will be treated as if the group III
member was hired after January 1, 2013, even if the group III member purchases
permissive service credits pursuant to §
2.5-4, or failed to take a refund of contributions.
   (i)   For pension purposes, if a group V firefighter terminates employment
with the city after vesting, takes a refund of contributions, and then returns
to service with the city after January 10, 2015, then the group V firefighter
will be treated as if the group V firefighter was hired after January 10, 2015,
even if the group V firefighter purchases permissive service credits pursuant
to §
2.5-4.
   (j)   For pension purposes, if a group V firefighter terminates employment
with the city after vesting, does not take a refund of contributions, and then
returns to service with the city after January 10, 2015, then the group V
firefighter will be treated as if the group V firefighter was hired prior to
January 10, 2015.
   (k)   For pension purposes, if a group V firefighter terminates employment
with the city prior to vesting, and then returns to service with the city after
January 10, 2015, the group V firefighter will be treated as if the group V
firefighter was hired after January 10, 2015, even if the group V firefighter
purchases permissive service credits pursuant to §
2.5-4, or failed to take a refund of contributions.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 25225-12-2021, § 1, passed 12-14-2021, eff. 1-1-2022)
§ 2.5-3 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (a)   Member contributions.
      (1)   Effective with the August 9, 2019 paycheck, and continuing until
the date of actual retirement or earlier termination of employment, group I
general members shall contribute to the fund 9.35% of their earnings.
Additionally, effective with the August 9, 2019 paycheck, each individual group
I general member shall contribute to the fund an additional 0.7% of earnings
until the earliest of the following: 1) the member retires; 2) the member
terminates employment; or 3) the member has made additional 0.7% contributions
for a period of time that is equal to the amount of credited service the member
earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013.
      (2)   Effective with the August 9, 2019 paycheck and continuing until the
date of actual retirement or earlier termination of employment, group II
general members shall contribute to the fund 9.35% of their earnings.
      (3)   Effective with the August 9, 2019 paycheck, group III and group IV
police members shall contribute 10.53% of their earnings to the fund; effective
with the first paycheck on or after January 1, 2020, group III and group IV
police members shall contribute 12.53% of their earnings to the fund; effective
with the first paycheck on or after January 1, 2021 and continuing until date
of actual retirement or earlier termination of employment, group III and group
IV police members shall contribute 13.13% of their earnings to the fund.
      (4)   Effective with the August 9, 2019 paycheck, group V firefighters
and group VI firefighters shall contribute 10.05% of their earnings to the
fund; effective with the first paycheck on or after January 1, 2020 and
continuing until date of actual retirement or earlier termination of
employment, group V and group VI firefighters shall contribute 12.05% of their
earnings to the fund.
      (5)   If, following a member's involuntary termination of employment, the
city is required, as the direct result of an appeal or suit arising from the
involuntary termination, to reinstate the member's employment, the member shall
make the contribution described in this section on any payment made by the city
to the member as back pay, less interim earnings, if any, with the city
empowered to make such payment on the employee's behalf in accordance with §
2.5-3(b)(2).
      (6)   Contributions by members reinstated following a military leave of
absence are governed by the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment
Rights Act, 38 U.S.C. §§ 4301-33, as provided for in §
2.5-4(a)(4) of this division. These contributions shall be made even if doing
so would reduce a member's net cash compensation below the minimum wage rate as
prescribed by law.
      (7)   By accepting employment with the city, each member shall be deemed
to consent and agree to deductions made from the member's compensation, and
payments to all such members of compensation, less the deduction, shall
constitute a full and complete discharge of all claims and demands whatsoever
for services rendered by such member during the period covered by such payment,
except as to the benefits provided by the fund.
      (8)   The contributions of all members may be raised at any time from the
amount stated in this section to a higher amount in accordance with the
procedures provided by Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6243i.
      (9)   Both group V and group VI firefighters will make contributions to
the fund on built-in overtime.
      (10)   For all pay periods beginning on or after July 20, 2019, all
members in all groups will contribute to the fund on all overtime.
   (b)   City contributions.
      (1)   For group III and group IV police members only, effective with the
January 11, 2019 paycheck and with each paycheck thereafter, the city shall
contribute to the fund 24.96% of their earnings. For all other members,
effective with the January 11, 2019 paycheck and with each paycheck thereafter,
the city shall contribute to the fund 24.24% of their earnings. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, city contributions to the fund shall be reduced for each fiscal
year by the amount of benefits paid by the city, if any, under the supplemental
retirement ordinance. Subsection (a) shall not limit the right of the governing
body, through its budget appropriation, to contribute an additional amount over
and above the member's contribution in accordance with Tex. Revised Civil
Statutes Article 6243i, as amended.
      (2)   If, following a member's involuntary termination of employment, the
city is required, as the direct result of an appeal or suit arising from the
involuntary termination, to reinstate the member's employment, the city shall
make the contribution described in this section on any payment by the city to
the member as back pay, without reduction for the member's interim earnings, if
any. In addition, the city shall, on behalf of the member, make the member's
contribution described in this §
2.5-3 on any interim earnings deducted from the back-pay award. Contributions
made by the city on behalf of members whose employment is reinstated following
a military leave of absence are governed by the Uniformed Services Employment
and Reemployment Rights Act, 38 U.S.C. §§ 4301-33, as provided for in
subsection (a)(6) above.
      (3)   Effective for pay periods ending after April 1, 1999, the required
member contributions described in subsection (a) above and subsection (c) below
shall be picked up by the city and shall be treated as city contributions for
federal income tax purposes. Such contributions, although designated as member
contributions, shall be paid by the city on behalf of the members and in lieu
of contributions by the members. The members shall not have the option of
receiving such contributions directly instead of having such amounts paid by
the city to the fund.
      (4)   Retirement contributions made on behalf of the members, as well as
the city's contributions to the fund, shall be paid by the city based on weekly
workers' compensation benefits (currently referred to as a temporary income
benefits) paid to those members, beginning for such amounts received by members
on or after January 1, 2006.
      (5)   Although overtime will not be included in the definition of
earnings for group I general members and group III police members effective
October 1, 2013, the city will continue to contribute its contribution on
overtime for all group I general members and group III police members.
      (6)   Although overtime that is not built-in overtime will not be
included in the definition of earnings for group V firefighters effective
January 10, 2015, the city will continue to contribute its contribution on all
overtime for all group V firefighters, and on built-in overtime for all group
VI firefighters.
   (c)   Automatic contribution increases/ decreases.
      (1)   In addition to any and all member contributions under §
2.5-4(a) and any and all city contributions under §
2.5-4(b), if the combined city and member contributions based on then-existing
contribution rates are less than the actuarially determined contribution amount
(ADC) for two consecutive years based on a closed 30-year funding of the
unfunded liabilities and a discount rate that is consistent with the average of
rates reported by two independent sources that are agreed to by the city and
the fund, both members and the city shall automatically be required to make
further contributions, defined herein as "additional increases," as more
specifically governed by this subsection (c). Additional increases due from
members shall be referred to as "additional member contribution increases," and
amounts due from the city shall be referred to as "additional city contribution
increases." Changes to additional increases will only be applied beginning with
the first paycheck of a given calendar year and will not be applied to any
paychecks received prior to January 1, 2022.
      (2)   The amount of an additional increase applied in any given year will
equal the difference between the ADC from the fund's most recent actuarial
valuation and the then-current combined city and member contributions. Any
additional increase shall be shared by both the members and the city, with the
additional city contribution increase equaling one and one-half times that of
the additional member contribution increase. In addition, the following caps
shall apply:
         a.   Annual caps. The additional member contribution increase applied
in any given calendar year may not exceed 0.8% of earnings over the member
contribution rates that were applied in the previous calendar year.
Accordingly, the additional city contribution increase applied in any given
calendar year may not exceed 1.2% of earnings over the member contribution
rates that were applied in the previous calendar year.
         b.   Aggregate caps. The additional member contribution increase
applied in any given calendar year may never exceed 1.6% of earnings over the
member contribution rates specified in §
2-5(a) for the same calendar year. Accordingly, the additional city
contribution increase applied in any given calendar year may never exceed 2.4%
of earnings over the city contribution rates specified in §
2-5(b) for the same calendar year.
      (3)   If two consecutive valuations by the fund's actuary indicate that
some or all of the additional increase is no longer required to meet the ADC,
then the additional increase may be unilaterally reduced by city council by
that actuarially determined unrequired percentage, with the amount of such
reduction to be allocated 40% to member contributions and 60% to city
contributions, so that, for example, if it is determined that the total
additional increase needed to meet the ADC can be decreased by 1%, then the
additional member contribution increase would be decreased by 0.4% and the
additional city contribution increase would be decreased by 0.6%.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 2, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-4 CREDITED SERVICE.
   (a)   Service breaks. Pension credits shall be granted for all credited
service for which a member of the fund receives employment compensation from
the city, subject to the following regulations pertaining to service breaks.
      (1)   Authorized service breaks of 90 or less consecutive calendar days
without pay shall not be deducted from credited service.
      (2)   Except as provided below, periods of absence in excess of 90
consecutive calendar days without pay shall be deducted from credited service,
and no contributions shall be made by members or by the city during such
periods.
      (3)   a.   An absence of any period shall be permitted without loss of
prior credited service, unless the member receives a distribution of his or her
total contributions, plus regular interest, and any period of absence shall
cancel all prior credited service if the member receives a distribution of the
member's total contributions, plus regular interest; however, if a member is
absent, the member may regain prior credited service by repaying the total
amount of the refund, less the amount received from the member's cash balance
account, from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment, pursuant to
policies adopted by the Board under one of the two following options:
            1.   Repay in a single lump sum payment within 90 days of
reemployment, including buy back interest on the date of repayment that also
includes buy back interest for the period of absence on the date of the
repayment; or
            2.   Repay through a payroll deduction pay-back plan which
commences within 90 days of reemployment, and provides buy back interest for
the period of absence and that buy back interest will be charged throughout the
pay-back period and that the repayment period will not exceed three years.
         b.   No other repayment option is authorized for the repayment of
prior credited service.
      (4)   Effective on or after December 12, 1994, any member who is
reemployed by the city upon completion of service in the uniformed services
(within the time frame provided under the Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended) shall be granted credited service
for such uniformed service, provided the member makes the contributions (with
no interest) to the fund that the member would have been required to contribute
if the member had remained continuously employed by the city throughout the
period of uniformed service. Such payment must be made during the period which
commences with the date of reemployment by the city and which duration is three
times the period of the member's service in the uniformed services, not to
exceed five years. If a reemployed member makes such contributions, the city
shall also make its corresponding contributions to the fund. This provision
shall be construed consistently with the requirements of the Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Act of 1994, as amended.
      (5)   Any member whose employment was terminated involuntarily and was
thereafter reinstated as the direct result of an appeal or suit arising from
the involuntary termination shall be granted all credited service for the
period of absence, provided, however that contributions for credited service
for such period of absence must be made by the city and by or on behalf of the
member in accordance with §
2.5-3.
   (b)   Accumulated sick leave and major medical leave. Subject to all further
terms and conditions of this §
2.5-4(b), only that portion of a person's accumulated sick leave and major
medical leave that was earned prior to July 20, 2019 and that remains unused
(or otherwise uncompensated to the member) as of the date the person retires
shall be taken into account in calculating that person's credited service,
provided, however, that such balance shall never be taken into account in
calculating the pension of a member receiving a line of duty disability
pension.
      (1)   For accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave earned prior
to July 20, 2019:
         a.   1.   Subject to the provisions of this section, at retirement and
in calculating a vested terminated pension, a member shall have added to his or
her credited service hours of accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
to the extent the official personnel records of the city reflect that such
leave was (i) earned prior to July 20, 2019 and (ii) not used by or otherwise
compensated to the member, with leave that meets both of these criteria being
considered and referred to herein as "qualified leave." For credited service
purposes, qualified leave shall be converted into months using the following
formula:
            2.   The total number of hours of qualified leave divided by the
annual scheduled hours for the position from which the member is retiring
multiplied by 12. The resulting product represents the number of months in
whole numbers and/or a decimal portion of a month. Any whole number shall
constitute that number of months to be added to credited service. If the
resulting product contains a decimal value that is less than five tenths
(0.50), then no addition to credited service shall be made with respect to such
decimal value; however, if the resulting product contains a decimal value that
is five tenths (0.50) or greater, then an additional month of credited service
shall be provided for such decimal value.
         b.   Qualified leave shall not be applied toward determining of
retirement eligibility, but only toward calculation of retirement benefits.
         c.   Group I general members and group III police members who have
qualified leave that was earned prior to October 1, 2013, will have the leave
added to credited service earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013.
Qualified leave earned on or after October 1, 2013 and before July 20, 2019
will be added to credited service earned or purchased during that period.
         d.   Group I general members and group III police members who use sick
leave and/or major medical leave on or after July 20, 2019 will have the leave
deducted as follows:
            1.   First from accrued sick leave and/or major medical leave hours
earned on or after July 20, 2019 to the extent such leave is available for use;
            2.   Second from accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
hours earned prior to October 1, 2013 until such time as those hours are
completely exhausted; and
            3.   Finally from accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
hours earned from October 1, 2013 through July 19, 2019 until such hours are
completely exhausted.
         e.   Group V firefighters who have qualified leave that was earned
prior to January 10, 2015, will have the leave added to credited service earned
or purchased prior to January 10, 2015. Qualified leave earned on or after
January 10, 2015 and before July 20, 2019 will be added to credited service
earned or purchased during that period.
         f.   Group V firefighters who use sick leave and/or major medical
leave on or after July 20, 2019 will have the leave deducted as follows:
            1.   First from accrued sick leave and/or major medical leave hours
earned on or after July 20, 2019 to the extent such leave is available for use;
            2.   Second from accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
hours earned prior to January 10, 2015 until such time as those hours are
completely exhausted; and
            3.   Finally from accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
hours earned from January 10, 2015 through July 19, 2019 until such hours are
completely exhausted.
         g.   Group II general members, group IV police members, and group VI
firefighters who use sick leave and/or major medical leave on or after July 20,
2019 will have the leave deducted as follows:
            1.   First from accrued sick leave and/or major medical leave hours
earned on or after July 20, 2019 to the extent such leave is available for use;
and
            2.   Second from accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave
hours earned through July 19, 2019 until such time as those hours are
completely exhausted.
      (2)   For accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave earned on or
after July 20, 2019:
         a.   Accumulated sick leave and/or major medical leave earned on or
after July 20, 2019, will not be added to credited service at retirement.
   (c)   Permissive service credits.
      (1)   General. Effective on or after October 1, 2002, a member who has
earnings from the city for the then current year may elect to purchase
permissive service credits and have his or her period of credited service
increased for purposes of calculating the member’s retirement benefit, pursuant
to the provisions of this division. The actuary shall prepare factors which
shall be used to determine the voluntary additional contributions that a member
must make to purchase permissive service credits, provided, however, that in no
event shall a member be required to contribute an amount that exceeds the
amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to the additional credited
service that is purchased.
      (2)   Limitations. A member may purchase up to five years of permissive
service credits that are attributable to non-qualified service, and a member
cannot purchase any permissive service credits for non-qualified service prior
to completion of five years of participation as a member.
      (3)   Non-qualified service. For purposes of this subsection (c), the
term NON-QUALIFIED SERVICE means service other than:
         a.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar
leave) as an employee of the government of the United States, any state or
political subdivision thereof, or any agency instrumentality of any of the
foregoing (other than military service or service for credit which was obtained
as a result of the repayment described in § 415(k)(3) of the Code);
         b.   Service (including parental, medical, sabbatical and similar
leave) as an employee (other than as an employee described in subsection (c)
(3)a. above) of an education organization described in § 170(b)(l)(A)(ii) of
the Code which is a public, private or sectarian school which provides
elementary or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under state
law;
         c.   Service as an employee of an association of employees who are
described in subsection (c)(3)a. above; or
         d.   Military service (other than qualified military service under §
414(u) of the Code) recognized by such governmental plan. In the case of
service described in subsections (c)(3)a.1., (c)(3)b. or (c)(3)c. above, such
service will be non-qualified service if recognition of such service would
cause a member to receive retirement benefits for the same service under more
than one plan.
      (4)   Purchase of permissive service credits. A member may purchase
permissive service credits pursuant to the rules, procedures and forms as may
be adopted and amended by the board in its complete discretion, which shall be
uniform and nondiscriminatory and which shall be interpreted in a manner that
is consistent with the provision of the retirement ordinance and applicable
law. Permissive service credits may be purchased by a member’s direct payment
to the trustee of the amount determined by the factors provided by the actuary,
or through a trustee to trustee transfer of such amount from the member’s
account under an eligible deferred compensation plan (as defined in Code § 457)
or a qualified plan within the meaning of Code § 401(a), including a 401(k)
plan, or the member’s annuity contract meeting the requirements of Code § 403
(b).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 1, passed 9-
16-2014; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 23034-12-2017, § 1,
passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-5 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The board of trustees. The fund shall be administered by the board.
The board shall consist of 13 trustees designated as Place 1, Place 2, Place 3,
Place 4, Place 5, Place 6, Place 7, Place 8, Place 9, Place 10, Place 11, Place
12 and Place 13, respectively. A trustee’s term shall be for two years, subject
to this section. Trustees shall be elected as follows.
      (1)   Trustees elected by employees.
         a.   Election. Four trustees who are vested, participating members of
the fund, as defined by Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6243i, shall be
elected by the employees of the city, who are also members of the fund; said
trustees shall serve in Places 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively.
         b.   Employee groups. Each of the trustees shall be elected by one of
the employee groups as follows:
            1.   Place 1. The trustee for Place 1 shall be elected from group
A, which shall consist of those members of the fund who are employed as group
III and group IV members as defined by this division. Only group III and group
IV members who qualify for employee group A shall be eligible to vote for a
nominee for Place 1. Only group III and group IV members who qualify for
employee group A shall be eligible to serve in Place 1 on the board.
            2.   Place 2. The trustee for Place 2 shall be elected from group
B, which shall consist of those members of the fund who are employed as
firefighters. Only firefighters who qualify for employee group B shall be
eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 2. Only firefighters who qualify for
employee group B shall be eligible to serve in Place 2 on the board.
            3.   Place 3. The trustee for Place 3 shall be elected from group
C, which shall consist of those group I and group II members who are assigned
to work in the following departments: water, planning and development, budget,
financial management services, city manager’s office, city secretary, human
resources, internal audit, city attorney’s office and municipal court,
including the marshal’s office. Group C shall also include group I and group II
members assigned to work in the police department who are not eligible to vote
for a nominee for Place 1. Only group I and group II members who qualify for
employee group C shall be eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 3. Group I
and group II members who qualify for employee group C shall be eligible to
serve in Place 3 on the board.
            4.   Place 4. The trustee for Place 4 shall be elected from group
D, which shall consist of those group I and group II members who are assigned
to work in the following departments: IT solutions, economic development,
neighborhood services, library, parks and community service, public events,
aviation, code compliance, property management and transportation and public
works. Group D shall also include group I and group II member assigned to work
in the fire department who are not eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 2.
Only group I and group II members who qualify for employee group D shall be
eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 4. Only group I and group II members
who qualify for employee group D shall be eligible to serve in Place 4 on the
board.
         c.   Term. In accordance with the nomination and election procedures
prescribed in this section, trustees shall be elected to Places 1, 2, 3 and 4,
and shall serve for a two-year term, subject to the following provisions.
Trustees for Places 1 and 3 shall be elected every odd numbered year beginning
in 2007, and shall serve from September 1 of such odd numbered year through
August 31 of the next odd numbered year. Trustees for Places 2 and 4 shall be
elected in 2007 to serve a term from September 1, 2007 through August 31, 2008.
Thereafter, the trustees for Place 2 and 4 shall be elected every even numbered
year and shall serve from September 1 of such even numbered year through August
31 of the next even numbered year. Should the employment status of any member
elected trustee change so that said trustee is no longer a member of the
employee group from which the trustee was elected, then said trustee shall
automatically forfeit the office of trustee. Should a vacancy occur, for
whatever reason, in Place 1, 2, 3 or 4, during the term thereof, then a
majority of all trustees remaining on the board shall appoint to the board a
qualified member from the employee group whose place has been vacated, which
qualified member shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term; provided,
however, that if, at the time the vacancy arises, more than one year remains in
the unexpired term, then in lieu of the board appointing a replacement trustee,
there shall be an election pursuant to the nomination and election provisions
set forth below, with the board making reasonable modifications in the dates
and time frames for the nomination and election in light of the time of the
vacancy.
         d.   Method of nominating members for election. Nominations of members
for election to the board shall be by petition only. Before May 31 of each
election year, the executive director shall make available to members of each
employee group eligible to vote in the scheduled election petition forms with
written instructions. Petitions containing the names of nominees shall be
returned to the executive director prior to July 1 of said election year.
Nominees may use copies of the petition form or may create their own petition
forms, provided each page of each returned petition shall identify the name of
the nominee, the department in which the nominee is employed, the employee
group of which the nominee is a member, and the place on the board for which
the member is being nominated. No person’s name shall be placed upon the
official ballot as a nominee unless that person is nominated by petition. Said
nominating petition must contain the signature and employee number of at least
75 members of the employee group who are qualified to vote for said place on
the date said petition is submitted to the executive director. Only those
employees who are members of the fund shall be entitled to be listed upon the
official ballot as a nominee. No person’s name shall be placed upon the
official ballot as a nominee for Place 1 unless that person is a member of
employee group A. No person’s name shall be placed upon the official ballot as
a nominee for Place 2 unless that person is a member of employee group B. No
person’s name shall be placed upon the official ballot as a nominee for Place 3
unless that person is a member of employee group C. No person’s name shall be
placed upon the official ballot as a nominee for Place 4 unless that person is
a member of employee group D.
         e.   Method of electing member trustees.
            1.   The executive director shall provide for an election procedure
as authorized by the board, including, but not limited to, voting by mail,
telephone and electronic means, and which may be conducted by a third-party
voting service. The executive director shall prepare an official ballot for
each place, listing in alphabetical order according to surname the nominees for
election to that place. If, however, there is only one nominee for any place,
there shall be no election for that place, and such nominee shall automatically
be elected to the board. Only the names of those members who are nominated by
petition as prescribed herein shall be placed upon the official ballot. No
member shall be elected as a trustee whose name does not appear upon the
official ballot as a nominee. Ballots shall be made available to the members no
later than July 20 of the election year. Each member qualified to vote in said
election shall vote for one nominee only. Any ballot containing votes for two
or more persons, or for persons who are not nominees as prescribed herein,
shall be declared invalid and shall not be counted. All ballots must be cast no
later than August 15. Votes cast by written ballot must be returned no later
than August 15 of the election year. If the ballot is returned by mail, the
envelope must be postmarked by August 15 of the election year. The executive
director or a designated third party shall tabulate all votes for all nominees.
The nominee for each place who receives a majority of the votes cast for that
place shall be declared elected to the board. Following the tabulation of
votes, the executive director shall submit the results to the board at a
meeting to be held before September 1 of said election year, at which time the
board shall canvass the results of said election and certify which nominee is
elected for each place on the board. If, at the time of canvassing said
results, the nominee receiving the majority of votes for said place is no
longer eligible to serve in the place to which that nominee was elected, then
the nominee finishing second in the election shall be certified by the board as
elected to the board.
            2.   If there is more than one nominee and no nominee receives a
majority of the votes cast for any one place, or if there is a tie for any one
place, then a run-off election shall be held, with ballots made available to
the members qualified to vote for that place no later than September 1 of the
election year, and in the same manner as prescribed for the first election.
Only the names of candidates who tied for the highest number of votes cast for
that place in the first election, or the two candidates who received the
highest number of votes with neither having a majority of votes cast for that
place, shall be printed on the ballot for the run-off election. All ballots for
the second election must be cast by September 20 of the election year. Votes
cast by written ballot must be returned by September 20. If a ballot is
returned by mail, the envelope must be postmarked by September 20. The
executive director or a designated third party shall tabulate the votes for the
candidates in the run-off election. The candidate receiving the highest number
of votes cast for that place in the run-off election shall be declared elected
to the board.
            3.   In the event of a tie vote at the second election, the
candidates who tie shall cast lots in the presence of the board to determine
which one shall be declared elected. Following the tabulation of votes in the
run-off election, and the casting of lots in case of ties, the executive
director shall submit the results of same to the board at a meeting to be held
before November 1 of said election year, at which time the board shall canvass
the results of the run-off election and certify which nominee is elected to the
board. If, at the time of canvassing the results of the run-off election, the
nominee elected to serve on said board is no longer eligible to serve in the
place to which he or she was elected, then the nominee finishing second in the
election shall be certified by the board as elected to the board.
      (2)   Trustees elected by retired members.
         a.   Places.
            1.   Place 5. The trustee for Place 5 shall be elected by retiree
group B, which shall consist of those retired members of the fund from employee
group B. Only members of the fund who qualify for retiree group B shall be
eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 5. Only members of the fund who
qualify for retiree group B shall be eligible to serve in Place 5 on the board.
            2.   Place 6. The trustee for Place 6 shall be elected by retiree
group A, which shall consist of those retired members of the fund from employee
group A. Only members of the fund who qualify for retiree group A shall be
eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 6. Only members of the fund who
qualify for retiree group A shall be eligible to serve in Place 6 on the board.
            3.   Place 7. The trustee for Place 7 shall be elected by retiree
group C, which shall consist of those retired members of the fund from employee
groups C and D. Only members of the fund who qualify for retiree group C shall
be eligible to vote for a nominee for Place 7. Only members of the fund who
qualify for retiree group C shall be eligible to serve in Place 7 on the board.
         b.   Term. In accordance with the nomination and election procedures
prescribed in this section, a trustee shall be elected for Places 5, 6 and 7,
and shall serve for a two-year term. The trustee for Place 6 shall be elected
to serve a term from September 1, 2007 through August 31, 2008. Thereafter, the
trustee for Place 6 shall be elected every even numbered year and shall serve
from September 1 of such even numbered year through August 31 of the next even
numbered year. Trustees for Places 5 and 7 shall be elected every odd numbered
year beginning in 2007, and shall serve from September 1 of such odd numbered
year through August 31 of the next odd numbered year. Should a trustee for
Place 5, 6 or 7 return to city employment and again become an employee member
of the fund, the trustee shall automatically forfeit the office of trustee for
Place 5, 6 or 7. Should a vacancy occur in Place 5, 6 or 7, during the term
thereof, then a majority of all trustees remaining on the board shall appoint
to the board a retired member of the applicable retiree group, to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term.
         c.   Nomination of retired members for election. Nomination of retired
members for election to the board shall be by letter of nomination only. Before
May 31 of each election year, the executive director shall make available to
retired members official letter of nomination forms with written instructions.
Copies of the letter of nomination may be used. Completed letters of nomination
shall be returned to the executive director prior to July 1 of each election
year. Each returned letter of nomination shall identify the retired member
being nominated and the place for which the retired member is being nominated
and must contain the signature and the last four digits of the Social Security
number of the retired member making the nomination. Any member of retiree group
A receiving at least 25 nominations from retiree group A shall be considered a
nominee for election to Place 6 on the board. Any retired member of retiree
group B receiving at least 25 nominations from retiree group B shall be
considered a nominee for election to Place 5 on the board. Any member of
retiree group C receiving at least 25 nominations from retiree group C shall be
considered a nominee for election to Place 7 on the board. No person shall be
placed on the ballot as a nominee unless the person is a retired member who is
nominated by the process detailed above.
         d.   Election of retired board members.
            1.   The executive director shall provide for an election procedure
as authorized by the board, including, but not limited to, voting by mail,
telephone and electronic means, and which may be conducted by a third-party
voting service. The executive director shall prepare official ballots for the
election of the retired board members, listing the nominees in alphabetical
order by surname. Ballots for election of retired board members shall be made
available to all retired members in retiree group A, B and C no later than July
20. If there is only one nominee for Place 5, there shall be no election for
Place 5 and the one nominee shall automatically be elected to the board. If
there is only one nominee for Place 6, there shall be no election for Place 6
and the one nominee shall automatically be elected to the board. If there is
only one nominee for Place 7, there shall be no election for Place 7 and the
one nominee shall automatically be elected to the board. No person shall be
elected as trustee whose name does not appear on the official ballot as a
nominee. To be considered valid, a ballot must be cast no later than August 15
of the election year. Votes cast by written ballot must be returned no later
than August 15 of the election year. If the ballot is returned by mail, the
envelope must be postmarked by August 15 of the election year. Each retired
member qualified to vote in the election shall vote for one nominee only. Any
ballot containing votes for two or more persons, or for persons who are not
nominees as provided herein, shall be declared invalid and shall not be
counted. The executive director or a designated third party shall tabulate all
votes for all nominees. The nominees for each place receiving a majority of
votes cast shall be declared elected to the board of trustees. Following the
tabulation of votes, the executive director shall submit the results of same to
the board meeting to be held before September 1 of the election year, at which
time the board shall canvass the results of the election and certify which
nominees are elected to the board. If, at the time of canvassing the results, a
nominee receiving the majority of votes is no longer eligible to serve, then
the nominee receiving the second highest number of votes from the appropriate
retiree group will fill Place 5, 6 or 7 on the board. That member shall serve
from September 1 of the election year through August 31 of the next election
year for that place.
            2.   If there is more than one nominee for a place and no nominee
receives a majority of the votes cast, or if there is a tie, then a run-off
election shall be held, with ballots made available to the retired members for
that place no later than September 1 of the election year and in the same
manner as prescribed for the first election. Only the names of candidates who
tied for the highest number of votes cast for that place in the first election,
or the two candidates who received the highest number of votes with neither
having a majority of votes cast, shall be printed on the ballot for the run-off
election. All ballots for the second election must be cast by September 20 of
the election year. Votes cast by written ballot must be returned by September
20 of the election year. If a ballot is returned by mail, the envelope must be
postmarked by September 20 of the election year. The executive director or a
designated third party shall tabulate the votes for the candidates in the run-
off election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast in the
run-off election shall be declared elected to the board of trustees. In the
event of a tie vote at the second election, the candidates who tie shall cast
lots in the presence of the board of trustees to determine which one shall be
declared elected.
            3.   Following the tabulation of votes in the run-off election, and
the casting of lots in case of ties, the executive director shall submit the
results of same to the board at a meeting to be held before November 1 of said
election year, at which time the board shall canvass the results of the run-off
election and certify which nominee is elected to the board. If, at the time of
canvassing the results of the run-off election, the nominee elected to serve on
said board is no longer eligible to serve, then the nominee receiving the
second highest number of votes from the appropriate retiree term will fill
Place 5, 6 or 7 on the board. That member shall serve from September 1 of the
election year to August 31 of the next election year for that place.
      (3)   Trustees appointed by the governing body.
         a.   Place 8. The trustee for Place 8 shall be a resident of the city.
A person appointed under this section may not be a member of the governing
body. The trustee for Place 8 shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
governing body to serve a term initially commencing September 1, 2007 and
ending August 31, 2008. Thereafter, the person appointed by the governing body
shall serve a term of two years (unless removed sooner by a majority vote of
the governing body) commencing on September 1 of every even numbered year and
ending August 31 of the next even numbered year. Should a vacancy occur in
Place 8, then governing body, by majority vote, shall appoint another eligible
resident of the city to serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
         b.   Place 9. The trustee for Place 9 shall be a resident of the city.
A person appointed under this section may not be a member of the governing
body. The trustee for Place 9 shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
governing body to serve a term of two years (unless removed sooner by a
majority vote of the governing body) commencing on September 1 of every odd
numbered year through August 31 of the next odd numbered year. Should a vacancy
occur in Place 9, then governing body, by a majority vote, shall appoint
another eligible resident of the city to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term.
         c.   Place 10. The trustee for Place 10 shall be a resident of the
city. A person appointed under this section may not be a member of the
governing body. The trustee for Place 10 shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the governing body to serve a term initially commencing on September 1,
2007, and ending August 31, 2008. Thereafter, the person appointed by governing
body shall serve a term of two years (unless removed sooner by a majority vote
of the governing body) commencing on September 1 of every even numbered year
through August 31 of the next even numbered year. Should a vacancy occur in
Place 10, then governing body, by a majority vote, shall appoint another
eligible resident of the city to serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
         d.   Place 11. The trustee for Place 11 shall be a resident of the
city. A person appointed under this section may not be a member of the
governing body. The trustee for Place 11 shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the governing body to serve a term of two years (unless removed sooner by a
majority vote of the governing body) commencing on September 1 of every odd
numbered year through August 31 of the next odd numbered year. Should a vacancy
occur in Place 11, then governing body, by a majority vote, shall appoint
another eligible resident of the city to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term.
         e.   Place 12. The trustee for Place 12 shall be a resident of the
city. A person appointed under this section may not be a member of the
governing body. The trustee for Place 12 shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the governing body to serve a term initially commencing September 1, 2007,
and ending August 31, 2008. Thereafter, the person appointed by governing body
shall serve a term of two years (unless removed sooner by a majority vote of
the governing body) commencing on September 1 of every even numbered year and
ending on August 31 of the next even numbered year. Should a vacancy occur in
Place 12, then the governing body, by a majority vote, shall appoint another
eligible resident of the city to serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
         f.   Place 13. The trustee for Place 13 shall be the chief financial
officer of the city. Should a vacancy occur in Place 13, then governing body,
by a majority vote, shall appoint a qualified person to serve until a new chief
financial officer is appointed.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   The members of the board shall remain in office until their
successors are duly elected or appointed.
      (2)   At its September meeting, the board shall elect from its membership
a chair and a vice chair to serve for one year.
      (3)   The board shall serve without remuneration and shall meet not less
than once a month and may meet at any time that the business of the fund shall
require it. The chair shall have the power to call a meeting at any time
necessary to carry out the business of the fund.
      (4)   Seven members of the board shall constitute a quorum to transact
any business unless there are vacancies, in which event the quorum shall be
reduced by the number of vacancies existing. Every matter before the board for
vote shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the trustees on the
board (regardless of the number of trustees present at the board meeting) for
final passage.
      (5)   The board shall have the power and duty to administer the fund and
to make and establish any and all rules, regulations and procedures pertaining
to the fund not inconsistent with this ordinance and applicable law.
      (6)   The board shall have the power, as it deems necessary and
appropriate to carry out the purposes of the fund, to retain, enter into
contracts and pay from fund assets for professional services, including, but
not limited, to the following: actuaries, accountants, attorneys,
administrators, consultants, directors and investment managers or advisors.
      (7)   The board shall have the power, as it deems necessary and
appropriate to carry out the business of the fund, to enter into contracts,
agreements and arrangements to facilitate the administration of the fund, and
to pay for the costs and expenses of such business and administration out of
fund assets.
      (8)   The board has discretion to make all determinations regarding the
eligibility of members or other persons for benefits from the fund and the
amount and payee thereof, not inconsistent with this ordinance and applicable
law. Therefore, its decisions shall be final, binding and conclusive on all
persons.
      (9)   In construing this ordinance, the provisions of the Texas Trust
Code shall apply to the extent that they do not differ from this chapter.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21650-02-2015, § 2, passed 2-
17-2015; Ord. 21651-02-2015, § 2, passed 2-17-2015; Ord. 21652-02-2015, § 7,
passed 2-17-2015)
§ 2.5-6 ANNUAL ACTUARIAL VALUATIONS.
   (a)   The board shall appoint an actuary for the purpose of providing annual
valuations of the retirement fund. The actuary shall also serve as a technical
advisor to the board and the executive director regarding the operations
authorized by this chapter. The actuarial assumptions and tables used by the
actuary shall assume such costs, liabilities, rates of interest, mortality,
turnover and other factors as are reasonable, taking into account the
experience of the fund and reasonable expectations, and shall be subject to
board approval. At least 30 days before the date the board adopts actuarial
assumptions to be used by the fund, the board shall submit to the city council
a detailed report regarding the proposed actuarial assumptions. The report must
include the fiscal impact of the proposed actuarial assumptions on the fund.
   (b)   The city shall engage an independent actuary every five years to
perform an audit of the actuarial valuations, studies and reports of the fund
in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Government Code § 802.1012, as
amended.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-7 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   Definition of disabled member. A member is disabled (or continues to
be disabled) if, because of bodily injury, disease or mental illness, the
member is incapacitated for life, in spite of reasonable accommodations by the
city, from performing the essential functions of:
      (1)   The trade, profession or occupation in which the member was
employed by the city when the member suffered the bodily injury, disease or
mental illness; and
      (2)   Any other position which the board determines to be reasonably
comparable to the position held by the member, taking into account the member’s
education, qualifications, experience, salary and other factors which the board
deems appropriate; provided, however, that no physical condition existing at
the time of entry into the fund shall be a basis for a disability pension prior
to vesting.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Such disability must exist for at least 90 consecutive days prior
to application for a disability pension.
      (2)   Such disability must not have been contracted, suffered or incurred
while the member was engaged in, or did not result from the member having
engaged in, a criminal enterprise, or from habitual drunkenness, addiction to
narcotics, self-inflicted injury, or from voluntary or involuntary service in
the Armed Forces of the United States (including the United States Merchant
Marine), any of its allies or any other foreign country.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
2.5-26,
2.5-36,
2.5-46,
2.5-56,
2.5-66 and
2.5-76, no disability pension shall, at the time of commencement, exceed the
member’s rate of earnings.
      (4)   To assist the board in making disability determinations, the city
shall provide the executive director with city job descriptions and
qualifications, related salary ranges and other appropriate information as
requested.
      (5)   Continuation of a disability pension, whether granted before or
after the enactment of this article, shall be subject to all the provisions of
this section, including review and determination of the member’s eligibility
for a disability pension.
   (c)   Qualification for disability pension.
      (1)   A member shall not qualify for a disability pension as hereinafter
provided unless one or more duly licensed and practicing physician(s) appointed
by the executive director has determined that the member is not capable of
performing the essential functions of the positions identified under this
section. Determination of the existence of disability shall not be made until
90 days after the date such disability is alleged to have commenced, and
benefits shall not commence before the first day of the month following the
month in which such 90-day period ends.
      (2)   The executive director shall have the appointed physician(s)
conduct an annual medical examination after a disability pension has been
granted (unless deemed not necessary by the executive director due to the
member’s medical condition) and at any other time deemed necessary by the board
in order to determine whether the disability is continuing. The fund will pay
the expenses for medical examinations directed by the executive director or
board. To continue to receive a disability pension, the member shall submit to
any medical examination required by the executive director or board.
      (3)   If at any time the board is in reasonable doubt as to whether the
member is disabled as above defined, it may suspend the disability pension
until the doubt is resolved, which shall occur within a reasonable time. Any
disability pension shall be terminated upon the board’s determination that the
member is not disabled as defined in this section.
      (4)   No disability pension coverage shall be provided during a service
break in excess of 90 consecutive days unless the service break was caused by
sickness or accident leading to total disability.
      (5)   The disability pension specified herein shall not be payable during
any period for which wages are received from the city, the State of Texas or
any other branch of government while performing the duties of a firefighter or
peace officer.
      (6)   Falsification or omission on any part of the employment application
of prior conditions or injuries for which a disability pension is or has been
sought, falsification or omission on any part of the disability pension
application, or falsification or omission in connection with the continuation
of a disability pension shall constitute grounds for denial of a disability
pension or for revocation of any disability pension previously granted.
      (7)   The board’s determination on all matters concerning the granting,
refusing or revoking of a disability pension shall be final and conclusive on
all parties, and no appeal can be made therefrom. A member is entitled to a
reasonable hearing (at which the member may appear in person, with or by a
representative, or in writing) before the board makes its determination.
      (8)   No disability pension shall be granted (or continued) while the
member is working for the city; provided however, a member may be granted a
disability pension if the executive director or the board has been informed by
the city that the member’s employment is about to be terminated by the city
because of the member’s inability to perform the essential functions of the
member’s position. Any such disability pension granted under this subsection
(c)(8) shall not become effective until the month after the member has stopped
working for the city.
      (9)   Except as otherwise provided by law, to be eligible to continue
receiving a disability pension, a member must have complied with the medical
recommendations (including rehabilitation therapy and treatment) as prescribed
by the member’s treating physician(s), the physician(s) appointed by the
executive director and/or the Texas Rehabilitation Commission.
   (d)   Calculation of disability pension. The calculation for disability
pension can be found in the following sections:
      (1)   Section
2.5-26 for a group III member;
      (2)   Section
2.5-36 for a group IV member;
      (3)   Section
2.5-46 for a group I member;
      (4)   Section
2.5-56 for a group II member;
      (5)   Section
2.5-66 for a group V firefighter; and
      (6)   Section
2.5-76 for a group VI firefighter.
   (e)   Recovery from disability. If the board determines that a disabled
member receiving a disability pension hereunder is no longer disabled as above
defined, the member’s disability pension shall immediately cease. If such
member is re-employed by the city immediately following such determination by
the board, the member’s fund membership shall be reinstated as of the date of
such re-employment, with full credited service to the date of disability. The
member shall receive no additional credited service for the period of
disability, provided however, that such period of disability shall be used to
determine attainment of normal retirement date and special retirement date. If
such member is not re-employed by the city immediately following certification
of recovery, the member shall be considered as a terminated fund member and
shall have no further interest in the fund other than a refund of any excess of
the member’s total contributions, plus regular interest, less the amount
already received from the member’s cash balance account, if applicable, over
the total of disability payments made to the member; provided, however, that if
such member had a vested interest in pension credits as of the date of which
the member was certified disabled, the member shall receive a vested
termination pension from the later of the date of certification of recovery or
attainment of the vested retirement date under §
2.5-24,
2.5-34,
2.5-44,
2.5-54,
2.5-64 or
2.5-74, whichever is applicable, equal to the amount which would have been
payable under the provisions of this section had the member terminated
employment on the date the disability pension began. Any death benefits
thereafter shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this article.
   (f)   Report of earned income or net earnings from self employment.
      (1)   Any disabled member who has not attained normal retirement date or
special retirement date and who is receiving a disability pension shall submit
to the executive director prior to May 1 of each year following disability
retirement a copy of the member’s signed income tax return filed for the
preceding year, with all attachments thereto, along with all tax returns and
attachments for all of the member’s affiliated entities, including, but not
limited to, partnerships, corporations or other entities in which the member,
or any relative, owns any interest, including community or separate property,
and for which the member performs any services, whether compensated or not, as
proof of the member’s earned income and net earnings from self-employment for
that year obtained from any occupation or employment. At the end of the first
year of disability retirement and by May 1 of each subsequent year, a disabled
member shall also submit to the executive director an affidavit on the
executive director’s approved form swearing that the member’s earned income and
net earnings from self-employment are fully disclosed on the tax returns
provided to the executive director and that the disabled member has not
received any other compensation, directly or indirectly, for services rendered
by the disabled member, nor performed any services for which the member
received no compensation except as disclosed in the affidavit, including
amounts paid to other affiliated entities for the benefit of the disabled
member or to any relative of the disabled member. If the Internal Revenue
Service has approved an extension to file a tax return and the tax return has
not been filed by May 1, the member shall provide the executive director with a
copy of the extension by May 1, and a copy of the tax return with all
attachments and the related affidavit, within two weeks after the tax return
has been filed.
      (2)   If the disabled member’s total receipt of earned income, net
earnings from self-employment, and city disability pension exceed the
annualized base hourly rate of pay the member would have made during that same
tax year had he or she remained employed by the city in the same position then,
as soon as practicable, the board shall reduce the amount of disability
benefits to be paid to the member. In reducing a member’s disability pension
due to such excess earnings, the board shall consider the member’s then current
earnings, and attempt to recover the cumulative excess earnings and preclude
excess earnings in the future. In the event that a member’s disability pension
is reduced in excess of the amount required, the board shall pay such excess to
the member. For purposes of this subsection (f), base hourly rate of pay shall
not include overtime, acting, assignment, holiday, longevity, educational
incentive, safety award, incentive, shift differential or any other special or
premium pay.
      (3)   The board shall withhold a disabled member’s disability pension
upon the member’s failure to submit on a timely basis the required income tax
returns with all attachments thereto and related documents. If the disabled
member subsequently provides the required documentation by the end of the
calendar year in which the return was due, the board shall cause the member’s
disability pension to be reinstated, subject to the other provisions of this
section, and including the payment of any previously withheld amounts, without
interest. If the disabled member fails to provide the required documentation by
the end of the calendar year in which the return was due, the disabled member’s
disability pension shall be terminated and the member shall not be entitled to
any payment for the period during which the documentation was not provided.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, any amounts paid to a disabled
member’s affiliated entity in connection with the performance of services by
the disabled member shall constitute “earned income,” and any attempt to
circumvent the limitations under this article on earned income and net earnings
from self-employment through the use of affiliated entities shall be grounds
for the board to terminate the disabled member’s disability pension.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 1, passed 9-
16-2014; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1,
passed 10-24-2017)
§ 2.5-8 COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   History. In 1999, city council adopted Ord. 13842, which established a
simple 2% cost-of- living adjustment for all members. In 2007, city council
adopted Ord. 17839-10-2007, which established an ad hoc cost-of-living
adjustment for all city employees hired on or after December 31, 2007, and all
members who were not vested as of December 31, 2007. All members who were
vested as of December 31, 2007, all retired members, and all beneficiaries were
allowed to make a selection to either stay with the 2% simple cost-of-living
adjustment or to receive the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment. The members who
did not make a selection were automatically defaulted into the 2% cost-of-
living adjustment. In 2011, city council adopted Ord. 19599-03-2011, which
eliminated the cost-of-living adjustment for group II general members. In 2012,
city council adopted Ord. 20471-10-2012, which eliminated the cost-of-living
adjustment for group IV police members, implemented the 2% cost-of-living
adjustment for all service earned or purchased after October 1, 2013, for group
I and group III police members, allowed group I general members and group III
police members who were subject to the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment to
select the 2% cost-of-living adjustment for past years of service, and allowed
beneficiaries who were subject to the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment to
select the 2% cost-of-living adjustment for future COLA adjustments. Active
firefighters, and those firefighters who retired or separated from employment
during the term of the April 13, 2010, collective bargaining agreement between
the city and the Fort Worth Professional Firefighters Association IAFF Local
440, were not eligible to participate in the 2012 selection. On September 16,
2014, the city council adopted Ord. 21459-09-2014, which eliminated the cost-
of-living adjustment for group VI firefighters. On October 21, 2014, city
council adopted Ord. No. 21510-10-2014, which implemented the 2% cost-of-living
adjustment for all service earned or purchased on or after January 10, 2015 for
group V firefighters. Group V firefighters who were subject to the ad-hoc cost-
of-living-adjustment were also allowed to select the 2% cost-of living
adjustment for past years of service.
   (b)   Group II general members, group IV police officers, and group VI
firefighters. Group II general members, group IV police officers and group VI
firefighters (and their beneficiaries) are not eligible to receive a cost-of-
living adjustment on their pension amount.
   (c)   Group I general members, group III police officers, and group V
firefighters. Group I general members, group III police officers, and group V
firefighters (and their beneficiaries) are not entitled to a cost-of living
adjustment for any credited service earned or purchased on or after July 20,
2019.
   (d)   Group I general members, group III police officers, and group V
firefighters who have not retired or entered the DROP by January 1, 2021. The
following provisions apply to group I general members, group III police
officers and group V firefighters who have not retired or entered the drop
effective January 1, 2021:
      (1)   The ad-hoc cost-of-living adjustment and the 2% simple cost-of-
living adjustments are eliminated for all past years of service.
      (2)   The ad-hoc cost-of-living adjustment and the 2% simple cost-of-
living adjustment are eliminated for all future years of service.
      (3)   Group I general members, group III police members and group V
firefighters who have not retired or entered the DROP by January 1, 2021 may
receive a variable cost-of-living adjustment to be calculated as follows:
         a.   Upon retirement, on or after the first day of each January a
cost-of-living adjustment or 13th paycheck may be made in accordance with
subsection (d)(3)c. based on that portion of the base pension of a member for
all credited service earned or purchased prior to July 20, 2019 (hereinafter
called pro-rata base pension), with the amount of such cost-of-living
adjustment or 13th paycheck to be in an amount not to exceed 4% of the member's
pro-rata base pension, provided, however, that such cost-of-living adjustment
or 13th paycheck may be made only if both of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The actuarially determined contribution (ADC), based on a
closed 30-year funding of the unfunded liabilities, has been equal to or less
than the fixed contribution (the contribution in place before any automatic
increases under §
2.5-3(c)) for the last two consecutive calendar years based on both actuarial
and market values of assets; and
            2.   The fund's actuary determines that funding the full cost of
the 13th paycheck or cost-of-living adjustment is not anticipated to cause the
ADC to exceed the fixed contribution (the contribution in place before any
automatic increases under §
2.5-3(c)) for the calendar year in which the 13th paycheck or cost-of-living
adjustment will apply.
         b.   A cost-of-living adjustment or 13th check cannot be granted under
subsection (d)(3)a. if either of the following circumstances exist:
            1.   Any contributions under the automatic risk-sharing provisions
of §
2.5-3(c) are being made in the then-current calendar year or are determined to
be required for the following calendar year, including reduced-rate
contributions under §
2.5-3(c)(3); or
            2.   The assumed rate of return as determined by the board is
higher than the average of the assumed rates of return as reported by two
independent sources that have been agreed to by the city and the board.
         c.   No later than April 30 of each year, the board shall, based on
fund performance for the two immediately preceding years, advise the city
council of the board's decision regarding whether to grant a variable cost-of-
living adjustment or a 13th paycheck for the following calendar year, and the
city council shall ratify such decision if the decision is fully in compliance
with subsections (d)(3)a. and (d)(3)b..
      (4)   To be eligible for a cost-of-living adjustment for a particular
year, either the member or any survivor must have been receiving benefits by
September 30th of the prior year.
   (e)   Retirees and beneficiaries eligible to receive a cost-of-living
adjustment who are receiving payments or who have retired on or before July 19,
2019; group I general members, group III police members, and group V
firefighters who retire or enter the DROP on or before January 1, 2021; and
members who receive an in the line of duty disability retirement or in the line
of duty death retirement.
      The following provisions apply to:
         Retirees and beneficiaries eligible to receive a cost-of-living
adjustment, who are receiving payments or who have retired on or before July
19, 2019;
         Group I general members, group III police members, and group V
firefighters who retire or enter the DROP on or before January 1, 2021; and
         Members who receive an in the line of duty disability retirement or in
the line of duty death retirement.
      (1)   The 2% simple cost-of-living adjustment.
         a.   The 2% simple cost-of-living is applicable to the following:
            1.   Retirees and beneficiaries who are eligible to receive a cost-
of-living adjustment, who are already receiving payments on January 1, 2021,
and who selected or defaulted to the 2% cost-of-living adjustment following the
2007, 2012, and 2014 selection processes;
            2.   Credited service through July 19, 2019 for group I general
members, group III police members, group V firefighters, and vested terminated
members in any of those groups who retire or enter the DROP on or before
January 1, 2021 and who selected or defaulted to the 2% cost-of-living
adjustment following the 2007, 2012, and 2014 selection processes;
            3.   Credited service through July 19, 2019 for group I general
members, group III police members, and group V firefighters who retire on
disability retirement due to an in the line of duty disability, and who
selected or defaulted to the 2% cost-of-living adjustment following the 2007,
2012, and 2014 selection processes;
            4.   Credited service through July 19, 2019 for beneficiaries of
group I general members, group III police members, and group V firefighters who
selected or defaulted to the 2% cost-of-living-adjustment following the 2007,
2012, and 2014 selection processes;
            5.   Credited service earned or purchased from October 1, 2013
through July 19, 2019 for group I general members and group III police members
who retire or enter the DROP on or before January 1, 2021, and have the ad hoc
cost-of-living adjustment for service prior to October 1, 2013;
            6.   Credited service earned or purchased from January 10, 2015
through July 19, 2019 for group V firefighters who retire or enter the DROP on
or before January 1, 2021, and have the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment for
credited service prior to January 10, 2015;
            7.   Credited service earned or purchased from October 1, 2013
through July 19, 2019 for group I general members and group III police members
who retire on disability retirement due to an in the line of duty disability
and who have the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment for credited service prior to
October 1, 2013;
            8.   Credited service earned or purchased from January 10, 2015
through July 19, 2019 for group V firefighters who retire on disability
retirement due to an in the line of duty disability and who have the ad hoc
cost-of-living adjustment for credited service prior to January 10, 2015;
            9.   Credited service earned or purchased from October 1, 2013
through July 19, 2019 for beneficiaries of group I general members and group
III police members who had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment for credited
service prior to October 1, 2013, if the member is killed in the line of duty;
and
            10.   Credited service earned or purchased from January 9, 2015
through July 29, 2019 for beneficiaries of group V firefighters who had the ad
hoc cost-of-living adjustment for credited service prior to January 10, 2015,
if the member is killed in the line of duty.
         b.   Calculation of the 2% simple cost-of-living adjustment. Upon
retirement, on the first day of each January a cost-of-living adjustment shall
be made on that portion of the base pension of the member that is subject to
the 2% cost-of-living adjustment, as described in subsection (e)(1)a., by
increasing the amount of the actual pension by 2% of that portion of the base
pension, unless otherwise provided herein. To be eligible for a cost-of-living
adjustment for a particular year, either the member or any survivor must have
been receiving benefits by September 30 of the prior year.
      (2)   Ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment.
         a.   The ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment is applicable to the
following:
            1.   Credited service through September 30, 2013, for group I
general members and group III police members who retire or enter the DROP on or
before January 1, 2021, who had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment, and who
did not select to receive the 2% cost-of-living adjustment during the 2012
selection process;
            2.   Credited service through January 9, 2015, for group V
firefighters who retire or enter the DROP on or before January 1, 2021, who had
the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment, and who did not select to receive the 2%
cost-of-living adjustment during the 2014 selection process;
            3.   Credited service through September 30, 2013, for group I
general members and group III police members who retire on disability
retirement due to an in the line of duty disability, who had the ad hoc cost-
of-living adjustment, and who did not select to receive the 2% cost-of-living
adjustment during the 2012 selection process;
            4.   Credited service through September 30, 2013 for beneficiaries
of group I general members and group III police members if the member is killed
in the line of duty and the member had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment and
did not select to receive the 2% cost-of-living adjustment during the 2012
selection process;
            5.   Credited service through January 9, 2015 for group V
firefighters who retire on disability retirement due to an in the line of duty
disability, who had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment, and who did not
select to receive the 2% cost-of-living adjustment during the 2014 selection
process;
            6.   Credited service through January 9, 2015 for beneficiaries of
group V firefighters if the group V firefighter is killed in the line of duty,
and the group V firefighter had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment and did
not select the 2% cost-of-living adjustment during the 2014 selection process;
and
            7.   Members and beneficiaries who are eligible to receive a cost-
of-living adjustment, who are already receiving payments on January 1, 2021,
who had the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment, and who did not select the 2%
cost-of-living adjustment during the 2012 or 2014 selection process.
         b.   Calculation of the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment. Upon
retirement, on the first day of each January, an ad hoc cost-of-living
adjustment may be made on that portion of the base pension of the member that
is subject to the ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment, as described in subsection
(e)(2)a., pursuant to this subsection as follows:
            1.   Prior to December 31 of each year, the fund's actuary shall
make a written report to the board certifying the amortization period required
to pay off the unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the fund.
            2.   Based on the information provided by the actuary, the board
shall:
               i.   Grant a compounded ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment of 4%,
if the actuary certifies that the amortization period required to pay off the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the fund, after granting the 4% cost-
of-living adjustment, would be 18.0 years or less;
               ii.   Grant a compounded ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment of 3%,
if the actuary certifies that the amortization period required to pay off the
unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the fund, after granting the 3% cost-
of-living adjustment, would be between 18.1 and 24.0 years;
               iii.   Grant a compounded ad hoc cost-of-living adjustment of
2%, if the actuary certifies that the amortization period required to pay off
the unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the fund, after granting a 2% cost-
of-living adjustment, would be between 24.1 and 28.0 years;
               iv.   Grant no ad hoc cost of living adjustment if the actuary
certifies that the amortization period required to pay off the unfunded
actuarial accrued liability of the fund is 28.1 years or more.
         c.   Increased contributions made in conjunction with the automatic
risk-sharing provision of §
2.5-3(c) cannot be used in determining the amortization period for granting an
ad hoc cost-living adjustment.
         d.   To be eligible for a cost-of-living adjustment for a particular
year, either the member or any beneficiary must have been receiving benefits by
September 30th of the prior year.
   (f)   DROP participants.
      (1)   If a member enters the DROP and remains in the DROP for two or more
years, they will be entitled to receive a cost of living adjustment for their
years in the DROP as if the member retired on the date they entered in the
DROP. Members who do not remain in the DROP for at least two years are not
entitled to a cost of living adjustment for their time in the DROP. If the cost
of living adjustment takes the form of a 13th paycheck, the amount of the
paycheck shall be based on the member's DROP pension amount (excluding impact
of any potential qualified leave under §
2.5-4(c)), and the cumulative balance of all such 13th paychecks shall be
payable to the member in a lump sum following the date of actual retirement.
      (2)   A group I member, group III police member, or group V firefighter
who enters the DROP on or before January 1, 2021 , but does not remain in the
DROP for two years is still eligible to receive a cost-of-living on their
pension, although they would not be eligible to receive a cost-of-living
adjustment for their years in the DROP. If a member does not remain in the DROP
for two years, then the member must be receiving pension benefits by September
30th to be eligible to receive a cost-of-living adjustment on their pension the
next year.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 1, passed 9-
16-2014; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 1, passed 10-21-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 3,
passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-9 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM (DROP).
   (a)   General. In lieu of the standard pension benefit or the alternative
pension benefit, a member who has attained his or her normal retirement date
may elect to remain in active service with the city and to participate in the
DROP. By making an election to participate in DROP, the member’s commencement
of retirement pension benefits will be deferred until the member’s actual
retirement and the member will receive a lump sum payment (unless such person
elects installment payments pursuant to subsection (j) below) of his or her
DROP account at the time the member’s actual retirement pension benefits
commence. No interest on earnings shall be paid on the lump sum payment. Once a
member makes a DROP election and the DROP election is approved by the board,
the DROP election is irrevocable and is effective as long as the member remains
in active service with the city. Distribution of a member’s DROP account will
not be made, and commencement of the member’s retirement pension benefits will
not begin, until the member retires from the city. DROP shall be administered
in accordance with the rules, procedures and forms as may be adopted and
amended by the board in its complete discretion, which shall be uniform and
nondiscriminatory and which shall be interpreted in a manner that is consistent
with the provisions of this Article and applicable law.
   (b)   Procedure for DROP election. A DROP election shall be made in
accordance with the rules, procedures and forms (including spousal consent,
where applicable) as may be adopted by the board. The election form adopted by
the board may be amended by the board, and, except as otherwise provided by the
board, the election form in effect at the time of the member’s DROP election is
effective shall control all DROP benefits the member may become entitled to
receive upon retirement. A member shall not be subject to any fees, charges or
any other similar expenses in connection with a DROP election.
   (c)   Timing and irrevocability of a DROP election. A member may make a DROP
election at any time on or after the date that is 60 days prior to the date
that the member will attain his or her normal retirement date or special
retirement date. Once effective, a DROP election is irrevocable, provided,
however, that a member’s DROP election shall not be effective until the member
attains his or her normal retirement date.
   (d)   The DROP account. A member’s DROP account is an individual account
established on behalf of the member into which a monthly amount will be
credited once the DROP election is effective. The monthly amount credited to
the member’s DROP account will be equal to the monthly pension benefit that the
member would have initially received if the member had retired from the city
and commenced his or her pension. Credits to a member’s DROP account will
continue to be made until the member’s actual retirement, provided, however,
that amounts will be credited to a member’s DROP account for a maximum of six
years. No withdrawals may be made from the DROP account. A member will receive
his or her DROP account in a lump sum distribution at the time the member’s
pension benefits commences upon retirement, or, if elected by the member, the
DROP account will be distributed in installments, as provided in subsection (j)
below.
   (e)   Continued contributions to the fund. Once a DROP election is
effective, both the member and the city shall continue to make the same
contributions to the fund that would have been made if the member had not made
a DROP election. Neither the member’s nor the city’s contributions to the fund
will be credited to the member’s DROP account and the additional contributions
will not affect the member’s monthly pension upon actual retirement.
   (f)   Monthly pension and ad hoc cost of living adjustment. Upon retirement
following an effective DROP election, the member’s base pension will be the
monthly pension benefits that the member had earned at the time the DROP
election became effective. The member’s earnings and credited service following
the DROP election will not be included in calculating the member’s base pension
and monthly pension benefits. If (and only if) a member completes at least two
years of service with the city after his or her DROP election is effective,
then the monthly pension benefits that the member initially receives upon
retirement will be adjusted for intervening cost of living adjustments, if
applicable, as if the member’s monthly pension had commenced at the time the
DROP election became effective. Further, such a member shall receive a cost of
living adjustment on the following January 1, regardless of whether the
member’s pension benefits had commenced by September 30. Notwithstanding the
preceding provisions of this subsection (f), when a member’s monthly pension is
initially scheduled to commence at retirement or death, the member’s base
pension shall be recalculated by adjusting the member’s credited service for
the member’s then accumulated sick leave and major medical leave (if any)
pursuant to §
2.5-4(b).
   (g)   DROP election and death pension. If a member dies while his or her
DROP election is in effect, the member’s DROP account shall be paid to the
member’s spouse, or if there is no spouse, to the member’s estate. The spouse
or estate eligible to receive the DROP account shall receive the DROP account
in a lump sum distribution, unless an election is made to receive installment
payments pursuant to this section. The remaining portion of the member’s
pension shall be paid pursuant to the death pension provisions of this article,
with the amount determined as if the member had died at the time of the DROP
election.
   (h)   DROP election and disability pension. If a member makes a DROP
election, the member will not be eligible to receive a disability pension under
this article. If a member does become disabled following an effective DROP
election, the member may retire from the city and receive the amount that has
been credited to the member’s DROP account in a lump sum or in installment
payments pursuant to subsection (j) below, and commence receipt of a monthly
pension, with the amount of the pension calculated as if the member had retired
at the time the DROP election became effective.
   (i)   Alternative pension benefit. A member who has made a DROP election
shall not be eligible to elect an alternative pension benefit.
   (j)   Installment payments. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this
section, a member who is entitled to receive a lump sum payment of his or her
DROP account may elect (on a form adopted by the board) to receive the DROP
account in five substantially equal annual installment payments, rather than a
lump sum. The first installment payment shall be made at the time the member’s
monthly pension commences, and the other installments shall be made on or about
the anniversary of the initial installment. No interest on earnings shall be
paid on the installment payments.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 4, passed
12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-10 PAYMENT OF BENEFITS.
   (a)   When benefits are payable to a minor, an individual who has legally
been determined to lack capacity, or an individual whom the board determines to
be unable to handle money, the board shall make payments, without any duty to
see to the application thereof, to the guardian of such person’s estate or, if
there is none, as the board determines to be in the best interest of such
person.
   (b)   If a retired city employee who is receiving pension benefits from the
fund is re-employed by the city as a regular employee, that person’s pension
benefits shall cease upon the date of re-employment. credited service earned
during the term of any member’s subsequent re-employment in which the
employee’s pension benefits have been suspended shall be added to the credited
service of the prior periods of employment, and upon final separation from the
city, a new pension shall be calculated taking into account the member’s total
years of credited service and recalculated compensation base. In no event shall
the member’s monthly pension be reduced due to periods of re-employment.
   (c)   If the distributee of an eligible rollover distribution (as defined in
the code § 402(f)(2)(A) (i) elects to have such distribution paid directly to
another eligible retirement plan and (ii) specifies in writing (before the
distribution is made) the eligible retirement plan to which such distribution
is to be made, the distribution will be made in the form of a direct trustee-
to-trustee transfer to the eligible retirement plan so specified.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-11 EXEMPTION OF BENEFITS FROM JUDICIAL PROCESS.
   (a)   The city shall never be held liable or responsible for any claim or
asserted claim for benefits under the provisions of this article, but all
claims shall be paid from the fund for which provision has been specifically
made in this division. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the city,
pursuant to its policies, programs and applicable law, shall indemnify and hold
harmless the board and its individual members against any and all loss, damage
and expense, including court costs and attorney’s fees, resulting from or
arising out of the actions and inactions of the board and its members in
connection with the performance of their duties under the retirement ordinance,
provided, however, that such obligation of the city to indemnify and hold
harmless shall not apply to any member of the board to the extent that the
loss, damage or expense is attributable to such member’s gross negligence or
willful misconduct.
   (b)   No portion of this fund shall, at any time before or after its
disbursement, be held, seized, taken, subjected to or detained or levied upon
by virtue of any execution, attachment, garnishment, assignment, injunction or
other writ, order or decree, or any processor proceedings whatsoever issued out
of or by any court for the payment or satisfaction, in whole or in part, of any
debt, damage, claim, demand or judgment against any person entitled to a
benefit from this fund, nor shall the fund, or any claim thereto, be directly
or indirectly, assigned or transferred, and any attempt to transfer or assign
same shall be void; provided that:
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the deduction of the spouse’s
insurance premiums from the fund for the purpose of paying same, on behalf of
the spouse, to the health and life insurance carrier for the city only; and
      (2)   Nothing shall prevent the fund from dividing a member’s pension
benefit between the member and a former spouse and/or children or other
dependents of the member according to the terms of a valid court order from a
court of competent jurisdiction as set forth in subsection (c) below.
   (c)   (1)   The court order must be a “qualified domestic relations order”
within the meaning of § 414(p) of the code and must also satisfy the provisions
of this section. The maximum pension benefit that can be paid to a former
spouse is 50% of the member’s pension benefit. The order must state a specific
amount payable monthly or a percentage of the member’s pension benefit to be
divided between the member and the former spouse. Except as otherwise provided
below with respect to the return of the member’s contributions, no single sum
payment shall be made to a former spouse.
      (2)   a.   Upon the member’s death, no further monthly pension benefit
shall be paid to the former spouse. If, however, at the time of the member’s
death, the member and the former spouse had not yet received pension benefits
from the fund in excess of the member’s total contributions to the fund (plus
regular interest), the member’s remaining contributions (plus regular interest)
shall be divided between the member and the former spouse according to:
            1.   The ratio of the pension benefit payable to the former spouse
divided by the pension benefit payable to the member but for the divorce; or
            2.   The percentage used to calculate the pension benefit payable
to the member and the former spouse.
         b.   The former spouse shall receive his or her portion of the
remaining contributions (plus regular interest) in a single sum distribution.
      (3)   If such deceased member died with no dependent child, dependent
parent or surviving spouse to whom the member had been married for at least the
one year immediately prior to the member’s retirement, the member’s portion of
the remaining contributions (plus regular interest) shall be paid in a single
sum to the member’s estate. If the deceased member died with a dependent child
(or children), dependent parent (or parents), or a surviving spouse to whom the
member had been married for at least the one year immediately prior to the
member’s retirement, such person(s) shall be entitled to a monthly benefit
under the terms of this division, but adjusted as provided below. Upon a single
sum payment to the former spouse, such monthly pension benefit shall be reduced
according to the following methodology:
         a.   Create a fraction, the numerator of which is the single sum
amount paid to the former spouse and the denominator of which is the sum of the
member’s contributions (plus regular interest) and the city’s contributions on
behalf of the member;
         b.   Multiply that fraction by the monthly pension benefit which would
otherwise be payable to the dependent child, parent or surviving spouse; and
         c.   The difference between the result of the second step and the
monthly pension benefit which would otherwise be payable to the dependent
child, dependent parent or surviving spouse is the monthly pension benefit
which should be paid to the dependent child, dependent parent or surviving
spouse.
      (4)   Since any pension benefit payable to a former spouse is derived
from the member’s pension, a former spouse’s pension benefit shall not commence
until the member’s pension benefit commences.
      (5)   If a member with respect to whom a former spouse has obtained a
domestic relations order purporting to be a qualified domestic relations order
terminates employment with the city and receives a return of contributions
(plus regular interest) rather than a pension benefit, the former spouse shall
not receive a pension benefit, but shall instead receive a percentage (or fixed
dollar amount) of the returned contributions (plus regular interest).
      (6)   No court order shall be honored if it:
         a.   Provides for any form of benefit or option not otherwise provided
by this division;
         b.   Requires the fund to provide increased benefits determined on the
basis of actuarial value; or
         c.   Requires the payment of benefits to a former spouse that are
required to be paid to another former spouse.
   (d)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for in this division, the board
shall not reduce an individual pension.
   (e)   No part of the corpus or income of the fund shall ever revert to the
city or be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive
purpose of providing benefits to members and their beneficiaries in accordance
with the terms of this division.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-12 AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCE.
   The governing body, consistent with the Constitution, the laws of the State
of Texas, and the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, shall have the power and
authority to amend any or all of the terms and provisions of this article,
except where an amendment in the city’s contribution rate would require the
issuance of tax-supported bonds approved at an election of the qualified voters
of the City of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-13 CONTROLLING POWER OF ORDINANCE.
   The provisions of this division shall be cumulative of and in addition to
all other ordinances of the City of Fort Worth relating to pensions, which
ordinances are hereby preserved and continued in force and effect; provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict, the provisions of this division
shall control.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-14 PREREQUISITES TO ORDINANCE.
   The governing body finds that all acts, conditions and things required by
provisions of the Constitution of Texas and Charter and ordinances of the City
of Fort Worth precedent to and in the adoption of this division have been done,
have happened and have been performed in proper and lawful time.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-15 LIMITATION OF LEGAL RIGHTS.
   By reason of the benefits and coverage herein and the additional burdens
placed upon the City of Fort Worth and the fund, it is expressly provided that
no member of the fund shall have the right to sue the city with respect to this
fund for disability sustained in line of duty, as heretofore defined; and by
virtue of membership in the fund, the member accepts the benefits provided by
the fund in lieu of any alleged right at law to sue the city or this fund for
damages. No heir or legal representative of a member who is injured in line of
duty, which injury results in death, shall have the right to sue the city for
damages by reason thereof, but such heir or legal representative shall accept
the benefits provided under the employees’ retirement fund ordinances of the
City of Fort Worth in lieu of such right to sue for damages in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§§ 2.5-16—2.5-19 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: PROVISIONS FOR GROUP III MEMBERS
(POLICE OFFICERS HIRED PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2013)
§ 2.5-20 APPLICABILITY.
   This division applies only to group III members as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-21 EARNINGS.
   (a)   (1)   For credited service earned prior to October 1, 2013, earnings
shall mean the amount actually paid to a group III member by the city for
services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus overtime, acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group III member’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group III members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law.
Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown on a group III
member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings; and
         d.   Any amount paid to a group III member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b).
      (2)   A group III member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group III member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group III member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group III member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a group III member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of
earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any
(or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost of
living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded
for all purposes of this definition of earnings. Notwithstanding the preceding
provisions of this definition of earnings, earnings shall not include any
amounts paid following a group III member’s effective DROP election.
   (b)   (1)   For credited service earned on or after October 1, 2013,
earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group III member by the city
for services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group III member’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group III members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law.
earnings shall not include any amount received as a result of overtime.
Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown on a group III
member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings; and
         d.   Any amount paid to a group III member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b).
      (2)   A group III member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group III member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group III member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group III member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a group III member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of
earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any
(or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost of
living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded
for all purposes of this definition of earnings. Notwithstanding the preceding
provisions of this definition of earnings, earnings shall not include any
amounts paid following a group III member’s effective DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-22 RETIREMENT DATES.
   (a)   Normal retirement date. A group III member shall be eligible for
pension benefits on or after the group III member’s normal retirement date
which shall be the last day of the month in which the earliest of the following
occurs:
      (1)   The group III member’s years of age and years of credited service
total 80; or
      (2)   The later of:
         a.   The date on which the group III member reaches age 65; or
         b.   The fifth anniversary of the date the group III member joined the
fund.
      (3)   The last day of the month in which such group III member’s years of
credited service total 25.
   (b)   Vested terminated retirement date. A vested group III member who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city shall be
eligible for pension benefits on or after such group III member’s vested
termination date which shall be the last day of the month in which the group
III member reaches age 50, or, if earlier, the last day of the month in which
the group III member would have attained his or her normal retirement date had
the group III member remained employed by the city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed
12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-23 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS.
   (a)   Compensation base for determining group III member benefits for
credited service earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013.
      (1)   For group III members hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007
(not subject to the 12% earnings cap), pension, death benefits, disability
pension and vested termination benefits for credited service earned or
purchased prior to October 1, 2013, shall be based upon the group III member’s
compensation base which shall mean the average annual earnings as defined by §
2.5-21(a) which were paid to the group III member by the city for employment
with the city during any three calendar years in which the group III member had
the highest annual earnings. If a group III member’s last day of employment
with the city is prior to January 1, 1999, “five” shall be substituted for
“three” in the preceding sentence.
      (2)   For group III members who were not vested by October 23, 2007, and
for group III members hired after October 23, 2007, but prior to January 1,
2013 (subject to the 12% earnings cap), pension, death benefits, disability
pension and vested termination benefits for credited service earned or
purchased prior to October 1, 2013, shall be based upon the group III member’s
compensation base which shall mean the average annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-21(a) which were paid to the group III member by the city for employment
with the city during any three calendar years in which the group III member had
the highest annual earnings, subject to the following limitations.
         a.   The fund shall determine the four calendar years in which the
group III member had the highest annual earnings. Of such four years, the year
in which the group III member had the lowest annual earnings shall serve as the
base year. The base year shall not be included as one of the three calendar
years for purposes of the compensation base calculation.
         b.   The first annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group III member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from
the calendar year with the third highest annual earnings of the four calendar
years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual
earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the
amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the first
year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings for the base year.
         c.   The second annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group III member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from
the calendar year with the second highest annual earnings of the four calendar
years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual
earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the
amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the second
year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings used that are attributable to
the year described in subsection (a)(2)b. above.
         d.   The third annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group III member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from
the calendar year with the highest annual earnings of the four calendar years
identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual earnings
are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the amount to
be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the third year shall
not exceed 112% of the annual earnings used that are attributable to the year
described in subsection (a)(2)c. above.
         e.   The average of the three amounts determined in accordance with
subsections (a)(2)a. through (a)(2)d. above will be the average annual earnings
for purposes of the group III member’s compensation base.
   (b)   Compensation base for determining benefits for credited service earned
or purchased, on or after October 1, 2013. Pension, death benefits, disability
pension and vested termination benefits for credited service earned or
purchased from October 1, 2013 to the date of termination shall be based upon
the group III member’s average annual earnings as defined by §
2.5-21(b), which were paid to the group III member by the city for employment
with the city during any five calendar years in which the group III member had
the highest annual earnings. The compensation base for credited service earned
or purchased on or after October 1, 2013, does not include overtime.
   (c)   If a group III member has less than three, or if applicable, five
calendar years of employment. If a group III member has less than three, or if
applicable, five calendar years of employment, the group III member’s
compensation base shall be determined by the executive director under uniform,
non- discriminatory procedures that are consistently applied.
   (d)   Lump sum payments. For compensation base purposes, any lump sum
payments of earnings for any prior time period, whether awarded to the group
III member by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be
retroactively attributed to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have
been received by the employee from the city for services rendered.
   (e)   DROP election. For purposes of computing the compensation base for a
group III member who has made an effective DROP election, the group III
member’s compensation base shall be calculated using the group III member’s
earnings prior to the effective date of the DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-24 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. Any group III member who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city before the
group III member is vested shall be entitled to receive the amount of the group
III member’s contributions plus regular interest less any amount previously
paid to the group III member from the fund.
   (b)   Vested termination pension.
      (1)   a.   A vested group III member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city shall be entitled to receive a vested
termination pension payable:
            1.   In full, pursuant to §
2.5-22(b); or
            2.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 50.
         b.   A group III member must file a request for the commencement of
the vested termination pension by completing such forms and following such
procedures as are established by the board. A vested termination pension shall
be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with the month
following approval of the group III member’s vested termination pension by the
board.
      (2)   A vested termination pension shall be an annual life pension, the
amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group III member’s
compensation base multiplied by the group III member’s total years of credited
service to date of such voluntary or involuntary separation from the service of
the city. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of
the group III member’s compensation base shall be 2.75% for all credited
service earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013, and 2.25% for credited
service earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013, unless the group III
member has attained his or her normal retirement date or vested retirement date
prior to the date the group III member’s pension payments begin, in which case
the specified percentage shall be 3% for all credited service earned or
purchased prior to October 1, 2013 and shall be 2.5% for all credited service
earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013. A vested termination pension
shall be calculated using the specified percentage and compensation base in
effect at the time the group III member earned or purchased the credited
service for all credited service earned or purchased after October 1, 2013.
      (3)   In addition to the reduced multiplier described in subsection (b)
(2) above, if a group III member has not attained his or her normal retirement
date or vested retirement date prior to the date the group III member’s vested
termination pension payments begins, the amount of reduction for commencement
of a pension prior to the group III member’s normal retirement date or vested
retirement date shall be 0.416666667% for each month by which commencement of
the pension antedates the group III member’s normal retirement date had the
group III member remained employed by the city.
   (c)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested termination
pension. Any vested group III member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group III member’s contributions, plus regular interest less any amount
previously paid to the group III member from the fund, either at the date of
such separation or at any time thereafter prior to commencement of retirement
benefit, but by so doing, the group III member shall forfeit all rights under
the fund and thereafter be entitled to no further benefits hereunder.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§ 2.5-25 RETIREMENT PENSION (PENSION BENEFITS).
   (a)   Pensions commencing prior to October 1, 2013.
      (1)   Standard pension benefit A. A vested group III member who retires
on or after the group III member’s normal retirement date and who requests
commencement of the group III member’s pension prior to October 1, 2013, or a
group III member who terminates employment prior to October 1, 2013, and prior
to the group III member’s normal retirement date and who waits until such
vested retirement date to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be 3% of the group III member’s applicable
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-23(a)(1) or (a)(2), whichever is applicable, multiplied by the group III
member’s total years of credited service, payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board’s approval of the
group III member’s pension. This retirement pension shall be defined as the
“group III member’s standard pension benefit A.”
      (2)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group III member
standard pension benefit A, a group III member under this subsection (a) may
irrevocably elect with his or her spouse’s consent (where applicable), in
advance of his or her retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements
the board in its discretion may adopt, to receive an “alternative pension
benefit” which shall be actuarially equivalent to the group III member’s
standard pension benefit A and which shall be payable in two parts:
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group III member’s pre-October 1, 2013
standard pension benefit A, which lump sum shall be payable on the date
benefits commence under subsection (a)(2)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group III member’s alternative pension benefit.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any
other provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an
alternative pension benefit shall not be available for any disability pension
under §
2.5-26, death benefit under §
2.5-27, or normal vested termination pension under §
2.5-24, nor shall it be available to any group III member who is receiving
pension benefits as of the effective date of the alternative pension benefit
provisions of this section, nor shall it be available upon re-retirement to any
retired group III member who becomes re-employed by the city.
   (b)   Pensions commencing on or after October 1, 2013.
      (1)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested
retirement date for group iii members hired and vested prior to October 23,
2007, whose pensions commences on or after October 1, 2013 (not subject to the
12% earnings cap). A vested group III member hired and vested prior to October
23, 2007, who retires on or after the group III member’s normal retirement date
and requests commencement of the group III member’s pension on or after October
1, 2013, or a group III member who terminates employment on or after October 1,
2013, and prior to the group III member’s normal retirement date and who waits
until such vested retirement date to apply for a pension, shall receive an
annual life pension, the amount of which is calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent of the group III member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-23(a)(1) multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service
from date of hire until September 30, 2013; and
         b.   Two and fifty one-hundredths percent of the group III member’s
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-23(b) multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service from
October 1, 2013, until date of termination.
      (2)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date for group III
members hired prior January 1,2013 and not vested by October 23, 2007 (subject
to the earnings cap). A group III member hired prior to January 1, 2013, who
was not vested by October 23, 2007 who retires on or after the group III
member’s normal retirement date and requests commencement of the group III
member’s pension, and whose pension commences on or after October 1, 2013, or
who terminates employment on or after October 1, 2013, but prior to the group
III member’s normal retirement date and who waits until such vested retirement
date to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension, the amount
of which is calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent of the group III member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-23(a)(2) multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service
from date of hire until September 30, 2013; and
         b.   Two and fifty one-hundredths percent of the group III member’s
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-23(b) multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service from
October 1, 2013 until date of termination.
      (3)   Payable. The pension should be payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board’s approval of the
group III member’s pension benefit. This retirement pension shall be defined as
the “group III member standard pension benefit B.”
   (c)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group III member standard
pension benefit A or B, a group III member may irrevocably elect with his or
her spouse’s consent (where applicable), in advance of his or her retirement
and pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its discretion may
adopt, to receive an “alternative pension benefit” which shall be actuarially
equivalent to the group III member’s standard pension benefit A or B and which
shall be payable in two parts:
      (1)   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than 25%
of the actuarial equivalent of the group III member’s standard pension benefit
A or B, which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits commence under
subsection (c)(2) below; and
      (2)   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group III member’s pension.
   (d)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an alternative
pension benefit shall not be available for any disability benefits under §
2.5-26, death benefits under §
2.5-27, or vested termination pension under §
2.5-24, nor shall it be available to any group III member who is receiving
pension benefits hereunder as of the effective date of the alternative pension
benefit provisions of this section, nor shall it be available upon re-
retirement to any retired group III member who becomes re-employed by the city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-26 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   General provisions. See §
2.5-7, for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group III member, whether or not
vested, becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while in line of duty, the group III member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group III
member’s compensation base multiplied by the group III member’s total years of
credited service which would have accrued if the group III member had worked to
the group III member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250 per
month. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the
group III member’s compensation base shall be 2.75%, unless the group III
member is already eligible to retire on or after his or her normal retirement
date, in which case the group III member shall receive the standard pension
benefit.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group III members whose
disability pension commences prior to October 1, 2013. If a vested group III
member becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group III member’s pension commences
prior to October 1, 2013, the group III member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group III
member’s compensation base, multiplied by the group III member’s total years of
credited service to date of actual retirement. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base
shall be 2.75%, unless the group III member is already eligible to retire on or
after the group III member’s normal retirement date, in which case the
specified percentage shall be 3%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group III members whose
disability pension commences on or after October 1, 2013. If a vested group III
member becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group III member’s pension commences
on or after October 1, 2013, the group III member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be determined by adding the following:
      (1)   A specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base
as defined by §
2.5-23(a)(1) for group III members hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007,
or a specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-23(a)(2) for group III members who were hired prior to January 1, 2013, and
were not vested by October 23, 2007, multiplied by the group III member’s years
of credited service from date of hire until September 30, 2013. For purposes of
the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group III member’s
compensation base for credited service pursuant to this subsection (d)(1) shall
be 2.75%; and
      (2)   A specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base
as defined by §
2.5-23(b), multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service from
October 1, 2013, until the date of disability. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base
for credited service pursuant to this subsection (d)(2) shall be 2.25%.
   (e)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group III members. If a
group III member becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the group
III member is vested, then such group III member shall be entitled to receive a
contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-24(a).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-27 DEATH BENEFIT.
   (a)   While in line of duty.
      (1)   If a group III member dies before retirement while in line of duty
and as a result of the performance of that group III member’s duties, the
surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s pension, based on the
number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group III
member lived to the group III member’s normal retirement date, but not less
than $250.
      (2)   Each dependent child of such group III member under 18 years of age
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be
$100, provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be entitled
to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section, all such
dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be 75% of the group III member’s pension, based on the number of years of
credited service that would have accrued had the group III member lived to the
group III member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (3)   If a group III member dies while in line of duty and leaves no
widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s) shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the
group III member’s accrued pension projected to the group III member’s normal
retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group III member who
dies in line of duty under this subsection (a) shall be calculated using a
multiplier of 3%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group III member who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins prior to October 1, 2013.
         a.   If a vested group III member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, and the survivor monthly pension benefit begins prior to October
1, 2013, then the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s
accrued pension but not less than $150.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group
III member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100, provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this
subsection (b), all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly
pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s accrued
pension, but not less than $150.
         c.   If a vested group III member dies while not in line of duty and
leaves no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit under this
subsection (b), but is survived by a dependent parent or parents, such
dependent parent(s) shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s accrued pension, projected to
the group III member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $150.
         d.   For purposes of this subsection (b)(1), a group III member’s
accrued pension shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.75%, unless the
group III member had reached the group III member normal retirement date prior
to death, in which event the multiplier shall be 3.0%.
      (2)   Vested group III member who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins on or after October 1, 2013.
         a.   If a vested group III member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, and the survivor pension begins on or after October 1, 2013, then
the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s accrued pension but
not less than $150. The accrued pension shall be calculated by adding the
following:
            1.   A specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-23(a)(1) for group III member’s hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007,
or a specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-23(a)(2) for group III members who were hired prior to January 1, 2013, and
were not vested by October 23, 2007, multiplied by the group III member’s years
of credited service from date of hire until September 30, 2013. For purposes of
the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group III member’s
compensation base for credited service for this time period shall be 2.75%; and
            2.   A specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-23(b), multiplied by the group III member’s years of credited service from
October 1, 2013, until the date of death. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group III member’s compensation base
for credited service for this time period shall be 2.25%.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group
III member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group III member’s accrued pension, but not less
than $150.
         c.   If a group III member dies while not in line of duty and leaves
no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s) shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the
group III member’s accrued pension, but not less than $150.
      (3)   Group III member not vested at time of death. If a group III member
was not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to the return of all contributions which the group III member paid
into the fund during the group III member’s life plus regular interest thereon.
If there is not a surviving widow or widower, the contributions shall be paid
to the estate of the group III member.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Upon the death of a retired group III member. Upon the death of a
retired group III member, the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the pension
being paid to the group III member, provided that the group III member and
surviving widow or widower had been married for at least one year immediately
prior to the group III member’s retirement. Notwithstanding the preceding
sentence, a surviving widow or widower who was not married to the deceased
group III member for at least one year immediately prior to the group III
member’s retirement shall be eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group
III member has elected to receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and
subject to procedures developed by the executive director, within six months
after the group III member’s completion of two years of marriage to the group
III member’s spouse. The reduced monthly pension shall be actuarially
determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund, based on
actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group III member’s election to
receive a reduced monthly pension. If such an election has been made, the
surviving widow or widower shall receive a monthly pension for life equal to
75% of the group III member’s reduced monthly pension.
      (2)   Group III members who are not married on date of retirement. Upon
the death of a retired group III member who was not married at retirement, a
beneficiary designated by the group III member at retirement may be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group III member has elected to receive a
reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures developed by the
executive director. The group III member’s reduced monthly pension shall be
actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund,
based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group III member’s
election to receive a reduced monthly pension. The group III member can elect
for his or her designated beneficiary to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25%
of the group III member’s reduced monthly pension. If a group III member who
was not married at retirement and who selected a designated beneficiary
pursuant to this section later marries only the designated beneficiary would be
entitled to receive a lifetime monthly pension.
      (3)   Dependent children. Each dependent child under 18 years of age of
such retired deceased group III member shall be entitled to receive a monthly
pension, the amount of which shall be $100, but shall cease upon the earliest
of such child’s death, marriage or attainment of age 18 pursuant to the terms
of this article.
   (d)   Death of vested terminated group III member prior to pension
commencing. If a terminated group III member entitled to a pension dies before
the group III member’s pension commences, the group III member’s designated
beneficiary, or if none, the group III member’s estate shall receive an amount
equal to the group III member’s total contributions to the fund, plus regular
interest. If the vested group III member’s years of age and years of credited
service total at least 65 as of the date of the group III member’s termination,
the group III member’s eligible dependents shall receive the benefit specified
under subsection (b) above, based on the pension to which the group III member
would have been entitled as of the date of the group III member’s death, in
lieu of the payment of contributions plus regular interest. If the group III
member’s years of age and service did not total at least 65 as of the date of
the group III member’s termination, the group III member’s eligible dependents
may choose between the refund of contributions, the payment of the survivor
benefit at the date the group III member would have been eligible to draw the
benefit, or an immediate benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
   (e)   General provisions.
      (1)   If a deceased group III member leaves no widow, widower, designated
beneficiary, children or dependent parents eligible to receive a benefit
hereunder, the group III member’s total contributions plus regular interest
less any amount previously paid to him or her from the fund, shall be paid to
the group III member’s estate.
      (2)   Payments to a child shall be made whether or not a widow, widower
or designated beneficiary survives and shall continue after the death of a
widow, widower or designated beneficiary but shall cease upon the earliest of
such child’s death, marriage or attainment of age 18. Payments to a dependent
parent shall cease upon such parent’s death. For purposes of this division, a
parent will be deemed to be dependent if the group III member provides over one
half of the parent’s support. Payments to a widow, widower or designated
beneficiary shall continue after remarriage, but shall cease upon the death of
the widow, widower or designated beneficiary. Payments to a widow or widower
forfeited due to remarriage, under prior provisions of this section will be
reinstated upon written request by the widow or widower, but no retroactive
payment can be made. After payments cease, any excess of the group III member’s
total contributions over and above disability and/or death benefits paid, plus
regular interest at date of death o shall be paid to the group III member’s
estate.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (d) above, death benefit coverage
during service breaks in excess of 90 consecutive calendar days shall be
limited to group III members who are absent due to service-connected injury
incurred while in line of duty.
      (4)   Benefits hereunder shall be payable on the first day of each month
commencing with the month following the month in which the group III member’s
death occurs. The board shall determine all questions of dependency, and its
determination shall be final and conclusive on all parties. All unmarried,
legitimate and legally adopted children under the age of 18 years, in the
absence of determination to the contrary, shall be considered dependent.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§§ 2.5-28—2.5-29 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO GROUP IV MEMBERS
(POLICE OFFICERS HIRED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2013)
§ 2.5-30 APPLICABILITY.
   This division shall apply to group IV members as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-31 EARNINGS.
   (a)   Earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group IV member by
the city for services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus
acting, assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award,
incentive and shift differential pay, as reported on the group IV member’s W-
2 form. Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits
(currently referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such
amounts received by group IV members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as
required by law. Earnings does not include any amount received as a result of
overtime. Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown on a
group IV member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
      (1)   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement, automobile
allowance or mileage, etc.);
      (2)   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
      (3)   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings;
      (4)   Any payment received from the city’s wellness program;
      (5)   Any amount received from the city’s vacation sell-back program; and
      (6)   any amount paid to a group IV member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b).
   (b)   A group IV member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group IV member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group IV member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group IV member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a group IV member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of
earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any
(or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost-of-
living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded
for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions,
earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a group IV member’s
effective DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-32 RETIREMENT DATES.
   (a)   Normal retirement date. A group IV member shall be eligible for
pension benefits on or after the normal retirement date which shall be the last
day of the month in which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group IV member’s years of age and years of credited service
total 80;
      (2)   The later of:
         a.   The date on which the group IV member reaches age 65; or
         b.   The fifth anniversary of the date the group IV member joined the
fund.
      (3) The last day of the month in which such group IV member’s years of
credited service total 25.
   (b)   Vested terminated retirement date. A vested group IV member who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city shall be
eligible for pension benefits on or after such group IV member’s vested
termination date which shall be the last day of the month in which the group IV
member reaches age 50, or, if earlier, the last day of the month in which the
group IV member’s age when added to his or her credited service totals 80.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-33 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS.
   (a)   Pension, death, disability and vested termination benefits shall be
based upon the group IV member’s compensation base which shall mean the average
annual earnings which were paid to the group IV member by the city for
employment with the city during any five years. If a group IV member has less
than five calendar years of employment, the group IV member’s compensation base
shall be determined by the executive director under uniform, non-
discriminatory procedures that are consistently applied.
   (b)   For compensation base purposes, any lump sum payments of earnings for
any prior time period, whether awarded to the group IV member by a court,
administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be retroactively attributed
to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have been received by the
group IV member from the city for services rendered.
   (c)   For purposes of computing the compensation base for a group IV member
who has made an effective DROP election, the group IV member’s compensation
base shall be calculated using the group IV member’s earnings prior to the
effective date of the DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-34 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. A group IV member who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city before the
group IV member is vested shall be entitled to receive the amount of the group
IV member’s contributions plus regular interest less any amount previously paid
to the group IV member from the fund.
   (b)   Vested termination pension.
      (1)   a.   A vested group IV member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city shall be entitled to receive a vested
termination pension payable:
            1.   In full, pursuant to §
2.5-32(b); or
            2.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 50.
         b.   A group IV member must file a request for the commencement of the
vested termination pension by completing such forms and following such
procedures as are established by the board. A vested termination pension shall
be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with the month
following approval of the vested termination pension by the board.
      (2)   A vested termination pension shall be an annual life pension, the
amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group IV member’s
compensation base multiplied by his or her total years of credited service to
date of such voluntary or involuntary separation from the service of the city.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group
IV member’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group IV member has
attained his or her normal retirement date or vested retirement date prior to
the date that pension payments begin, in which case the specified percentage
shall be 2.5%. A vested termination pension shall be calculated using the
specified percentage and compensation base in effect at the time the group IV
member’s earned the credited service.
      (3)   If a group IV member has not attained his or her normal retirement
date or vested retirement date prior to the date the vested termination pension
payments begins, the amount of reduction for commencement of a pension prior to
the group IV member’s normal retirement date or vested retirement date (in
addition to the specified percentage of 2.25%), shall be 0.416666667% for each
month by which commencement of the pension antedates the group IV member’s
normal retirement date had he or she remained employed by the city.
   (c)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested termination
pension. Any vested group IV member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group IV member’s contributions, plus regular interest less any amount
previously paid to the group IV member from the fund, either at the date of
such separation or at any time thereafter prior to commencement of retirement
benefit, but by so doing, the group IV member shall forfeit all rights under
the fund and thereafter be entitled to no further benefits hereunder.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§ 2.5-35 RETIREMENT PENSION (BENEFIT).
   (a)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date. A vested group IV
member under this division who retires on or after the group IV member’s normal
retirement date and requests commencement of the group IV member’s pension, or
a group IV member who terminates employment prior to the group IV member’s
normal retirement date and who waits until such vested retirement date to apply
for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension, the amount of which shall
be 2.5% of the group IV member’s compensation base multiplied by the group IV
member’s total years of credited service, payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board’s approval of the
group IV member’s pension. This pension benefit shall be called the “group IV
member’s standard pension benefit.”
   (b)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the standard pension benefit,
a group IV member may irrevocably elect with his or her spouse’s consent (where
applicable), in advance of his or her retirement and pursuant to regulations
and requirements the board in its discretion may adopt, to receive an
“alternative pension benefit” which shall be actuarially equivalent to the
group IV member’s standard pension benefit and which shall be payable in two
parts:
      (1)   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than 25%
of the actuarial equivalent of the group iv member’s standard pension benefit,
which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits commence under subsection
(b)(2) below; and
      (2)   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group IV member’s pension.
   (c)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an alternative
pension benefit shall not be available for any disability pension under §
2.5-36, death benefit under §
2.5-37, or normal vested termination pension under §
2.5-34, nor shall it be available to any retired group IV member who is
receiving pension benefits hereunder as of the effective date of the
alternative pension benefit provisions of this section, nor shall it be
available upon re-retirement to any retired group IV member who becomes re-
employed by the city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-36 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   General provisions. See §
2.5-7 for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group IV member, whether or not
vested, becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7 while in line of duty, the group IV member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group IV
member’s compensation base multiplied by the total years of credited service
which would have accrued if the group IV member had worked to normal retirement
date, but not less than $250 per month. For purposes of the preceding sentence,
the specified percentage of the group IV member’s compensation base shall be
2.25%, unless the group IV member is already eligible to retire on or after his
or her normal retirement date, in which case the specified percentage shall be
2.5%.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group IV members. If a
vested group IV member becomes disabled, as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, the group IV member shall receive an annual
life pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the
group IV member’s compensation base multiplied by the group IV member’s total
years of credited service to date of actual retirement. For purposes of the
preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group IV member’s
compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group IV member is already
eligible to retire on or after the group IV member’s normal retirement date, in
which case the specified percentage shall be 2.5%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group IV members. If a
group IV member becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the group IV
member is vested, then such group IV member shall be entitled to receive a
contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-34(a).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-37 DEATH BENEFIT.
   (a)   While in line of duty.
      (1)   If a group IV member dies before retirement while in line of duty
and as a result of the performance of that group IV member’s duties, the
surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group IV member’s pension, based on the
number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group IV
member lived to the group IV member’s normal retirement date, but not less than
$250.
      (2)   Each dependent child of such group IV member under 18 years of age
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be
$100, provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be entitled
to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this division, all such
dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be 75% of the group IV member’s pension, based on the number of years of
credited service that would have accrued had the group IV member lived to the
group IV member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (3)   If a group IV member dies while in line of duty and leaves no widow
or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is survived
by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parents or the surviving
dependent parent shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of
which shall be 75% of the group IV member’s accrued pension projected to his or
her normal retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group IV member who
dies in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.5%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group IV member.
         a.   If a vested group IV member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group IV member’s
accrued pension but not less than $150.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group
IV member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100, provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this
division, all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group IV member’s accrued pension, but
not less than $150.
         c.   If a group IV member dies while in not in line of duty and leaves
no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parents or the
surviving dependent parent shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group IV member’s accrued pension,
projected to the group IV member’s normal retirement date, but not less than
$150.
         d.   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a vested group IV
member who dies not in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of
2.25%.
      (2)   Group IV member not vested at time of death. If a group IV member
was not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to the return of all contributions which the group IV member paid into
the fund during the group IV member’s life plus regular interest thereon. If
there is not a surviving widow or widower, the contributions shall be paid to
the estate of the group IV member.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Group IV members who are married at retirement. The surviving
spouse of a group IV member who dies after retirement would be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group IV member elected to receive a reduced
monthly pension prior to retirement, on a form and subject to procedures
developed by the executive director of the fund. The group IV member’s reduced
monthly pension shall be determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to
the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group IV
member’s election to receive a reduced monthly pension. Notwithstanding the
preceding, a surviving spouse who was not married to the deceased group IV
member at the time of his or her retirement shall be eligible to receive a
monthly pension if the group IV member has elected to receive a reduced monthly
pension, on a form and subject to procedures developed by the executive
director, within six months after the group IV member’s completion of two years
of marriage to his or her spouse. The reduced monthly pension shall be
actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund,
based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group IV member’s
election to receive a reduced monthly pension. The group IV member can elect
for his or her surviving spouse to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25% of the
group IV member’s reduced monthly pension.
      (2)   Group IV members who are not married on date of retirement. Upon
the death of a retired group IV member, who was not married at retirement, a
beneficiary designated by the group IV member at retirement may be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group IV member has elected to receive a
reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures developed by the
executive director. The group IV member’s reduced monthly pension shall be
actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund,
based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group IV member’s
election to receive a reduced monthly pension. The group IV member can elect
for his or her designated beneficiary to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25%
of the group IV member’s reduced monthly pension. If a group IV member who was
not married at retirement and who selected a designated beneficiary pursuant to
this subsection (c) later marries, only the designated beneficiary would be
entitled to receive a lifetime monthly pension.
      (3)   Dependent child. Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such
retired deceased group IV member shall be entitled to receive a monthly
pension, the amount of which shall be $100, but shall cease upon the earliest
of such child’s death, marriage or attainment of age 18 pursuant to the terms
of this article.
   (d)   Death of vested terminated group IV member prior to pension
commencing. If a terminated group IV member entitled to a pension dies before
his or her pension commences, the group IV member’s designated beneficiary, or
if none, the group IV member’s estate shall receive an amount equal to the
group IV member’s total contributions to the fund, plus regular interest. If
the vested group IV member’s years of age and years and credited service total
at least 65 as of the date of the group IV member’s termination, the group IV
member’s eligible dependents shall receive the benefit specified under
subsection (b) above, based on the pension to which the group IV member would
have been entitled as of the date of the group IV member’s death, in lieu of
the payment of contributions plus regular interest. If the group IV member’s
years of age and service did not total at least 65 as of the date of the group
IV member’s termination, the group IV member’s eligible dependents may choose
between the refund of contributions, the payment of the survivor benefit at the
date the group IV member would have been eligible to draw the benefit, or an
immediate benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
   (e)   General provisions.
      (1)   If a deceased group IV member leaves no widow, widower, designated
beneficiary, children or dependent parents eligible to receive a benefit
hereunder, the group IV member’s total contributions plus regular interest less
any amount previously paid to him or her from the fund, shall be paid to the
group IV member’s estate.
      (2)   Payments to a child shall be made whether or not a widow, widower
or designated beneficiary survives and shall continue after the death of a
widow, widower or designated beneficiary but shall cease upon the earliest of
such child’s death, marriage or attainment of age 18. Payments to a dependent
parent shall cease upon such parent’s death. For purposes of this division, a
parent will be deemed to be dependent if the group IV member provides over one-
half of the parent’s support. Payments to a widow, widower or designated
beneficiary shall continue after remarriage, but shall cease upon the death of
the widow, widower or designated beneficiary. Payments to a widow or widower
forfeited due to remarriage, under prior provisions of this section will be
reinstated upon written request by the widow or widower, but no retroactive
payment can be made. After payments cease, any excess of the group IV member’s
total contributions over and above disability and/or death benefits paid, plus
regular interest at date of death shall be paid to the member’s estate.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (d) above, death benefit coverage
during service breaks in excess of 90 consecutive calendar days shall be
limited to group IV members who are absent due to service- connected injury
incurred while in line of duty.
      (4)   Benefits hereunder shall be payable on the first day of each month
commencing with the month following the month in which the group IV member’s
death occurs. The board shall determine all questions of dependency, and its
determination shall be final and conclusive on all parties. All unmarried,
legitimate and legally adopted children under the age of 18 years, in the
absence of determination to the contrary, shall be considered dependent.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§§ 2.5-38, 2.5-39 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO GROUP I MEMBERS
(GENERAL EMPLOYEES HIRED PRIOR TO JULY 1, 2011)
§ 2.5-40 APPLICABILITY.
   This division shall apply to group I members as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-41 EARNINGS.
   (a)   (1)   For credited service earned prior to October 1, 2013, earnings
shall mean the amount actually paid to a group I member by the city for
services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus overtime, acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group I member’s W-2 form.
“Earnings” shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group I members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law.
Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown upon a group I
member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings; and
         d.   Any amount paid to a group I member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-4(b).
      (2)   A group I member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group I member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group I member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group I member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a group I member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of
earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any
(or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost-of-
living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded
for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions,
earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a group I member’s
effective DROP election.
   (b)   (1)   For credited service earned on or after October 1, 2013,
earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group I member by the city
for services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group I member’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group I members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law.
earnings does not include overtime. Regardless of the fact that the following
payments may be shown upon a group I member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not
include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings; and
         d.   Any amount paid to a group I member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-4(b).
      (2)   A group I member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group I member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group I member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group I member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a group I member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of
earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any
(or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost-of-
living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded
for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions,
earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a group I member’s
effective DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-42 RETIREMENT DATES FOR GROUP I GENERAL MEMBERS.
   (a)   Normal retirement date for group I general members. A group I general
member shall be eligible for pension benefits on or after the group I general
member's normal retirement date, which shall be the last day of the month on
which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group I general member's years of age and all years of credited
service total 80; or
      (2)   The date on which the group I general member reaches age 65, but in
no event shall such normal retirement date be prior to the fifth anniversary of
the date the group I general member joined the fund.
   (b)   Omitted per council direction.
   (c)   Vested terminated retirement date for group I general members. A
vested terminated group I general member shall be eligible for pension benefits
on or after the group I general member's vested terminated retirement date,
which shall be the last day of the month on which the earliest of the following
occurs:
      (1)   The group I general member's years of age plus years of credited
service total 80 as if the vested terminated member had remained employed by
the city; or
      (2)   The date on which the group I general member reaches age 65.
   (d)   Omitted per council direction.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed
12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-43 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS.
   (a)   Compensation base for determining group I member benefits for credited
service earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013.
      (1)   For group I members hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007 (not
subject to the 12% cap), pension, death benefits, disability pension and vested
termination benefits shall be based upon the group I member’s compensation base
which shall mean the average annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-41(a) which were paid to the group I member by the city for employment with
the city during any three calendar years in which he or she had the highest
annual earnings. If a group I member’s last day of employment with the city is
prior to January 1, 1999, “five” shall be substituted for “three” in the
preceding sentence.
      (2)   For group I members who were hired prior to July 1, 2011, but not
vested by October 23, 2007 (subject to the 12% cap), pension, death benefits,
disability pension and vested termination benefits shall be based upon the
group I member’s compensation base which shall mean the average annual
earnings, as defined by §
2.5-41(a) which were paid to the group I member by the city for employment with
the city during any three calendar years in which he or she had the highest
annual earnings, subject to the following limitations.
         a.   The fund shall determine the four calendar years in which the
group I member had the highest annual earnings. Of such four years, the year in
which the group I member had the lowest annual earnings shall serve as the base
year. The base year shall not be included as one of the three calendar years
for purposes of the compensation base calculation.
         b.   The first annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group I member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from the
calendar year with the third highest annual earnings of the four calendar years
identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual earnings
are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the amount to
be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the first year shall
not exceed 112% of the annual earnings for the base year.
         c.   The second annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group I member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from the
calendar year with the second highest annual earnings of the four calendar
years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual
earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the
amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the second
year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings that are attributable to the
year described in subsection (a)(2)b. above.
         d.   The third annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group I member’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings from the
calendar year with the highest annual earnings of the four calendar years
identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual earnings
are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the amount to
be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the third year shall
not exceed 112% of the annual earnings that are attributable to the year
described in subsection (a)(2)c. above.
         e.   The average of the three amounts determined in accordance with
subsections (a)(2)a. through (a)(2)d. above will be the average annual earnings
for purposes of the group I member’s compensation base.
   (b)   Compensation base for determining group I member benefits for credited
service earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013. For group I members,
credited service earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013 shall be based
upon average annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-41(b) which were paid to the group I member by the city for employment with
the city during any five calendar years in which the group I member had the
highest annual earnings. The compensation base for credited service earned or
purchased on or after October 1, 2013, does not include overtime.
   (c)   If a group I member has less than five (or if applicable, three)
calendar years of employment. If a group I member has less than five (or if
applicable, three) calendar years of employment, the group I member’s
compensation base shall be determined by the executive director under uniform,
non-discriminatory procedures that are consistently applied.
   (d)   Lump sum payments. For compensation base purposes, any lump sum
payments of earnings for any prior time period, whether awarded to the group I
member by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be
retroactively attributed to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have
been received by the group I member from the city for services rendered.
   (e)   Compensation base. For purposes of computing the compensation base for
a group I member who has made an effective DROP election, the group I member’s
compensation base shall be calculated using the group I member’s earnings prior
to the effective date of the DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-44 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. Any group I general member who
is voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city before
the group I general member is vested shall be entitled to receive the amount of
the group I general member's contributions plus regular interest less any
amount previously paid to the group I general member from the fund.
   (b)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested terminated
pension. Any vested group I general member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group I general member's contributions, plus regular interest, less any amount
previously paid to the group I general member from the fund, either at the date
of such separation or at any time thereafter prior to commencement of
retirement benefit, but by so doing, the group I general member shall forfeit
all rights under the fund and thereafter be entitled to no further benefits
hereunder.
   (c)   Vested terminated pension.
      (1)   A vested terminated group I general member shall be entitled to
receive a vested terminated pension payable:
         a.   In full, pursuant to §
2.5-45(b)(1) and (2); or
         b.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 50 pursuant to §
2.5-45(b)(5).
      (2)   A vested terminated group I general member must file a request for
the commencement of the vested terminated pension by completing such forms and
following such procedures as are established by the board. A vested terminated
pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with
the month following approval of the group I general member's vested terminated
pension by the board.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-45 RETIREMENT PENSION (BENEFIT).
   (a)   Pensions commencing prior to October 1, 2013.
      (1)   Standard pension benefit A. A vested group I member who retires on
or after the group I member’s normal retirement date and who requests
commencement of the group I member’s pension prior to October 1, 2013, or a
group I member who terminates employment prior to October 1, 2013, and prior to
the group I member’s normal retirement date and who waits until such vested
retirement date, to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension,
the amount of which shall be 3% of the group I member’s applicable compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-43(a)(1) or (a)(2), whichever is applicable, multiplied by the group I
member’s total years of credited service, payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board’s approval of the
group I member’s pension. This retirement pension shall be defined as the
“group I member’s standard pension benefit A.”
      (2)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group I member standard
pension benefit A, a group I member under this subsection (a) may irrevocably
elect with his or her spouse’s consent (where applicable), in advance of his or
her retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its
discretion may adopt, to receive an “alternative pension benefit” which shall
be actuarially equivalent to the group I member’s standard pension benefit A
and which shall be payable in two parts:
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group I member’s pre-October 1, 2013
standard pension benefit A, which lump sum shall be payable on the date
benefits commence under subsection (a)(2)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group I member’s alternative pension benefit.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any
other provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an
alternative pension benefit shall not be available for any disability pension
under §
2.5-46, death benefit under §
2.5-47, or vested termination pension under §
2.5-44, nor shall it be available to any group I member who is receiving
pension benefits as of the effective date of the alternative pension benefit
provisions of this section, nor shall it be available upon re-retirement to any
retired group I member who becomes re-employed by the city.
   (b)   Pensions commencing on or after October 1, 2013 (known as group I
general member standard pension benefit "B," excluding § 2.5-45(b)(5)).
      (1)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested
terminated retirement date for group I general members hired and vested prior
to July 1, 2011, whose pension commences on or after October 1, 2013 (not
subject to the earnings cap). A vested group I general member hired and vested
prior to October 23, 2007, who retires on or after the group I general member's
normal retirement date and requests commencement of the group I general
member's pension on or after October 1, 2013, or a group I general member who
terminates employment on or after October 1, 2013, and prior to the group I
general member's normal retirement date and who waits until such vested
terminated retirement date to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent (3.0%) of the group I general member's compensation
base as defined by § 2.5-43(a)(1) multiplied by the group I general member's
years of credited service from date of hire until September 30, 2013; and
         b.   Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the group I general member's
compensation base as defined by § 2.5-43(b) multiplied by the group I general
member's years of credited service from October 1, 2013 until date of
termination.
      (2)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested
terminated retirement date for group I general members who were hired prior to
July 1, 2011 and were not vested prior to October 23, 2007 and whose pension
commences on or after October 1, 2013 (subject to the earnings cap). A group I
general member hired prior to July 1, 2011, and not vested prior to October 23,
2007, who retires on or after the group I general member's normal retirement
date and requests commencement of the group I general member's pension, and
whose pension commences on or after October 1, 2013, or who terminates
employment on or after October 1, 2013, but prior to his or her normal
retirement date and who waits until such vested terminated retirement date to
apply for a pension shall receive an annual life pension, the amount of which
shall be calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent (3.0%) of the group I general member's compensation
base as defined by § 2.5-43(a)(2) multiplied by the group I general member's
years of credited service from date of hire until September 30, 2013; and
         b.   Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the group I general member's
compensation base as defined by § 2.5-43(b) multiplied by the group I general
member's years of credited service from October 1, 2013 until date of
termination.
      (3)   Omitted per council direction.
      (4)   Omitted per council direction.
      (5)   Early retirement.
         a.   A group I general member can retire prior to their normal
retirement date with a reduced pension if:
            1.   The group I general member is age 50; and
            2.   The group I general member has been a member of the fund for
five years or more.
         b.   Early retirement pension calculation.
            1.   An early retirement pension shall be an annual life pension,
the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group I general
member's compensation base multiplied by the group I general member's total
years of credited service. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the
specified percentage of the group I general member's compensation base shall be
2.75% for all credited service earned or purchased prior to October 1, 2013,
and 2.25% for credited service earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013.
Early retirement pension shall be calculated using the specified percentage and
compensation base in effect at the time the group I general member earned or
purchased the credited service for all credited service earned or purchased
after October 1, 2013.
            2.   In addition to the reduced multiplier described in subsection
(5)(b)(1) above, a member taking early retirement shall have his benefit
reduced by an amount equal to the product of 0.416666667% multiplied times the
number of months by which the commencement of the early retirement pension
antedates the group I general member's normal or vested terminated retirement
date. This reduction shall be applied to all parts of the benefit.
      (6)   Payable. The pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board's approval of the
group I general member's pension per §
2.5-45(b)(1) and (2) or (b)(5). The pension shall be payable monthly.
   (c)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group I general member
standard pension benefit B, a group I general member may irrevocably elect with
his or her spouse's consent (where applicable), in advance of his or her
retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its
discretion may adopt, to receive an "alternative pension benefit," and which
shall be payable in two parts:
      (1)   Normal retirement alternative pension benefit.
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group I general member's standard
pension benefit "B," which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits
commence under subsection (c)(1)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board's
approval of the group I general member's pension.
      (2)   Omitted per council direction.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. The only people eligible
for the alternative pension benefit are members who take normal retirement and
do not enroll in DROP. Notwithstanding any other provision in this division to
the contrary, the option to elect an alternative pension benefit shall not be
available for any disability benefit under §
2.5-46, death benefit under §
2.5-47, or normal vested termination pension under §
2.5-44, nor shall it be available to any retired employee who is receiving
pension benefits hereunder as of the effective date of the alternative pension
benefit provisions of this division, nor shall it be available upon re-
retirement to any retired group I member who becomes re-employed by the city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed
12-11-2018)
Editor’s note:
   On December 11, 2018, the Fort Worth City Council adopted Ordinance No.
23516-12-2018, which added subsection 2.5-45(c)(3), ‘Limitation on alternative
pension benefit.’ To improve clarity, the pre-existing subsection 2.5-45(d),
‘Limitation on alternative pension benefit,’ was collapsed into the newly added
subsection with all limitations together in a single subsection. Other than the
elimination of the redundant title, no change was made to the text of either
subsection.
§ 2.5-46 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   General provisions. See §
2.5-7 for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group I member, whether or not
vested, becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while in line of duty, the group I member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group I
member’s compensation base multiplied by the group I member’s total years of
credited service which would have accrued if the group I member had worked to
the group I member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250 per month.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group I
member’s compensation base shall be 2.75%, unless the group I member is already
eligible to retire on or after the group I member’s normal retirement date, in
which case the specified percentage shall be 3%.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group I members whose
disability pension commences prior to October 1, 2013. If a vested group I
member becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group I member’s pension commences
prior to October 1, 2013, the group I member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group I
member’s compensation base, multiplied by the group I member’s total years of
credited service to date of actual retirement. For purposes of the proceeding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation base
shall be 2.75%, unless the group I member is already eligible to retire on or
after the group I member’s normal retirement date, in which case the specified
percentage shall be 3%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group I members whose
disability pension commences on or after October 1, 2013. If a vested group I
member becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group I member’s pension commences on
or after October 1, 2013, the group I member shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be determined by adding the following:
      (1)   A specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-43(a)(1) if hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007, or a specified
percentage of the group I member’s compensation base as defined by §
2.5-43(a)(2) if hired prior to July 1, 2011 and not vested by October 23, 2007,
multiplied by the group I member’s years of credited service from date of hire
until September 30, 2013. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified
percentage of the group I member’s compensation base for credited service
pursuant to this subsection (d) shall be 2.75%; and
      (2)   A specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation base as
defined by §
2.5-43(b) multiplied by the group I member’s years of credited service from
January 1, 2013, until the date of disability. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation base
for credited service pursuant to this subsection shall be 2.25%.
   (e)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group I members. If a
group I member becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the group I
member is vested, then such group I member shall be entitled to receive a
contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-44(a).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-47 DEATH BENEFIT.
   (a)   While in line of duty.
      (1)   If a group I member dies before retirement while in line of duty
and as a result of the performance of that group I member’s duties, the
surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group I member’s standard pension, based on
the number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group I
member lived to the group I member’s normal retirement date, but not less than
$250.
      (2)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such group I member
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be
$100, provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be entitled
to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this division, all such
dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be 75% of the group I member’s pension, based on the number of years of
credited service that would have accrued had the group I member lived to the
group I member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (3)   If a group I member dies while in line of duty and leaves no widow
or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is survived
by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s) shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group I
member’s accrued pension projected to the group I member’s normal retirement
date, but not less than $250.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group I member who
dies in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of 3%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group I member who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins prior to October 1, 2013.
         a.   If a vested group I member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, and the survivor monthly pension benefits begins prior to October
1, 2013, then the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group I member’s
accrued pension but not less than $150.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group I
member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this
subsection (b), all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly
pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group I member’s accrued
pension, but not less than $150.
         c.   If a vested group I member dies while not in line of duty and
leaves no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit under this
subsection (b), but is survived by a dependent parent or parents, such
dependent parents of the surviving dependent parent shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group I
member’s accrued pension, projected to the group I member’s normal retirement
date, but not less than $150.
         d.   For purposes of this subsection (b)(1), a group I member’s
accrued pension shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.75%, unless the
group I member had reached the group I member’s normal retirement date prior to
death, in which event the multiplier shall be 3%.
      (2)   Vested group I member who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins on or after October 1, 2013.
         a.   If a vested group I member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, and the survivor pension begins on or after October 1, 2013, then
the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group I member’s accrued pension but
not less than $150. The accrued pension shall be calculated by adding the
following:
            1.   A specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-43(a)(1) if hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007, or a specified
percentage of the group I member’s compensation base as defined by §
2.5-43(a)(2) if hired prior to July 1, 2011 and not vested by October 23, 2007,
multiplied by the group I member’s years of credited service from date of hire
until September 30, 2013. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified
percentage of the group I member’s compensation base for credited service for
this time period shall be 2.75%; and
            2.   A specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-43(b), multiplied by the group I member’s years of credited service from
October 1, 2013, until the date of death. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group I member’s compensation base
for credited service for this time period shall be 2.25%.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group I
member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group I member’s accrued pension, but not less
than $150.
         c.   If a group I member dies while not in line of duty and leaves no
widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s) shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the
group I member’s accrued pension, but not less than $150.
      (3)   Group I member not vested at time of death. If a group I member was
not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to the return of all contributions which the group I member paid into
the fund during the group I member’s life plus regular interest thereon. If
there is not a surviving widow or widower, the contributions shall be paid to
the estate of the group I member.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Upon the death of a group I member, the surviving widow or widower
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be
75% of the pension being paid to the group I member, provided that the group I
member and surviving widow or widower had been married for at least one year
immediately prior to the group I member’s retirement. Notwithstanding the
preceding sentence, a surviving widow or widower who was not married to the
deceased group I member for at least one year immediately prior to the group I
member’s retirement shall be eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group
I member has elected to receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and
subject to procedures developed by the executive director, within six months
after the group I member’s completion of two years of marriage to the group I
member’s spouse. The reduced monthly pension shall be actuarially determined in
a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund, based on actuarial tables in
effect on the date of the group I member’s election to receive a reduced
monthly pension. If such an election has been made, the surviving widow or
widower shall receive a monthly pension for life equal to 75% of the group I
member’s reduced monthly pension.
      (2)   Upon the death of a group I member who was not married at
retirement, a beneficiary designated by a group I member at retirement may be
eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group I member has elected to
receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures
developed by the executive director. The group I member’s reduced monthly
pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral
to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group I
member’s election to receive a reduced monthly pension. If such an election has
been made, the group I member’s designated beneficiary shall receive a monthly
pension for life equal to 100%, 75%, 50% or 25% of the group I member’s reduced
monthly pension. If a group I member who was not married at retirement and who
selected a designated beneficiary pursuant to this subsection (e) later marries
only the designated beneficiary would be entitled to receive a lifetime monthly
pension.
      (3)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such deceased group I
member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100 but shall cease upon the earliest of such child’s death, marriage
or attainment of age 18; provided, however, that if no surviving widow, widower
or designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a monthly pension pursuant to
the terms of this division, all such dependent children shall share equally a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the pension being paid to
the group I member at the time of his or her death.
   (d)   Death of vested terminated group I member prior to pension commencing.
If a terminated group I member entitled to a pension under the provisions of §
2.5-44 dies before the group I member’s pension commences, the group I member’s
designated beneficiary, or if none, the group I member’s estate shall receive
an amount equal to the group I member’s total contributions to the fund, plus
regular interest. If the vested group I member’s years of age and years of
credited service total at least 65 as of the date of the group I member’s
termination, the group I member’s eligible dependents shall receive the benefit
specified under subsection (b) above, based on the pension to which the group I
member would have been entitled as of the date of the group I member’s death,
in lieu of the payment of contributions plus regular interest. If the group I
member’s years of age and credited service did not total at least 65 as of the
date of the group I member’s termination, the group I member’s eligible
dependents may choose between the refund of contributions, the payment of the
survivor benefit at the date the group I member would have been eligible to
draw the benefit, or an immediate benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§§ 2.5-48—2.5-49 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: PROVISIONS FOR GROUP II MEMBERS
(GENERAL EMPLOYEES HIRED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2011)
§ 2.5-50 APPLICABILITY.
   This division applies to group II members as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-51 EARNINGS.
   (a)   (1)   For credited service earned prior to October 1, 2013, earnings
shall mean the amount actually paid to a group II member by the city for
services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus overtime, acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group II member’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group II members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law.
Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown upon a group II
member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings;
         d.   Any a payment received from the city’s wellness program;
         e.   Any amount received from the city’s vacation sell-back program;
and
         f.   Any amount paid to a group II member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3.
      (2)   A group II member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group II member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group II member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group II member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of earnings.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any (or such
other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost-of-living
adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded for
all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions,
earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a group II member’s
effective DROP election.
   (b)   (1)   For credited service earned on or after October 1, 2013,
earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group II member for services
rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus acting, assignment,
holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive and shift
differential pay, as reported on the group II member’s W-2 form. “Earnings”
shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently referred to
as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received by group II
members on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by law. earnings does
not include overtime. Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be
shown upon a group II member’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation leave, sick leave and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings;
         d.   Any payment received from the city’s wellness program;
         e.   Any amount received from the city’s vacation sell-back program;
and
         f.   Any amount paid to a group II member for which the city does not
contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3.
      (2)   A group II member participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group II member during the calendar year added to earnings reported on
the group II member’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund matters.
Mandatory group II member contributions that are picked-up by the city and
excluded from a member’s W-2 form shall also be included as part of earnings.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of $200,000, if any (or such
other amounts as may be determined by taking into account the cost-of-living
adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the code) shall be disregarded for
all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions,
earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a group II member’s
effective DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-52 RETIREMENT DATES.
   (a)   Normal retirement date. A group II member hired on or after July 1,
2011, shall be eligible for pension benefits on or after the group II member’s
normal retirement date which shall be the last day of the month in which the
group II member reaches age 55, and in which the earliest of the following
occurs:
      (1)   The group II member’s years of age (minimum age of 55) and years of
credited service total 80; or
      (2)   The later of:
         a.   The date on which the group II member reaches age 65; or
         b.   The fifth anniversary of the date the group II member joined the
fund.
   (b)   Vested terminated retirement date. A vested group II member hired on
or after July 1, 2011, who is voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the
service of the city prior to their normal retirement date shall be eligible for
pension benefits on or after such group II member’s vested termination date
which shall be the last day of the month in which the group II member reaches
age 55, and in which the group II member’s years of age (minimum age of 55) and
years of service total 80.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed
12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-53 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS FOR GROUP II MEMBERS.
   (a)   For a group II member, pension, death, disability and vested
termination benefits shall be based upon the group II member’s compensation
base which shall mean the average annual earnings, excluding overtime, which
were paid to the group II member by the city for employment with the city
during any five calendar years in which he or she had the highest annual
earnings (excluding overtime).
   (b)   If a group II member has less than five calendar years of employment,
the group II member’s compensation base shall be determined by the executive
director under uniform, non-discriminatory procedures that are consistently
applied.
   (c)   For compensation base purposes, any lump sum payments of earnings for
any prior time period, whether awarded to the group II member by a court,
administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be retroactively attributed
to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have been received by the
group II member from the city for services rendered. For purposes of computing
the compensation base for a group II member who has made an effective DROP
election, the group II member’s compensation base shall be calculated using the
group II member’s earnings (excluding overtime) prior to the effective date of
the DROP election.
   (d)   For the time period from July 1, 2011, through September 30, 2013,
both city contributions and group II member contributions “picked up” by the
city on overtime will be placed in a cash balance account for each group II
member to be administered by the fund. A group II member will be eligible to
receive the proceeds in the cash balance account plus regular interest upon
termination of employment from the city. However, a group II member who retires
from the city under a normal retirement, special retirement, disability
retirement or early retirement is entitled to receive a dollar-for-dollar match
of the proceeds in the cash balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar match of
the regular interest on the proceeds in the cash balance account upon
retirement. A group II member who retires from the city under a vested
termination retirement is entitled to receive a dollar-for-dollar match of the
proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account, and a dollar-for-dollar
match of the regular interest on the cash balance up until the date of the
group II member’s termination of employment with the city. However, the group
II member is not entitled to any interest on the cash balance account after the
date of the group II member’s termination of employment with the city. An
eligible surviving widow or widower, dependent child or children, or dependent
parent or parents of a group II member who dies prior to retirement would also
be entitled to receive a dollar-for-dollar match of the proceeds in the cash
balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar match of the regular interest on the
proceeds in the cash balance account.
   (e)   Overtime is not included in the definition of earnings for credited
service earned or purchased on or after October 1, 2013.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§ 2.5-54 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. Any group II member hired on or
after July 1, 2011, who is voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the
service of the city before the group II member is vested shall be entitled to
receive the amount of the group II member’s contributions, plus regular
interest including any proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account,
less any amount previously paid to the group II member from the fund.
   (b)   Vested termination pension.
      (1)   a.   A vested group II member, who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city shall be entitled to receive a vested
termination pension payable:
            1.   In full pursuant to §
2.5-52(b); or
            2.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 55.
         b.   A group II member must file a request for the commencement of the
vested termination pension by completing such forms and following such
procedures as are established by the board. A vested termination pension shall
be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with the month
following approval of the group II member’s vested termination pension by the
board.
      (2)   A vested termination pension shall be an annual life pension, the
amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group II member’s
compensation base multiplied by the group II member’s total years of credited
service to date of such voluntary or involuntary separation from the service of
the city. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of
the group II member’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group II
member has attained his or her normal retirement date prior to the date the
group II member’s pension payments begin, in which case the specified
percentage shall be 2.50%. A vested termination pension shall be calculated
using the “multiplier” (“specified percentage”) in effect at the time the
credited service is earned or purchased.
      (3)   In addition to the reduced multiplier described in subsection (b)
(2) above, a member taking early retirement shall have his benefit reduced by
an amount equal to the product of 0.416666667% multiplied times the number of
months by which the commencement of the early retirement pension antedates the
group II member's normal retirement date.
   (c)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested termination
pension. Any vested group II member who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group II member’s contributions, plus regular interest including any proceeds
in the group II member’s cash balance account less any amount previously paid
to the group II member from the fund, either at the date of such separation or
at any time thereafter prior to commencement of retirement benefit, but by so
doing, the group II member shall forfeit all rights under the fund and
thereafter be entitled to no further benefits hereunder.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-55 RETIREMENT PENSION (BENEFIT).
   (a)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date. A vested group II
member who retires on or after the group II member’s normal retirement date and
requests commencement of the group II member’s pension, or a group II member
who terminates employment prior to the group II member’s normal retirement date
and who waits until such vested retirement date to apply for a pension, shall
receive an annual life pension, the amount of which shall be 2.50% of the group
II member’s compensation base multiplied by the group II member’s total years
of credited service, payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing
with the month following the board’s approval of the group II member’s
retirement benefit. This retirement benefit shall be called the “group II
member standard pension benefit.”
   (b)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group II member standard
pension benefit, a group II member may irrevocably elect with his or her
spouse’s consent (where applicable), in advance of his or her retirement and
pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its discretion may adopt,
to receive an “alternative pension benefit” which shall be actuarially
equivalent to the group II member’s standard pension benefit and which shall be
payable in two parts:
      (1)   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than 25%
of the actuarial equivalent of the group II member’s standard pension benefit,
which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits commence under subsection
(b)(2) below; and
      (2)   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group II member’s pension.
   (c)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an alternative
pension benefit shall not be available for any disability benefit under §
2.5-56, death benefit under §
2.5-57, or normal vested termination pension under §
2.5-54, nor shall it be available to any retired employee who is receiving
pension benefits hereunder as of the effective date of the alternative pension
benefit provisions of this division, nor shall it be available upon re-
retirement to any retired employee who becomes re-employed by the city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-56 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   General provisions. See §
2.5-7, for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group II member hired on or after
July 1, 2011, whether or not vested, becomes disabled as above defined while in
line of duty, the group II member shall receive an annual life pension, the
amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group II member’s
compensation base multiplied by the group II member’s total years of credited
service which would have accrued if the group II member had worked to the group
II member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250 per month. For
purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group II
member’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group II member is
already eligible to retire on or after the group II member’s normal retirement
date, in which case the specified percentage shall be 2.50%.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group II members. If a
vested group II member as defined by §
2.5-7 becomes disabled as above defined while not in line of duty, the group II
member shall receive an annual life pension, the amount of which shall be the
specified percentage of the group II member’s compensation base multiplied by
the group II member’s total years of credited service to date of actual
retirement. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of
the group II member’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group II
member is already eligible to retire on or after the group II member’s normal
retirement date, in which case the specified percentage shall be 2.50%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group II members. If a
group II member becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the group II
member is vested, then such group II member shall be entitled to receive a
contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-54(a).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-57 DEATH BENEFITS.
   (a)   In line of duty.
      (1)   If a group II member dies before retirement while in line of duty
and as a result of the performance of that group II member’s duties, the
surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group II member’s pension, based on the
number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group II
member lived to the group II member’s normal retirement date, but not less than
$250. The surviving widow or widower shall also be entitled to the proceeds in
the group II member’s cash balance account and a dollar-for-dollar match of the
proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar
match of the regular interest on the proceeds in the cash balance account, if
applicable.
      (2)   Each dependent child of such group II member under age 18 shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be $100,
provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this division, all such
dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be 75% of the group II member’s pension, based on the number of years of
credited service that would have accrued had the group II member lived to the
group II member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250, plus the
proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account, and a dollar-for-dollar
match of the proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account plus a
dollar-for-dollar match of the regular interest on the proceeds in the cash
balance account, if applicable.
      (3)   If a group II member dies while in line of duty and leaves no widow
or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is survived
by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parents or the surviving
dependent parent shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of
which shall be 75% of the group II member’s accrued pension projected to the
group II member’s normal retirement date, but not less than $250, plus the
proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account, and a dollar-for-dollar
match of the proceeds in group II member’s cash balance account plus a dollar-
for-dollar match of the regular interest on the proceeds in the cash balance
account, if applicable.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group II member who
dies in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.5%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group II member.
         a.   If a vested group II member dies before retirement, while not in
line of duty, the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group II member’s
accrued pension but not less than $150, plus the proceeds in the group II
member’s cash balance account, and a dollar-for-dollar match of the proceeds in
the group II member’s cash balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar match of
the regular interest on the proceeds in the cash balance account, if
applicable.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group
II member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this
division, all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group II member’s accrued pension, but
not less than $150, plus the proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance
account, and a dollar-for-dollar match of the proceeds in group II member’s
cash balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar match of the regular interest on
the proceeds in the cash balance account, if applicable.
         c.   If a group II member dies while not in line of duty and leaves no
widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parents or the
surviving dependent parent shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group II member’s accrued pension, but not
less than $150, plus the proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance
account, and a dollar-for-dollar match of the proceeds in group II member’s
cash balance account plus a dollar-for-dollar match of the regular intereston
the proceeds in the cash balance account, if applicable.
         d.   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a vested group II
member who dies not in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of
2.25%.
      (2)   Group II member not vested at time of death. If a group II member
was not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to the return of all contributions which the group II member paid into
the fund during the group II member’s life plus regular interest thereon. If
there is not surviving widow or widower, the contributions shall be paid to the
estate of the group II member.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Group II members who are married at retirement. Upon the death of a
retired group II member, the surviving spouse of the group II member may be
eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group II member has elected to
receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures
developed by the executive director. The group II member’s reduced monthly
pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral
to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group II
member’s election to receive a reduced monthly pension. Notwithstanding the
preceding, a surviving spouse who was not married to the deceased group II
member at the time of the group II member’s retirement shall be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group II member has elected to receive a
reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures developed by the
executive director, within six months after the group II member’s completion of
two years of marriage to the group II member’s spouse. The reduced monthly
pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral
to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group II
member’s election to receive a reduced monthly pension. The group II member can
elect for his or her surviving spouse to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25%
of the group II member’s reduced monthly pension.
      (2)   Group II members who are not married on date of retirement. Upon
the death of a retired group II member who was not married at retirement, a
beneficiary designated by the group II member at retirement may be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group II member has elected to receive a
reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures developed by the
executive director. The group II member’s reduced monthly pension shall be
actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral to the fund,
based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group II member’s
election to receive a reduced monthly pension. The group II member can elect
for his or her designated beneficiary to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25%
of the group II member’s reduced monthly pension. If a group II member who was
not married at retirement and who selected a designated beneficiary pursuant to
this section later marries, only the designated beneficiary would be entitled
to receive a lifetime monthly pension.
      (3)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such deceased group
II member shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100, but shall cease upon the earliest of such child’s death,
marriage or attainment of age 18 pursuant to the terms of this division.
   (d)   Terminated group II member. If a terminated group II member entitled
to a pension under the provisions of this division dies before the group II
member’s pension commences, the group II member’s designated beneficiary, or if
none, the group II member’s estate shall receive an amount equal to the group
II member’s total contributions to the fund, plus regular interest, including
any proceeds in the group II member’s cash balance account, if applicable. If
the vested group II member’s years of age and years of credited service total
at least 65 as of the date of the group II member’s termination, the group II
member’s eligible dependents shall receive the benefit specified under
subsection (b) above, based on the pension to which the group II member would
have been entitled as of the date of the group II member’s death, in lieu of
the payment of contributions plus regular interest. If the group II member’s
years of age and credited service did not total at least 65 as of the date of
the group II member’s termination, the group II member’s eligible dependents
may choose between the refund of contributions, the payment of the survivor
benefit at the date the group II member would have been eligible to draw the
benefit, or an immediate benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed
10-24-2017)
§§ 2.5-58—2.5-60 RESERVED.
DIVISION 6: PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO GROUP V FIREFIGHTERS
(FIREFIGHTERS HIRED PRIOR TO JANUARY 10, 2015) ONLY
§ 2.5-60 APPLICABILITY.
   This division shall apply to group V firefighters as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed 10-21-2014)
§ 2.5-61 EARNINGS.
   (a)   (1)   For credited service earned prior to January 10, 2015, earnings
shall mean the amount actually paid to a group V firefighter by the city for
services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus overtime, acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group V firefighter’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group V firefighters on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by
law. Regardless of the fact that the following payments may be shown upon a
group V firefighter’s W-2 form, earnings shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation, sick and/or major medical, and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings; and
         d.   Any amount paid to a group V firefighter for which the city does
not contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b).
      (2)   A group V firefighter participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group V firefighter during the calendar year added to earnings reported
on the group V firefighter’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund
matters. Mandatory group V firefighter contributions that are picked-up by the
city and excluded from a group V firefighter’s W-2 form shall also be included
as part of earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of
$200,000, if any (or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into
account the cost-of-living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the Code)
shall be disregarded for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the
preceding provisions, earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a
group V firefighter’s effective DROP election.
   (b)   (1)   For credited service earned on or after January 10, 2015,
earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group V firefighter by the
city for services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus acting,
assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award, incentive
and shift differential pay, as reported on the group V firefighter’s W-2 form.
Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits (currently
referred to as temporary income benefits), beginning for such amounts received
by group V firefighters on or after January 1, 2006, so long as required by
law. Earnings will also include built-in overtime as defined by §
2.5-1. All other overtime is excluded. Regardless of the fact that the
following payments may be shown upon a group V firefighter’s W-2 form, earnings
shall not include:
         a.   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement,
automobile allowance or mileage, etc.);
         b.   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation, sick and/or major medical, and personal leave;
         c.   Any award by a court, administrative body, or settlement
agreement in excess of earnings;
         d.   Any amount paid to a group V firefighter for which the city does
not contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b); and
         e.   Overtime that is not built-in overtime.
      (2)   A group V firefighter participating in a city-sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group V firefighter during the calendar year added to earnings reported
on the group V firefighter’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for fund
matters. Mandatory group V firefighter contributions that are picked-up by the
city and excluded from a group V firefighter’s W-2 form shall also be included
as part of earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess of
$200,000, if any (or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into
account the cost-of-living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the Code)
shall be disregarded for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the
preceding provisions, earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a
group V firefighter’s effective DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014)
§ 2.5-62 RETIREMENT DATES FOR GROUP V FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   Normal retirement date for group V firefighters. A group V
firefighter, shall be eligible for pension benefits on or after the group V
firefighter's normal retirement date, which shall be the last day of the month
on which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group V firefighter's years of age and all years of credited
service total 80; or
      (2)   The date on which the group V firefighter reaches age 65, but in no
event shall such normal retirement date be prior to the fifth anniversary of
the date the group V firefighter joined the fund.
   (b)   Omitted per council direction.
   (c)   Vested terminated retirement date for group V firefighters. A vested
terminated group V firefighter, shall be eligible for pension benefits on or
after the group V firefighter's vested terminated retirement date, which shall
be the last day of the month on which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group V firefighter's years of age plus years of credited
service total 80 as if the vested terminated firefighter had remained employed
by the city; or
      (2)   The date on which the group V firefighter reaches age 65.
   (d)   Omitted per council direction.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-63 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS.
   (a)   Compensation base for determining group V firefighter benefits for
credited service earned or purchased prior to January 10, 2015.
      (1)   For group V firefighters hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007
(not subject to the 12% cap), pension, death benefits, disability pension and
vested termination benefits shall be based upon the group V firefighter’s
compensation base which shall mean the average annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-61(a) which were paid to the group V firefighter by the city for employment
with the city during any three calendar years in which he or she had the
highest annual earnings.
      (2)   For group V firefighters who were hired prior to January 10, 2015,
but not vested by October 23, 2007 (subject to the 12% cap), pension, death
benefits, disability pension and vested termination benefits shall be based
upon the group V firefighter’s compensation base which shall mean the average
annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-61(a) which were paid to the group V firefighter by the city for employment
with the city during any three calendar years in which he or she had the
highest annual earnings, subject to the following limitations:
         a.   The fund shall determine the four calendar years in which the
group V firefighter had the highest annual earnings. Of such four years, the
year in which the group V firefighter had the lowest annual earnings shall
serve as the base year. The base year shall not be included as one of the three
calendar years for purposes of the compensation base calculation.
         b.   The first annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group V firefighter’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings
from the calendar year with the third highest annual earnings of the four
calendar years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such
annual earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008,
the amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the first
year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings for the base year.
         c.   The second annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group V firefighter’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings
from the calendar year with the second highest annual earnings of the four
calendar years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such
annual earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008,
the amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the
second year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings that are attributable
to the year described in subsection (a)(2)b. above.
         d.   The third annual earnings to be used in the calculation of the
group V firefighter’s compensation base shall be the actual annual earnings
from the calendar year with the highest annual earnings of the four calendar
years identified in subsection (a)(2)a. above, provided that if such annual
earnings are from a calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, the
amount to be used in the calculation of the compensation base for the third
year shall not exceed 112% of the annual earnings that are attributable to the
year described in subsection (a)(2)c. above.
         e.   The average of the three amounts determined in accordance with
subsections (a)(2)a. through (a)(2)d. will be the average annual earnings for
purposes of the group V firefighter’s compensation base.
   (b)   Compensation base for determining group V firefighter benefits for
credited service earned or purchased on or after January 10, 2015. For group V
firefighters, credited service earned or purchased on or after January 10, 2015
shall be based upon average annual earnings, as defined by §
2.5-61(b) which were paid to the group V firefighter by the city for employment
with the city during any five calendar years in which the group V firefighter
had the highest annual earnings. The compensation base for credited service
earned or purchased on or after January 10, 2015, includes built-in overtime,
but does not include any other overtime.
   (c)   If a group V firefighter has less than five (or if applicable, three)
calendar years of employment, the group V firefighter’s compensation base shall
be determined by the executive director under uniform, non-discriminatory
procedures that are consistently applied.
   (d)   For compensation base purposes, any lump sum payments of earnings for
any prior time period, whether awarded to the group V firefighter by a court,
administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be retroactively attributed
to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have been received by the
group V firefighter from the city for services rendered.
   (e)   For purposes of computing the compensation base for a group V
firefighter who has made an effective DROP election, the group V firefighter’s
compensation base shall be calculated using the group V firefighter’s earnings
prior to the effective date of the DROP election.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014)
§ 2.5-64 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. Any group V firefighter who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city before the
group V firefighter is vested shall be entitled to receive the amount of the
group V firefighter's contributions plus regular interest less any amount
previously paid to the group V firefighter from the fund.
   (b)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested terminated
pension. Any vested group V firefighter who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group V firefighter's contributions, plus regular interest, less any amount
previously paid to the group V firefighter from the fund, either at the date of
such separation or at any time thereafter prior to commencement of retirement
benefit, but by so doing, the group V firefighter shall forfeit all rights
under the fund and thereafter be entitled to no further benefits hereunder.
   (c)   Vested terminated pension.
      (1)   A vested terminated group V firefighter shall be entitled to
receive a vested terminated pension payable:
         a.   In full, pursuant to §
2.5-65(b)(1) and (2); or
         b.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 50 pursuant to §
2.5-65(b)(5).
      (2)   A vested terminated group V firefighter must file a request for the
commencement of the vested terminated pension by completing such forms and
following such procedures as are established by the board. A vested terminated
pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with
the month following approval of the group V firefighter's vested terminated
pension by the board.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed 10-24-2017; Ord. 23516-12-2018, §
1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-65 RETIREMENT PENSION FOR GROUP V FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   Pensions commencing prior to January 10, 2015.
      (1)   A vested group V firefighter who retires on or after the group V
firefighter’s normal retirement date and who requests commencement of the group
V firefighter’s pension prior to January 10, 2015, or a group V firefighter who
terminates employment prior to January 10, 2015, and prior to the group V
firefighter’s normal retirement date and who waits until such normal retirement
date, to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension, the amount
of which shall be 3% of the group V firefighter’s applicable compensation base
as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(1) or (a)(2), whichever is applicable, multiplied by the group V
firefighter’s total years of credited service, payable monthly on the first day
of each month commencing with the month following the board’s approval of the
group V firefighter’s pension. This retirement pension shall be defined as the
“group V firefighter’s standard pension benefit A.”
      (2)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group V firefighter’s
standard pension benefit A, a group V firefighter under this subsection may
irrevocably elect with his or her spouse’s consent (where applicable), in
advance of his or her retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements
the board in its discretion may adopt, to receive an “alternative pension
benefit” which shall be actuarially equivalent to the group V firefighter’s
standard pension benefit A and which shall be payable in two parts:
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group V firefighter’s pre-January 10,
2015 standard pension benefit A, which lump sum shall be payable on the date
benefits commence under subsection (a)(2)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board’s
approval of the group V firefighter’s alternative pension benefit.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. Notwithstanding any
other provision in this division to the contrary, the option to elect an
alternative pension benefit shall not be available for any disability pension
under §
2.5-66, death benefit under §
2.5-67, or vested termination pension under §
2.5-64, nor shall it be available to any group V firefighter who is receiving
pension benefits as of the effective date of the alternative pension benefit
provisions of this section, nor shall it be available upon re-retirement to any
retired group V firefighter who becomes re-employed by the city.
   (b)   Pensions commencing on or after January 10, 2015 [known as group V
firefighter standard pension benefit "B," excluding § 2.5-65(b)(5)].
      (1)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested
terminated retirement date for group V firefighters hired and vested prior to
October 23, 2007, whose pension commences on or after January 10, 2015 (not
subject to the earnings cap). A vested group V firefighter hired and vested
prior to October 23, 2007, who retires on or after the group V firefighter's
normal retirement date and requests commencement of the group V firefighter's
pension on or after January 10, 2015, or a group V firefighter who terminates
employment on or after January 10, 2015, and prior to the group V firefighter's
normal retirement date and who waits until such vested terminated retirement
date to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension, the amount
of which shall be calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent (3.0%) of the group V firefighter's compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(1) multiplied by the group V firefighter's years of credited service
from date of hire until January 9, 2015; and
         b.   Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the group V firefighter's
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(b) multiplied by the group V firefighter's years of credited service
from January 10, 2015 until date of termination.
      (2)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested
terminated retirement date for group V firefighters who were hired prior to
January 10, 2015, but were not vested by October 23, 2007 and whose pension
commences on or after January 10, 2015 (subject to the earnings cap). A group V
firefighter hired and not vested prior to October 23, 2007, who retires on or
after the group V firefighter's normal retirement date and requests
commencement of the group V firefighter’s pension, and whose pension commences
on or after January 10, 2015, or who terminates employment on or after January
10, 2015, but prior to his or her normal retirement date and who waits until
such vested retirement date to apply for a pension shall receive an annual life
pension, the amount of which shall be calculated by adding the following:
         a.   Three percent (3.0%) of the group V firefighter's compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(2) multiplied by the group V firefighter's years of credited service
from date of hire through January 9, 2015; and
         b.   Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the group V firefighter's
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(b) multiplied by the group V firefighter's years of credited service
from January 10, 2015 until date of termination.
      (3)   Omitted per council direction.
      (4)   Omitted per council direction.
      (5)   Early retirement.
         a.   A group V firefighter can retire prior to their normal retirement
date with a reduced pension if:
            1.   The group V firefighter is age 50; and
            2.   The group V firefighter has been a member of the fund for five
years or more.
         b.   Early retirement pension calculation.
            1.   An early retirement pension shall be an annual life pension,
the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group V
firefighter's compensation base multiplied by the group V firefighter's total
years of credited service. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the
specified percentage of the group V firefighter's compensation base shall be
2.75% for all credited service earned or purchased prior to January 10, 2015,
and 2.25% for credited service earned or purchased on or after January 10,
2015. Early retirement pension shall be calculated using the specified
percentage and compensation base in effect at the time the group V firefighter
earned or purchased the credited service for all credited service earned or
purchased after January 10, 2015.
            2.   In addition to the reduced multiplier described in subsection
(5)(b)1. above, a group V firefighter taking early retirement shall have his
benefit reduced by an amount equal to the product of 0.416666667% multiplied
times the number of months by which the commencement of the early retirement
pension antedates the group V firefighter's normal or vested terminated
retirement date. This reduction shall be applied to all parts of the benefit.
      (6)   Payable. The pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of
each month commencing with the month following the board's approval of the
group V firefighter's pension per §
2.5-65(b)(1) and (2) or (b)(5). The pension shall be payable monthly.
   (c)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group V firefighter
standard pension benefit B, a group V firefighter may irrevocably elect with
his or her spouse's consent (where applicable), in advance of his or her
retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its
discretion may adopt, to receive an "alternative pension benefit," which shall
be payable in two parts:
      (1)   Normal retirement alternative pension benefit.
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group V firefighter's standard pension
benefit "B," which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits commence
under subsection (c)(1)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board's
approval of the group V firefighter’s pension.
      (2)   Omitted per council direction.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. The only people eligible
for the alternative pension benefit are firefighters who take normal retirement
and do not enroll in DROP. Notwithstanding any other provision in this division
to the contrary, the option to elect an alternative pension benefit shall not
be available for any disability benefit under §
2.5-66, death benefit under §
2.5-67, or vested termination pension under §
2.5-64, nor shall it be available to any retired employee who is receiving
pension benefits hereunder as of the effective date of the alternative pension
benefit provisions of this division, nor shall it be available upon re-
retirement to any retired group V firefighter who becomes re-employed by the
city.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
Editor’s note:
   On December 11, 2018, the Fort Worth City Council adopted Ordinance No.
23516-12-2018, which added subsection 2.5-65(c)(3), ‘Limitation on alternative
pension benefit.’ To improve clarity, the pre-existing subsection 2.5-65(d),
‘Limitation on alternative pension benefit,’ was collapsed into the newly added
subsection with all limitations together in a single subsection. Other than the
elimination of the redundant title, no change was made to the text of either
subsection.
§ 2.5-66 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   See §
2.5-7, for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group V firefighter, whether or not
vested, becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while in the line of duty, the group V firefighter shall receive an
annual life pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of
the group V firefighter’s compensation base multiplied by the group V
firefighter’s total years of credited service which would have accrued if the
group V firefighter had worked to the group V firefighter’s normal retirement
date, but not less than $250 per month. For purposes of the preceding sentence,
the specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation base shall
be 2.75%, unless the group V firefighter is already eligible to retire on or
after the group V firefighter’s normal retirement date, in which case the group
V firefighter shall receive the standard pension benefit.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group V firefighters whose
disability pension commences prior to January 10, 2015. If a vested group V
firefighter becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group V firefighter’s pension
commences prior to January 10, 2015, the group V firefighter shall receive an
annual life pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of
the group V firefighter’s compensation base, multiplied by the group V
firefighter’s total years of credited service to date of actual retirement. For
purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group V
firefighter’s compensation base shall be 2.75%, unless the group V firefighter
is already eligible to retire on or after the group V firefighter’s normal
retirement date, in which case the specified percentage shall be 3%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group V firefighters whose
disability pension commences on or after January 10, 2015. If a vested group V
firefighter becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, and the group V firefighter’s pension
commences on or after January 10, 2015, the group V firefighter shall receive
an annual life pension, the amount of which shall be determined by adding the
following:
      (1)   A specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(1) if hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007, or a specified
percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(2) if hired prior to January 10, 2015, and not vested by October 23,
2007, multiplied by the group V firefighter’s years of credited service from
date of hire until January 9, 2015. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the
specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation base for
credited service pursuant to this subsection shall be 2.75%; and
      (2)   A specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation
base as defined by §
2.5-63(b) multiplied by the group V firefighter’s years of credited service
from January 10, 2015, until the date of disability. For purposes of the
preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s
compensation base for credited service pursuant to this subsection shall be
2.25%.
   (e)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group V firefighters. If
a group V firefighter becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the
group V firefighter is vested, then such group V firefighter shall be entitled
to receive a contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-64(a).
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014)
§ 2.5-67 DEATH BENEFITS FOR GROUP V FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   While in line of duty.
      (1)   If a group V firefighter dies before retirement while in line of
duty and as a result of the performance of that group V firefighter’s duties,
the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s standard pension,
based on the number of years of credited service that would have accrued had
the group V firefighter lived to the group V firefighter’s normal retirement
date, but not less than $250.
      (2)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such group V
firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100, provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s pension, based on the number
of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group V
firefighter lived to the group V firefighter’s normal retirement date, but not
less than $250.
      (3)   If a group V firefighter dies while in line of duty and leaves no
widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s) or the
surviving dependent parent, shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s accrued pension
projected to the group V firefighter’s normal retirement date, but not less
than $250.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group V firefighter
who dies in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of 3%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group V firefighter who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins prior to January 10, 2015.
         a.   If a vested group V firefighter dies before retirement, while not
in line of duty, and the survivor monthly pension benefit begins prior to
January 10, 2015, then the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group V
firefighter’s accrued pension but not less than $150.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group V
firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s accrued pension, but not
less than $150.
         c.   If a vested group V firefighter dies while not in line of duty
and leaves no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit under
this section, but is survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent
parent(s) or the surviving dependent parent, shall be entitled to receive a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s
accrued pension, but not less than $150.
         d.   For purposes of this subsection (b)(1), a group V firefighter’s
accrued pension shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.75%, unless the
group V firefighter had reached the group V firefighter’s normal retirement
date prior to death, in which event the multiplier shall be 3%.
      (2)   Vested group V firefighter who dies not in line of duty and whose
survivor’s monthly pension begins on or after January 10, 2015.
         a.   If a vested group V firefighter dies before retirement, while not
in line of duty, and the survivor pension begins on or after January 10, 2015,
then the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly
pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s accrued
pension but not less than $150. The accrued pension shall be calculated by
adding the following:
            1.   A specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(1) if hired and vested prior to October 23, 2007, or a specified
percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(a)(2) if hired prior to January 10, 2015, and not vested by October 23,
2007, multiplied by the group V firefighter’s years of credited service from
date of hire until January 9, 2015. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the
specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation base for
credited service for this time period shall be 2.75%; and
            2.   A specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s
compensation base as defined by §
2.5-63(b), multiplied by the group V firefighter’s years of credited service
from January 10, 2015, until the date of death. For purposes of the preceding
sentence, the specified percentage of the group V firefighter’s compensation
base for credited service for this time period shall be 2.25%.
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group V
firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall
be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group V firefighter’s accrued pension, but not
less than $150.
         c.   If a group V firefighter dies while not in line of duty and
leaves no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder,
but is survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s)
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be
75% of the group V firefighter’s accrued pension, but not less than $150.
      (3)   Group V firefighter not vested at time of death. If a group V
firefighter was not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower
shall be entitled to the return of all contributions which the group V
firefighter paid into the fund during the group V firefighter’s life plus
regular interest thereon. If there is not a surviving widow or widower, the
contributions shall be paid to the estate of the group V firefighter.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Upon the death of a group V firefighter, the surviving widow or
widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be 75% of the pension being paid to the group V firefighter, provided
that the group V firefighter and surviving widow or widower had been married
for at least one year immediately prior to the group V firefighter’s
retirement. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a surviving widow or
widower who was not married to the deceased group V firefighter for at least
one year immediately prior to the group V firefighter’s retirement shall be
eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group V firefighter has elected to
receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures
developed by the executive director, within six months after the group V
firefighter’s completion of two years of marriage to the group V firefighter’s
spouse. The reduced monthly pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner
that is actuarially neutral to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on
the date of the group V firefighter’s election to receive a reduced monthly
pension. If such an election has been made, the surviving widow or widower
shall receive a monthly pension for life equal to 75% of the group V
firefighter’s reduced monthly pension.
      (2)   Upon the death of a group V firefighter who was not married at
retirement, a beneficiary designated by a group V firefighter at retirement may
be eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group V firefighter has elected
to receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to procedures
developed by the executive director. The group V firefighter’s reduced monthly
pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner that is actuarially neutral
to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the date of the group V
firefighter’s election to receive a reduced monthly pension. If such an
election has been made, the group V firefighter’s designated beneficiary shall
receive a monthly pension for life equal to 100%, 75%, 50% or 25% of the group
V firefighter’s reduced monthly pension. If a group V firefighter who was not
married at retirement and who selected a designated beneficiary pursuant to
this subsection later marries only the designated beneficiary would be entitled
to receive a lifetime monthly pension.
      (3)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such deceased group V
firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which
shall be $100 but shall cease upon the earliest of such child’s death, marriage
or attainment of age 18; provided, however, that if no surviving widow, widower
or designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a monthly pension pursuant to
the terms of this section, all such dependent children shall share equally a
monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the pension being paid to
the group V firefighter at the time of his or her death.
   (d)   Death of vested terminated group V firefighter prior to pension
commencing. If a terminated group V firefighter entitled to a pension under the
provisions of § 2.5-64 dies before the group V firefighter’s pension commences,
the group V firefighter’s designated beneficiary, or if none, the group V
firefighter’s estate shall receive an amount equal to the group V firefighter’s
total contributions to the fund, plus regular interest. If the vested group V
firefighter’s years of age and years of credited service total at least 65 as
of the date of the group V firefighter’s termination, the group V firefighter’s
eligible dependents shall receive the benefit specified under subsection (b)
above, based on the pension to which the group V firefighter would have been
entitled as of the date of the group V firefighter’s death, in lieu of the
payment of contributions plus regular interest. If the group V firefighter’s
years of age and credited service did not total at least 65 as of the date of
the group V firefighter’s termination, the group V firefighter’s eligible
dependents may choose between the refund of contributions, the payment of the
survivor benefit at the date the group V firefighter would have been eligible
to draw the benefit, or an immediate benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012; Ord. 21510-10-2014, § 2, passed
10-21-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed 10-24-2017)
§§ 2.5-68—2.5-69 RESERVED.
DIVISION 7: PROVISIONS FOR GROUP VI FIREFIGHTERS
(FIREFIGHTERS HIRED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 10, 2015)
§ 2.5-70 APPLICABILITY.
   This division applies to group VI firefighters as defined by §
2.5-1.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 2.5-71 EARNINGS.
   (a)   Earnings shall mean the amount actually paid to a group VI firefighter
by the city for services rendered to the city during the calendar year, plus
acting, assignment, holiday, longevity, educational incentive, safety award,
incentive and shift differential pay, as reported on the group VI firefighter’s
W-2 form. Earnings shall also include weekly workers’ compensation benefits
(currently referred to as temporary income benefits). Earnings will include
built-in overtime as defined by §
2.5-1. All other overtime is excluded. Regardless of the fact that the
following payments may be shown on a group VI firefighter’s W-2 form, earnings
shall not include:
      (1)   Any non-salary allowance (such as uniform reimbursement, automobile
allowance or mileage, etc.);
      (2)   Lump sum payments received at time of termination for unused
vacation, sick and/or major medical, and personal leave;
      (3)   Any award by a court, administrative body or settlement agreement
in excess of earnings;
      (4)   Any payment received from the city’s wellness program;
      (5)   Any amount received from the city’s vacation sell-back program,
      (6)   Any amount paid to a group VI firefighter for which the city does
not contribute to the fund under §
2.5-3(b), and
      (7)   Overtime that is not built-in overtime.
   (B)   A group VI firefighter participating in a city- sponsored deferred
compensation plan shall have the amount of any deferred compensation credited
to that group VI firefighter during the calendar year added to earnings
reported on the group VI firefighter’s W-2 form to arrive at total earnings for
fund matters. Mandatory group VI firefighter contributions that are picked-up
by the city and excluded from a group VI firefighter’s W-2 form shall also be
included as part of earnings. Notwithstanding the foregoing, earnings in excess
of $200,000, if any (or such other amounts as may be determined by taking into
account the cost-of-living adjustment provided under § 401(a)(17) of the Code)
shall be disregarded for all purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the
preceding provisions, earnings shall not include any amounts paid following a
group VI firefighter’s effective DROP election.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 2.5-72 RETIREMENT DATES FOR GROUP VI FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   Normal retirement date for group VI firefighters. A group VI
firefighter, shall be eligible for pension benefits on or after the group VI
firefighter's normal retirement date, which shall be the last day of the month
on which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group VI firefighter's years of age and all years of credited
service total 80; or
      (2)   The date on which the group VI firefighter reaches age 65, but in
no event shall such normal retirement date be prior to the fifth anniversary of
the date the group VI firefighter joined the fund.
   (b)   Omitted per council direction.
   (c)   Vested terminated retirement date for group VI firefighters. A group
VI firefighter, shall be eligible for pension benefits on or after the group VI
firefighter' s vested terminated retirement date, which shall be the last day
of the month on which the earliest of the following occurs:
      (1)   The group VI firefighter's years of age plus years of credited
service total 80 as if the vested terminated firefighter had remained employed
by the city; or
      (2)   The date on which the group VI firefighter reaches age 65, but in
no event shall such vested terminated retirement date be prior to the fifth
anniversary of the date the group VI firefighter joined the fund.
   (d)   Omitted per council direction.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-
11-2018)
§ 2.5-73 COMPENSATION BASE FOR DETERMINING BENEFITS FOR GROUP VI FIREFIGHTERS.
   (a)   Pension, death, disability and vested termination benefits shall be
based upon the group VI firefighter’s compensation base which shall mean the
average annual earnings which were paid to the group VI firefighter by the city
for employment with the city during any five years in which the group VI
firefighter had the highest annual earnings. If a group VI firefighter has less
than five calendar years of employment, the group VI firefighter’s compensation
base shall be determined by the executive director under uniform, non-
discriminatory procedures that are consistently applied.
   (b)   For compensation base purposes, any lump sum payments of earnings for
any prior time period, whether awarded to the group VI firefighter by a court,
administrative body or settlement agreement, shall be retroactively attributed
to the calendar year in which it would otherwise have been received by the
group VI firefighter from the city for services rendered.
   (c)   For purposes of computing the compensation base for a group VI
firefighter who has made an effective DROP election, the group VI firefighter’s
compensation base shall be calculated using the group VI firefighter’s earnings
prior to the effective date of the DROP election.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 2.5-74 TERMINATION BENEFITS AND VESTING.
   (a)   Contribution refund prior to vesting. Any group VI firefighter who is
voluntarily or involuntarily separated from the service of the city before the
group VI firefighter is vested shall be entitled to receive the amount of the
group VI firefighter's contributions plus regular interest less any amount
previously paid to the group VI firefighter from the fund.
   (b)   Contribution refund after vesting in lieu of vested terminated
pension. Any vested group VI firefighter who is voluntarily or involuntarily
separated from the service of the city may elect to receive a refund of the
group VI firefighter's contributions, plus regular interest, less any amount
previously paid to the group VI firefighter from the fund, either at the date
of such separation or at any time thereafter prior to commencement of
retirement benefit, but by so doing, the group VI firefighter shall forfeit all
rights under the fund and thereafter be entitled to no further benefits
hereunder.
   (c)   Vested terminated pension.
      (1)   A vested terminated group VI firefighter shall be entitled to
receive a vested terminated pension payable:
         a.   In full, pursuant to §
2.5-75(a); or
         b.   In a reduced amount commencing on or after age 50 pursuant to §
2.5-75(c).
      (2)   A vested terminated group VI firefighter must file a request for
the commencement of the vested terminated pension by completing such forms and
following such procedures as are established by the board. A vested terminated
pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with
the month following approval of the group VI firefighter's vested terminated
pension by the board.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed 10-
24-2017; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 2.5-75 RETIREMENT PENSION FOR GROUP VI MEMBERS.
   (a)   Pensions commencing upon normal retirement date or vested terminated
retirement date for group VI firefighters. A vested group VI firefighter under
this division who retires on or after the group VI firefighter's normal
retirement date and requests commencement of the group VI firefighter's
pension, or a group VI firefighter who terminates employment prior to the group
VI firefighter's normal retirement date and who waits until such normal
retirement date to apply for a pension, shall receive an annual life pension,
the amount of which shall be 2.5% of the group VI firefighter's compensation
base multiplied by the group VI firefighter's total years of credited service,
payable monthly on the first day of each month commencing with the month
following the board's approval of the group VI firefighter's pension. This
pension benefit shall be called the "group VI firefighter's standard pension
benefit."
   (b)   Omitted per council direction.
   (c)   Early retirement.
      (1)   A group VI firefighter can retire prior to their normal retirement
date with a reduced pension if:
         a.   The group VI firefighter is age 50; and
         b.   The group VI firefighter has been a member of the fund for five
years or more.
      (2)   Early retirement pension calculation.
         a.   An early retirement pension shall be an annual life pension, the
amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the group VI firefighter's
compensation base multiplied by the group VI firefighter's total years of
credited service. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified
percentage of the group VI firefighter's compensation base shall be 2.25%;
         b.   In addition to the reduced multiplier described in subsection (c)
(2)a. above, a group VI firefighter taking early retirement shall have his
benefit reduced by an amount equal to the product of 0.416666667% multiplied
times the number of months by which the commencement of the early retirement
pension antedates the group VI firefighter's normal or vested terminated
retirement date. This reduction shall be applied to all parts of the benefit.
   (d)   Payable. The pension shall be payable monthly on the first day of each
month commencing with the month following the board's approval of the group VI
firefighter's pension per §
2.5-75(a) and (c). The pension shall be payable monthly. This retirement
pension shall be defined as the "group VI firefighter standard pension benefit
B."
   (e)   Alternative pension benefit. In lieu of the group VI firefighter
standard pension benefit B, a group VI firefighter may irrevocably elect with
his or her spouse's consent (where applicable), in advance of his or her
retirement and pursuant to regulations and requirements the board in its
discretion may adopt, to receive an "alternative pension benefit," which shall
be payable in two parts:
      (1)   Normal retirement alternative pension benefit.
         a.   One part in a lump sum amount not less than 5% nor greater than
25% of the actuarial equivalent of the group VI firefighter's standard pension
benefit "B," which lump sum shall be payable on the date benefits commence
under subsection (e)(1)b. below; and
         b.   The remainder in an annual life pension, payable monthly on the
first day of each month commencing with the month following the board's
approval of the group VI firefighter's pension.
      (2)   Omitted per council direction.
      (3)   Limitation on alternative pension benefit. The only people eligible
for the alternative pension benefit are group VI firefighters who take normal
retirement and do not enroll in DROP.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014; Ord. 23516-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-
11-2018)
§ 2.5-76 DISABILITY PENSION.
   (a)   See §
2.5-7 for general provisions related to disability pension.
   (b)   Disability in line of duty. If a group VI firefighter, whether or not
vested, becomes disabled as defined in §
2.5-7 while in line of duty, the group VI firefighter shall receive an annual
life pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of the
group VI firefighter’s compensation base multiplied by the total years of
credited service which would have accrued if the group VI firefighter had
worked to normal retirement date, but not less than $250 per month. For
purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group VI
firefighter’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group VI firefighter
is already eligible to retire on or after his or her normal retirement date, in
which case the specified percentage shall be 2.5%.
   (c)   Disability not in line of duty for vested group VI firefighters. If a
vested group VI firefighter becomes disabled, as defined in §
2.5-7, while not in line of duty, the group VI firefighter shall receive an
annual life pension, the amount of which shall be the specified percentage of
the group VI firefighter’s compensation base multiplied by the group VI
firefighter’s total years of credited service to date of actual retirement. For
purposes of the preceding sentence, the specified percentage of the group VI
firefighter’s compensation base shall be 2.25%, unless the group VI firefighter
is already eligible to retire on or after the group VI firefighter’s normal
retirement date, in which case the specified percentage shall be 2.5%.
   (d)   Disability not in line of duty for non-vested group VI firefighters.
If A group VI firefighter becomes disabled while not in line of duty before the
group VI firefighter is vested, then such group VI firefighter shall be
entitled to receive a contribution refund in accordance with §
2.5-74(a).
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 2.5-77 DEATH BENEFIT.
   (a)   While in line of duty.
      (1)   If a group VI firefighter dies before retirement while in line of
duty and as a result of the performance of that group VI firefighter’s duties,
the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group VI firefighter’s pension, based
on the number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the
group VI firefighter lived to the group VI firefighter’s normal retirement
date, but not less than $250.
      (2)   Each dependent child of such group VI firefighter under 18 years of
age shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall
be $100, provided however, that if no surviving widow or widower shall be
entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this section,
all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be 75% of the group VI firefighter’s pension, based on the
number of years of credited service that would have accrued had the group VI
firefighter lived to the group VI firefighter’s normal retirement date, but not
less than $250.
      (3)   If a group VI firefighter dies while in line of duty and leaves no
widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder, but is
survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s), or the
surviving dependent parent, shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group VI firefighter’s accrued pension
projected to his or her normal retirement date, but not less than $250.
      (4)   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a group VI firefighter
who dies in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier of 2.5%.
   (b)   While not in line of duty.
      (1)   Vested group VI firefighter.
         a.   If a vested group VI firefighter dies before retirement, while
not in line of duty, the surviving widow or widower shall be entitled to
receive a monthly pension, the amount of which shall be 75% of the group VI
firefighter’
         b.   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such vested group
VI firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount of
which shall be $100; provided, however, that if no surviving widow or widower
shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension pursuant to the terms of this
section, all such dependent children shall share equally a monthly pension, the
amount of which shall be 75% of the group VI firefighter’s accrued pension, but
not less than $150.
         c.   If a group VI firefighter dies while not in line of duty and
leaves no widow or widower or children eligible to receive a benefit hereunder,
but is survived by a dependent parent or parents, such dependent parent(s), or
the surviving dependent parent, shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension,
the amount of which shall be 75% of the group VI firefighter’s accrued pension,
but not less than $150.
         d.   The survivor’s monthly pension benefit for a vested group VI
firefighter who dies not in line of duty shall be calculated using a multiplier
of 2.25%.
      (2)   Group VI firefighter not vested at time of death. If a group VI
firefighter was not vested on the date of death, the surviving widow or widower
shall be entitled to the return of all contributions which the group VI
firefighter paid into the fund during the group VI firefighter’s life plus
regular interest thereon. If there is not a surviving widow or widower, the
contributions shall be paid to the estate of the group VI firefighter.
   (c)   After retirement.
      (1)   Group VI firefighters who are married at retirement. The surviving
spouse of a group VI firefighter who dies after retirement would be eligible to
receive a monthly pension if the group VI firefighter elected to receive a
reduced monthly pension prior to retirement, on a form and subject to
procedures developed by the executive director of the fund. The group VI
firefighter’s reduced monthly pension shall be determined in a manner that is
actuarially neutral to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the
date of the group VI firefighter’s election to receive a reduced monthly
pension. Notwithstanding the preceding, a surviving spouse who was not married
to the deceased group VI firefighter at the time of his or her retirement shall
be eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group VI firefighter has
elected to receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to
procedures developed by the executive director, within six months after the
group VI firefighter’s completion of two years of marriage to his or her
spouse. The reduced monthly pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner
that is actuarially neutral to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on
the date of the group VI firefighter’s election to receive a reduced monthly
pension. The group VI firefighter can elect for his or her surviving spouse to
receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25% of the group VI firefighter’s reduced
monthly pension.
      (2)   Group VI firefighters who are not married on date of retirement.
Upon the death of a retired group VI firefighter, who was not married at
retirement, a beneficiary designated by the group VI firefighter at retirement
may be eligible to receive a monthly pension if the group VI firefighter has
elected to receive a reduced monthly pension, on a form and subject to
procedures developed by the executive director. The group VI firefighter’s
reduced monthly pension shall be actuarially determined in a manner that is
actuarially neutral to the fund, based on actuarial tables in effect on the
date of the group VI firefighter’s election to receive a reduced monthly
pension. The group VI firefighter can elect for his or her designated
beneficiary to receive either 100%, 75%, 50% or 25% of the group VI
firefighter’s reduced monthly pension. If a group VI firefighter who was not
married at retirement and who selected a designated beneficiary pursuant to
this subsection later marries, only the designated beneficiary would be
entitled to receive a lifetime monthly pension.
      (3)   Each dependent child under 18 years of age of such retired deceased
group VI firefighter shall be entitled to receive a monthly pension, the amount
of which shall be $100, but shall cease upon the earliest of such child’s
death, marriage or attainment of age 18 pursuant to the terms of this section.
   (d)   Death of vested terminated group VI firefighter prior to pension
commencing. If a terminated group VI firefighter entitled to a pension dies
before his or her pension commences, the group VI firefighter’s designated
beneficiary, or if none, the group VI firefighter’s estate shall receive an
amount
equal to the group VI firefighter’s total contributions to the fund, plus
regular interest. If the vested group VI firefighter’s years of age and years
and credited service total at least 65 as of the date of the group VI
firefighter’s termination, the group VI firefighter’s eligible dependents shall
receive the benefit specified under subsection (b) above, based on the pension
to which the group VI firefighter would have been entitled as of the date of
the group VI firefighter’s death, in lieu of the payment of contributions plus
regular interest. If the group VI firefighter’s years of age and service did
not total at least 65 as of the date of the group VI firefighter’s termination,
the group VI firefighter’s eligible dependents may choose between the refund of
contributions, the payment of the survivor benefit at the date the group VI
firefighter would have been eligible to draw the benefit, or an immediate
benefit at an actuarially reduced rate.
   (e)   General provisions.
      (1)   If a deceased group VI firefighter leaves no widow, widower,
designated beneficiary, children or dependent parents eligible to receive a
benefit hereunder, the group VI firefighter’s total contributions plus regular
interest less any amount previously paid to him or her from the fund, shall be
paid to the group VI firefighter’s estate.
      (2)   Payments to a child shall be made whether or not a widow, widower
or designated beneficiary survives and shall continue after the death of a
widow, widower, or designated beneficiary but shall cease upon the earliest of
such child’s death, marriage or attainment of age 18. Payments to a dependent
parent shall cease upon such parent’s death. For purposes of this section, a
parent will be deemed to be dependent if the group VI firefighter provides over
one-half of the parent’s support. Payments to a widow, widower or designated
beneficiary shall continue after remarriage, but shall cease upon the death of
the widow, widower, or designated beneficiary. Payments to a widow or widower
forfeited due to remarriage, under prior provisions of this section will be
reinstated upon written request by the widow or widower, but no retroactive
payment can be made. After payments cease, any excess of the group VI
firefighter’s total contributions over and above disability and/or death
benefits paid, plus regular interest at date of death shall be paid to the
firefighter’s estate.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (d) above, death benefit coverage
during service breaks in excess of 90 consecutive calendar days shall be
limited to group VI firefighters who are absent due to service-connected injury
incurred while in line of duty.
      (4)   Benefits hereunder shall be payable on the first day of each month
commencing with the month following the month in which the group VI
firefighter’s death occurs. The board shall determine all questions of
dependency, and its determination shall be final and conclusive on all parties.
All unmarried, legitimate and legally adopted children under the age of 18
years, in the absence of determination to the contrary, shall be considered
dependent.
(Ord. 21459-09-2014, § 2, passed 9-16-2014; Ord. 22977-10-2017, § 1, passed 10-
24-2017)
§§ 2.5-78—2.5-225 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: RETIRED EMPLOYEES GROUP DEATH BENEFIT FUND
§ 2.5-226 CONTINUATION OF DEATH BENEFIT FUND.
   Ord. 6235, as adopted by the city council on January 26, 1970, created and
established a fund designated as the “retired employees group death benefit
fund” from which lump-sum payments are made upon the death of retired members
of the employees’ retirement fund of the City of Fort Worth, Texas. That fund
is still in existence and shall continue operation as herein set forth.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-227 APPROPRIATIONS TO FUND.
   The city shall continue to appropriate to the retired employees’ death
benefit fund such amount or amounts as may be necessary to provide the lump-sum
payments hereinafter set forth in §
2.5-229 on an as needed basis from current revenues, and, in the event such
current revenues are insufficient, the city shall compute, ascertain and levy
an ad valorem tax sufficient to raise and produce the money required to
appropriate and pay any additional sums which may become due during any such
year. The city shall levy a sufficient tax, when needed, to provide the revenue
from which such appropriations may be made.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-228 DEFINITIONS.
   With reference to the retired employees’ group death benefit fund, the
following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The
masculine pronouns wherever used herein shall include both the male and female
persons.
   DESIGNATED BENEFICIARIES ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE THE DEATH BENEFIT HEREUNDER.
Includes any individual designated by the member as a designated beneficiary on
a board approved beneficiary designated card.
   FILING. For purposes of determining the surviving designated beneficiary,
the date when the beneficiary designation card is actually received by the
retirement office.
   RETIRED EMPLOYEES’ GROUP DEATH BENEFIT FUND. The fund from which lump-sum
payments are made upon the death of retired members of the fund if said member
retired after January 1, 1970.
   SURVIVING SPOUSE. The widow or widower legally married to the member at
least one year immediately prior to the member’s retirement from the City of
Fort Worth and at the time of the member’s death.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-229 ENTITLEMENT TO DEATH BENEFIT.
   (a)   When a member of the fund dies subsequent to retirement from active
employment with the city, the surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive (in
addition to benefits provided by the fund a lump-sum payment of $5,000). If the
deceased member leaves no surviving spouse and has filed a valid beneficiary
designation card with the retirement office naming a surviving designated
beneficiary, a lump-sum payment of $5,000 shall be made in full to said
surviving designated beneficiary. Upon written request by the surviving spouse
or surviving designated beneficiary after the death of the member, the
executive director may directly pay the death benefit, or the portion thereof
to the funeral home necessary to satisfy the member’s funeral expenses.
   (b)   (1)   If the deceased member leaves no surviving spouse or surviving
designated beneficiary, a lump-sum payment of $5,000 shall be made to the
estate of the deceased member upon presentation to the executive director of
one of the following legal instruments:
         a.   Letters testamentary;
         b   Letters of administration;
         c.   Muniment of title;
         d.   Affidavit of small estate; or
         e.   Judgment declaring heirship.
      (2)   The lump-sum payment herein provided shall be made in lieu of any
payments to which the survivor(s) or estate of the deceased member would have
been entitled under the city’s group life insurance plan during the member’s
period of active employment with the city.
   (c)   This lump-sum payment of $5,000 shall not be payable to those members:
      (1)   Who retired before January 1, 1970; or
      (2)   Whose coverage at the time of death was otherwise extended under
the permanent and total disability feature of the city’s group life insurance
plan.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-230 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF DEATH BENEFIT FUND.
   The executive director of the fund shall be charged with the duty of making
the lump-sum payments herein provided for, and such payments shall be made
solely from funds appropriated by the city council for such purpose. The
executive director shall maintain such records as may be necessary in the
administration of the retired employees’ group death benefit fund. The
executive director shall maintain a special accounting of the funds heretofore
and hereby appropriated, and the executive director shall not make any payments
authorized hereunder from funds contributed by the employees or the city under
the provisions of the fund or from earnings on such contributions.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-231 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (a)   The board of trustees of the fund shall act on behalf of the city
council of the City of Fort Worth as trustees of the retired employees’ group
death benefit fund under the same provisions, regulations and procedures for
the investment of funds of the employees’ retirement fund of the City of Fort
Worth.
   (b)   All records and earnings on the assets of the retired employees’ group
death benefit fund shall be maintained separate and apart from assets and
earnings of the fund.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
ARTICLE III: SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT ORDINANCE
§ 2.5-232 GENERAL PROVISION.
   (a)   Establishment of supplemental retirement ordinance. There is hereby
created and established an ordinance designated as the City of Fort Worth
supplemental retirement ordinance which shall provide benefits to members of
the fund whose benefits are limited by the qualified plan limits under the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
   (b)   Appropriations. The city shall annually appropriate such amounts as
may be necessary to provide for the payment of benefits under the supplemental
retirement ordinance. Such appropriations shall continue to be made from
current revenues, and, in the event such current revenues are insufficient, the
city shall compute, ascertain and levy an ad valorem tax sufficient to raise
and produce the money required to appropriate and pay any additional sums which
may become due during any such year. The city shall levy a sufficient tax from
year to year to provide the revenue from which such appropriations may be made.
   (c)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide members with
certain benefits which, because of the qualified plan limits, are not provided
to such members under the fund
   (d)   Governing law. The ordinance shall be construed in accordance with and
governed by the laws of the State of Texas.
   (e)   Amounts provided by the city. Benefits under the ordinance shall
constitute general obligations of the city in accordance with the terms of the
ordinance. No amounts in respect of such benefits are required to be set aside
or held in trust, and no recipient of any benefit hereunder shall have any
right to have the benefit paid out of any particular asset of the city, except
to the extent the city may establish a grantor (“rabbi”) trust, which trust
will not be protected from the city’s creditors. members have the status of
general unsecured creditors of the city and this ordinance constitutes promise
to make benefit payments as described herein.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-233 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, as may be
amended, shall have the respective meanings set forth below, unless their
context clearly indicates to the contrary. The masculine pronouns, wherever
used herein, shall include both male and female persons, and the singular may
include the plural, and vice versa.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. April 1, 1999.
   ORDINANCE. The City of Fort Worth supplemental retirement ordinance, as
amended from time to time.
   PLAN YEAR. The 12-month period beginning on January 1 and ending on December
31.
   QUALIFIED PLAN LIMITS. The limitation on qualified plan benefits under code
§§ 401(a)(17) and 415, as amended.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-234 ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFITS.
   (a)   Employees eligible to participate. Each employee of the city who is a
member of the fund shall be eligible to participate in the ordinance. Each such
employee whose benefits under the fund are reduced due to the qualified plan
limits shall automatically participate in and be eligible to receive benefits
under this ordinance.
   (b)   Benefits.
      (1)   Amount of benefits. If the benefits payable to a member from the
fund are limited by the qualified plan limits, the amount by which such
benefits are so limited shall be paid to such member under this ordinance. For
purposes of this ordinance, death and disability benefits under the retirement
ordinance which are limited by the qualified plan limits shall be provided
hereunder.
      (2)   Payment of benefits. Payment of a member’s benefits calculated
under subsection (b)(1) hereof shall be made to such member, after termination
of employment with the city. Payment shall be made at the same time and in the
same form as the member’s benefits under the employees’ retirement fund. If a
member’s (or his or her beneficiary’s) death or disability benefits under the
fund are reduced by the qualified plan limits, such reduced benefits shall be
paid under this ordinance at the same time, in the same form, and to the same
person(s) who receive the fund benefits.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
§ 2.5-235 ADMINISTRATION AND MISCELLANEOUS.
   (a)   General. The ordinance shall be administered by the board.
   (b)   Powers and duties. The board shall have such powers as may be
necessary to discharge its duties hereunder, including without limitations, the
complete discretion to construe and interpret the ordinance, determine
eligibility to participate, compute any benefits payable, grant or deny any
benefit claims, review any claim denials and to give directions to the trustee
under any grantor trust referred to in §
2.5-232(e) hereof. The board may delegate its duties hereunder as it deems
appropriate, including to any committee it may appoint or to the executive
director.
   (c)   Amendment, termination, etc. The city may, in its absolute discretion,
from time to time, amend, suspend or terminate in whole or in part, and if
terminated reinstate, any or all of the provisions of the ordinance.
   (d)   Nonguarantee of employment. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall
be construed as a contract of employment between the city and any employee, or
as providing a right of any employee to be continued in the employment of the
city, or as a limitation of the right of the city to discharge any of its
employees, with or without cause.
   (e)   Nonalienation of benefits. To the extent permitted by law, benefits
payable under this ordinance shall not be subject in any manner to
anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance,
charge, garnishment, execution or levy of any kind, either voluntary or
involuntary. Any unauthorized attempt to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer,
assign, pledge, encumber, charge or otherwise dispose of any right to benefits
payable hereunder shall be void. No part of the assets of the city shall be
subject to seizure by legal process resulting from any attempt by creditors of
or claimants against any member (or beneficiary), or any person claiming under
or through the foregoing, to attach his or her interest under the ordinance.
   (f)   Liability. No member of the board shall be liable for any act or
action, whether of omission or commission, taken by any other member, or by any
officer, agent or employee of the city or of any such body, nor, except in
circumstances involving his or her bad faith, for anything done or omitted to
be done by himself or herself.
(Ord. 20471-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-23-2012)
CHAPTER 3: AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD
      
III.   LANDING FIELDS
      
IV.   HELICOPTERS
      
V.   REGULATIONS GOVERNING CITY-OWNED LANDING FIELDS
      
VI.   AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS
      
VII.   FORT WORTH ALLIANCE AIRPORT ACCESS
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to establish and maintain airport, see
Ch. II, § 3
Cross-reference:
   Emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5
   Planning and development department, see §§
2-310 et seq.
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Transportation and public works department, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Authority generally, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 22
Section
Article I: In General
   
3-1   Definitions
   
3-2   Penalty for violations of chapter
   
3-3—3-15   Reserved
Article II: Aviation Advisory Board
   
3-16—3-19   Reserved
   
3-20   Aviation advisory board
   
3-21   Same—Limit on number of terms
   
3-22   Reserved
   
3-23   Meetings
   
3-24   Same—Powers; jurisdiction; scope of activities
   
3-25—3-29   Reserved
   
3-30—3-45   Reserved
Article III: Landing Fields
   
3-46   FAA approval required
   
3-47   License—Required; application
   
3-48   Same—Approval procedure
   
3-49   Same—Revocation; hearing
   
3-50   Limitation of approval
   
3-51   Reserved
   
3-52—3-65   Reserved
Article IV: Helicopters
   
3-66   Operation of helicopters, heliports
   
3-67   Injunctive relief
   
3-68—3-80   Reserved
Article V: Regulations Governing Airports
Division 1: Generally
   
3-81   Title
   
3-82   Intent
   
3-83   Scope
   
3-84   Federal Aviation Administration regulations and procedures
   
3-85—3-95   Reserved
Division 2: Regulation of Vehicles
   
3-96   Generally
   
3-97   Traffic-control devices
   
3-98   Parking
   
3-99—3-100   Reserved
   
3-101   Impeding flow of traffic
   
3-102   Vehicle and pedestrian communications in airport movement areas
   
3-103   Maintenance of vehicles
   
3-104   Reserved
   
3-105   Access to airport property
   
3-106   Unauthorized AOA access
   
3-107   Trailers and recreational vehicles
   
3-108   Airport perimeter roads
   
3-109—3-115   Reserved
Division 3: Regulation of Aircraft
   
3-116   Parking; fees
   
3-117   Illegally parked aircraft; remedies
   
3-118   Accidents; damaged property; repairs to aircraft
   
3-119   Lien on impounded aircraft
   
3-120   City free from liability
   
3-121   Aircraft operations generally
   
3-122   Aircraft movement
   
3-123   Aircraft noise
   
3-124   Radar
   
3-125—3-135   Reserved
Division 4: Personal Conduct
   
3-136   Generally
   
3-137   Restricted areas
   
3-138   Animals
   
3-139   Soliciting
   
3-140   Advertisements
   
3-141   Litter
   
3-142   Airspace hazards
   
3-143   Demonstrations
   
3-144   Recreational activities
   
3-145   Commercial videography
   
3-146   Tampering with private or public property
   
3-147   Grills
   
3-148—3-154   Reserved
Division 5: Aircraft Fueling and Fire Safety
   
3-155   Uniform Fire Code adopted
   
3-156   Self-fueling aircraft
   
3-157—3-159   Reserved
Division 6: Enforcement
   
3-160   Intent
   
3-161   Airport security
   
3-162   Enforcement authority; penalties
   
3-163—3-175   Reserved
Article VI: Airport Zoning Regulations
Division 1: Generally
   
3-176—3-190   Reserved
Division 2: Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport
   
3-191   Short title
   
3-192   Definitions
   
3-193   Incorporation of hazard zoning maps
   
3-194   Imaginary surfaces
   
3-195   Height limitations
   
3-196   Use restrictions
   
3-197   Existing nonconformities
   
3-198   Permits required
   
3-199   Notice to FAA
   
3-200   Variances
   
3-201   Hazard marking and lighting
   
3-202   Administrative agencies
   
3-203   Rules of procedure
   
3-204   Board of adjustment
   
3-205   Appeals
   
3-206   Judicial review
   
3-207   Enforcement and remedies
   
3-208   Penalties
   
3-209   Effect of conflict with other ordinances or regulations
   
3-210   Amendments
   
3-211—3-225   Reserved
Division 3: Meacham Field
   
3-226   Title
   
3-227   Definitions
   
3-228   Incorporation of zoning map
   
3-229   Imaginary surfaces
   
3-230   Height limitations
   
3-231   Use restrictions
   
3-232   Permits required
   
3-233   Division not relieve owner, etc., of duty to give notice to FAA
   
3-234   Variances
   
3-235   Hazard marking and lighting
   
3-236   Administrative agencies
   
3-237   Rules of procedure
   
3-238   Board of adjustment
   
3-239   Appeals
   
3-240   Judicial review
   
3-241   Enforcement and remedies
   
3-242   Penalties
   
3-243   Conflicting regulations
   
3-244—3-259   Reserved
Division 4: Fort Worth Alliance Airport Zoning Overlay District
   
3-260   Short title
   
3-261   Definitions
   
3-262   Incorporation of zoning maps
   
3-263   General provisions
   
3-264   Development zone and airport height control area
   
3-265   Compatible land use regulations
   
3-266   Height regulations
   
3-267   Administrative agency
   
3-268   Nonconforming uses and structures
   
3-269   Permits
   
3-270   Board of adjustment
   
3-271   Variances
   
3-272   Judicial review
   
3-273   Enforcement and remedies
   
3-274   Penalties
   
3-275—3-279   Reserved
Article VII: Fort Worth Alliance Airport Access
   
3-280   Short title
   
3-281   Definitions
   
3-282   Access right
   
3-283   Off-airport parcel uses; access area; access taxiways; prohibited uses
   
3-284   Access permit
   
3-285   Access permit fee; landing fee; fuel flowage fee; time for payment;
amount of fee; abatement of fee; use of fees by city
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   AIR OPERATIONS AREA or AOA. Any area of the airport, both public and leased,
used or intended to be used for the landing, takeoff, taxiing or parking of
aircraft, or any other area designated so by the director.
   AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL or ATC. Personnel, equipment and air traffic control
services provided by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other person, firm
or corporation contracted to do so by the City of Fort Worth.
   AIRCRAFT. Any weight-carrying structure for navigation in the air and which
obtains support by the dynamic reaction of the air to any obstruction connected
with the structure. Gliders or ultralights, either powered or unpowered,
helicopters, hot air balloons and airships will be considered aircraft.
   AIRCRAFT EMERGENCY or EMERGENCY. A problem or condition involving an
aircraft either in flight or on the ground, which could endanger lives or
property. An AIRCRAFT EMERGENCY can be declared by the pilot, ATC or other
personnel responsible for the safe operation of the aircraft or airport.
   AIRPORT, AIRPORTS or AIRFIELD. All of the land, improvements, facilities and
development of the Fort Worth Meacham, Alliance and Spinks Airports, or any
other city-owned airport, except for the Dallas-Fort Worth International
Airport.
   AIRPORT CERTIFICATION MANUAL or ACM. The FAA approved manual containing the
minimum operating standards of a specific Airport, as prescribed in FAR part
139, for certification of that Airport.
   AIRPORT CERTIFICATION SPECIFICATIONS or ACS. The FAA approved specifications
containing the minimum operating standards of a specific airport, as prescribed
in FAR part 139, for certification of that airport.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The specific manager or assistant aviation director
responsible for the efficient administration of a specific airport. The airport
manager acts in the absence of the director, or upon specific instruction of
the director.
   AIRPORT OFFICIAL. The director, airport manager, airport operations
superintendent, airport operations supervisor, or any other aviation department
employee designated by the director to be responsible for the safe operation of
the airports and specifically designated with the authority to do so by the
director.
   AIRPORT RESCUE AND FIREFIGHTING or ARFF. The primary airport firefighting
personnel and equipment responding to emergencies on the airports.
   AIRPORT ROADWAY. Those portions of the airports designated and made
available temporarily or permanently by the director for vehicular traffic and
not located on ground leased by others.
   AVIATION DEPARTMENT. The aviation department of the City of Fort Worth,
Texas, the department employing those city employees whose primary task is to
administer, operate and maintain all airports.
   DIRECTOR. The aviation director, the head of the aviation department, being
responsible for the administration, operations and maintenance for all
airports.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FAR. The Federal Aviation Regulations found in C.F.R. Title 14.
   HELICOPTER. Any rotorcraft which depends principally for its support and
motion in the air upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors,
rotating on substantially vertical axes.
   MOVEMENT AREA. The runways, taxiways and other landing areas of the airport
which are utilized for taxiing, hover taxiing, air taxiing and landings and
takeoffs of aircraft, exclusive of ramp areas.
   NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION or NFPA. A global nonprofit
organization devoted to preventing death, injury, property and economic loss
due to fire, electrical and related hazards.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives, pilots, controls or maintains, either
directly or indirectly, an aircraft or vehicle.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company
(including any assignee, receiver, trustee or similar representative thereof),
or the United States of America or any foreign government, state or political
subdivision thereof.
   RAMP or RAMP AREA. Those portions of the airport, both public and leased,
designated for the parking or storage of aircraft.
   RESTRICTED AREA. Any portion of the airport to which no ingress is permitted
except upon specific authorization by the director.
   RUN-UP. Any operation of a stationary aircraft engine above idle power
except to overcome inertia for taxiing.
   SELF-FUELING. The fueling or servicing of an aircraft by the owner of the
aircraft with his or her own employees and using his or her own equipment.
   VEHICLE or MOTOR VEHICLE. Any automobile, golf cart, truck, bus, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle, bicycle, push cart, fuel servicing vehicle, tug or any
other device in or by which a person or property is or may be transported or
drawn on a roadway, other than a device used exclusively on stationary rails or
tracks.
   VEHICULAR PARKING AREA. Those portions of the airport designated and made
available temporarily or permanently by the director, or his designee, for the
parking of vehicles but not including parking areas under lease to others.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-15-2017)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 3-2 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter affecting fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation,
including dumping of refuse, shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense in accordance with §
1-6(c), and shall be fined not more than $500 for all other violations. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-
12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Penalty for certain violations of
Article VII, see §
3-284(e)
§§ 3-3—3-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 3-16—3-19 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Ord. 19416-10-2010, § 6, adopted October 26, 2010, repealed § 3-18, which
pertained to “Same—Powers.” Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February
4, 2020, repealed §§ 3-16, 3-17, and 3-19. Formerly, § 3-16 pertained to
“Department Established; Director”, § 3-17 pertained to “Appointment of
Employees” and § 3-19 pertained to “Same—Responsibilities”. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 3-20 AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD.
   The aviation advisory board shall have such members and purposes as defined
in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 9, passed 8-8-2023)
Cross-reference:
   General provisions dealing with number of members and terms of service of
city boards, see §
2-83
§ 3-21 SAME—LIMIT ON NUMBER OF TERMS.
   No member shall be appointed to serve more than three two-year terms, but
will serve until his or her replacement is appointed.
(1964 Code, § 4-7) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-22 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19416-10-2010, § 6, adopted October 26, 2010, repealed §
3-22, which pertained to removal; filling vacancies. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 3-23 MEETINGS.
   The aviation advisory board shall hold regular scheduled meetings quarterly
throughout the year and such special meetings as the aviation director deems
necessary.
(1964 Code, § 4-9) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 19416-10-2010, § 5,
passed 10-26-2010; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 1, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
§ 3-24 SAME—POWERS; JURISDICTION; SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   The aviation advisory board shall have the authority to review and
recommend to the city manager and city council any and all plans of any
extensions, improvements and additions to the airport system and master plans.
   (b)   The board may also:
      (1)   Recommend the adoption of rules and regulations for the aviation
system;
      (2)   Review and comment on the annual operating budget and capital
improvement requests;
      (3)   Make recommendation concerning the leasing of lands and granting of
concessions or franchises for the privilege of doing business in or on the
properties of the aviation system in cases where such leases, concessions or
franchises might have an impact on the development of the aviation system and
its master plan; and
      (4)   Review and recommend a schedule of rental rates and other fees and
charges for tenants and other lessees of aviation property.
(1964 Code, § 4-10) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 10953, § 9, passed
11-12-1991; Ord. 11214, § 3, passed 12-3-1992; Ord. 19416-10-2010, § 5, passed
10-26-2010)
§ 3-25—3-29 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 2403-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed § 3-25,
which pertained to Department of Aviation, funding. Ord. 19416-10-2010, § 6,
adopted October 26, 2010, repealed §§ 3-26 through 3-29, which pertained to
annual audit; operations governmental; disclaimer of liability; accounting
procedure; and aid from other departments. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§§ 3-30—3-45 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: LANDING FIELDS
§ 3-46 FAA APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall own, control or operate any landing field of any kind within
the city without first securing written authorization from the Federal Aviation
Administration and the city. This provision shall not apply to those airfields
operated prior to June 7, 1983. All flight operations shall be conducted in
accordance with current Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations.
(1964 Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-47 LICENSE—REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring permission to operate a landing field within the city
shall file with the director of aviation a written, sworn application for a
landing field license, which application shall state:
   (a)   The location and size of the area proposed to be used as a landing
field;
   (b)   Whether or not such field has been approved for operation by the
Federal Aviation Administration, and for what purposes;
   (c)   If the applicant is an individual, the length of time he or she has
been a resident of the city, the nature of the business in which he or she has
been engaged for the past five years, and such other information as may be
pertinent to show that he or she is a competent and reliable person to engage
in the business of maintaining a landing field;
   (d)   If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all of the
information prescribed in subsection (c) of this section as to each individual
composing the firm, association or partnership;
   (e)   If the applicant is a corporation, that the applicant is organized and
chartered under the corporation laws; and
   (f)   If the application is for a heliport, applicant shall pay a fee in the
amount of $200 at the time of filing of the application, for services rendered
by the aviation department in processing heliport license applications. No
application will be considered until the fee is paid.
(1964 Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 10534, § 1, passed
2-27-1990)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 3-48 SAME—APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   No approval shall be granted under this article by the director unless it
shall appear, upon investigation of the application, that the premises desired
to be used for the purpose of operating a landing field strictly comply with
all the laws of the state, the United States and the provisions of this code,
and that the applicant has obtained full approval from the Federal Aviation
Administration of such applicant’s proposed landing field. Before recommending
approval of any application, the director shall submit such application to the
director of transportation and public works, the zoning board of adjustment and
the chief of the fire department in order to ascertain if the proposed
facilities would comply with the requirements of their respective departments
or activities. Such officers and agencies shall note their approval or
disapproval upon the request. The application shall then be passed to the
aviation advisory board for their inspection and they shall note their
recommendations on the application. The director shall then bring the
application as soon as feasible before the city council. The city council shall
then, upon hearing, grant or reject the application.
(1964 Code, § 4-19) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 10953, § 9, passed
11-12-1991)
§ 3-49 SAME—REVOCATION; HEARING.
   If a landing field operated under provisions of this article is not being
conducted in accordance with the laws of the United States, the state, the
provisions of this code or other ordinances of the city, or is being conducted
in violation of such laws and regulations, the director may at any time give
notice in writing to the licensee or other person in control of the operation
and maintenance of such landing field, to show cause why the permission issued
for the operation of such landing field should not be revoked and canceled.
Such notice to show cause shall become effective as a cancellation after the
expiration of ten days from the date of service of same upon the operator or
the person in charge of such landing field unless, on or before the expiration
of ten days, the licensee or the person in charge of such landing field files
with the city secretary a written appeal, addressed to the city council, in
which it is requested that the council grant him or her a hearing upon the
question of whether or not the permit or license issued by the city shall be
canceled and revoked. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed in this
section, shall operate as a stay or postponement of such revocation and
cancellation of the permit issued until such time as the council shall grant a
hearing and make a final determination upon the question of whether or not such
permit or license should be canceled. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days
after the date of the filing of such appeal. The action of the council, after
hearing the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all
parties.
(1964 Code, § 4-20) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 10953, § 9, passed
11-12-1991)
§ 3-50 LIMITATION OF APPROVAL.
   The granting of approval under the terms of this article shall in no event
be construed as the granting or conferring of any vested right to the operator,
but shall be subject to revocation or cancellation as provided for in §
3-49.
(1964 Code, § 4-18) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983)
§ 3-51 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 14030, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1999, repealed §
3-51 which pertained to records to be kept; inspection. See the Code
Comparative Table.
§§ 3-52—3-65 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: HELICOPTERS
§ 3-66 OPERATION OF HELICOPTERS, HELIPORTS.
   (a)   No person shall operate any heliport within the City of Fort Worth
without first securing a heliport license from the city. An application for a
heliport license shall contain the same information and shall be subject to the
same approval procedure as is required in
Article III of this chapter.
   (b)   The operation and flight of helicopters within the city shall be in
conformity with all applicable safety rules, regulations, manuals and
directives of the Federal Aviation Administration and the provisions of the
ordinances and the codes of the city, including, but not limited to, those
regulations relating to minimum safe altitudes. In addition, where specific
minimum safe altitudes, traffic patterns and approach routes for a heliport are
prescribed by the city council with the approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration, failure to comply therewith shall constitute a violation of
this article.
(1964 Code, § 4-22) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 9925, § 1, passed 8-
11-1987)
§ 3-67 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be enjoined
by a suit filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this
remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision.
(1964 Code, § 4-23) (Ord. 8840, § 1, passed 6-7-1983)
§§ 3-68—3-80 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: REGULATIONS GOVERNING AIRPORTS
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 3-81 TITLE.
   The rules set out in this article are adopted for the regulation of any
airport. These rules may be cited as "Fort Worth Airport Rules and
Regulations."
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-82 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city by and through the rules and regulations in
this article to establish and promulgate the standards deemed necessary to the
maintenance and promotion of the peace, health, good government and welfare of
city-owned airports; to provide for the best performance of the functions
thereof; to promote the security of persons using the airports and their
facilities; and to provide suitable penalties for the violation thereof.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-83 SCOPE.
   The rules and regulations in this article shall constitute a special
enactment effective only within the boundaries of the airport as depicted on
the Airport Layout Plan approved by the FAA and not otherwise.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-84 FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.
   (a)   All flight and ground aircraft operations and vehicle operations at an
airport shall be conducted in accordance with FAA rules and regulations and FAA
approved policies and procedures for aircraft and airports, and now in effect
or hereafter promulgated, which rules, regulations and procedures are
incorporated into this code by reference.
   (b)   Any ACM or ACS now in effect or hereafter adopted by the FAA for an
airport, upon adoption, is incorporated into this code by reference.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-85—3-95 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: REGULATION OF VEHICLES
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see
Ch. 22
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
§ 3-96 GENERALLY.
   All of the provisions of Title 7 of the Texas Transportation Code, entitled
"Vehicles and Traffic" are hereby declared to be in effect on the airport
roadways, as defined, except insofar as this article prescribes different
provisions.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-97 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to disobey any traffic-control device, sign,
signal, marking or insignia erected, installed or placed by authority of the
Director of Transportation and Public Works of the city. This shall apply, when
applicable, to both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Insofar as possible, all
such devices, signs, signals, markings or insignia shall conform to the manual
and specifications adopted by the Texas Transportation Commission, as set forth
in Chapter 544 of the Texas Transportation Code.
   (b)   Except for speed limit signs, all traffic-control devices, signs,
signals, markings and insignia as presently located, erected or installed on
the premises of the airport are hereby adopted, affirmed and ratified.
Hereafter, to effect any change the Director of Transportation and Public Works
or his or her designated representative shall conduct studies and
investigations relating to all such traffic-control devices, signs, signals,
markings and insignia, and in accordance with such studies and determinations
shall make such changes as are deemed necessary in the interest of traffic
safety. Records of such changes, when effected, shall be maintained in the
director's office; provided, however, the delegation of authority granted in
this section shall not extend to establishing or changing speed limits, whether
maximum or minimum, but same shall be established by the city council according
to the requirements of state law as delegated to cities by legislative
enactment.
   (c)   The speed limits upon airport roadways are set at 20 mph. Vehicular
speeds on aircraft ramps are set at ten mph, which limits, when appropriate
signs giving notice thereof are erected, shall be effective at any such
intersection or other place or part of the airport roadway system at all times
during hours of daylight or darkness, or at such other times as may be
determined.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-98 PARKING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to park or remain standing upon
aircraft apron areas in such a manner that impedes aircraft access into and out
of hangars and taxilanes.
   (b)   Any vehicle which is disabled or which is parked in violation of this
section or which represents an operational hazard at the airport may be removed
or towed and impounded, all at the operator's or owner's expense and without
liability for any damage to the vehicle which may ensue from such removal or
towing. Such expense shall be a lien against the vehicle and payment in full
therefor shall be a prerequisite to the reclaiming of the vehicle by the
operator or owner.
   (c)   The method of disposition of abandoned or junked motor vehicles or
other vehicles shall be as set forth in Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation
Code (Abandoned Motor Vehicles) and §§ 22-301 et seq.
   (d)   Unless prior arrangements have been made with the Airport Manager,
motor vehicles properly parked but which remain at the airports in excess of 30
days may be removed and disposed of by the Airport Manager as provided in
Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code and §§ 22-301 et seq. There shall
be installed at each entrance to public parking lots on the airports a suitable
permanent and legible sign discernible from a distance of 40 feet, which shall
read substantially as follows:
"NOTICE: IF VEHICLE IS TO BE PARKED
IN EXCESS OF THIRTY (30) DAYS,
CALL 817-392-5400"
   (e)   For vehicles rendered inoperable due to collision or other causes:
      (1)   The owner or person in charge thereof shall have an opportunity to
contact a wrecker or tow service and have the vehicle removed from the airport;
      (2)   If a motor vehicle rendered inoperable is not removed by the owner
or person in charge within 48 hours, it shall be impounded and disposed of at
the direction of the Airport Manager and in accordance with Chapter 683 of the
Texas Transportation Code and §§ 22-301 et seq; and
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the immediate
removal of a damaged or inoperable motor vehicle from a traveled road or right-
of-way onto a shoulder or other safe place in order to maintain traffic flow
and safety.
   (f)   For motor vehicles without an operator due to arrest or detention of
the owner or person in charge thereof:
      (1)   Where a motor vehicle is without an operator due to the arrest or
detention of the owner or person in charge thereof, the vehicle shall be taken
to a city vehicle impoundment area;
      (2)   If the arrested or detained person is confined but makes provision
for another person to remove the vehicle within 24 hours, no charges or fees
shall accrue against the vehicle unless it has been towed to a city vehicle
impoundment area, in which case it shall be subject to the prevailing customary
charges for towing, impoundment and storage;
      (3)   The procedures relating to notification and auction set forth in
Chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code and §§ 22-301 et seq shall apply;
and
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the release of a motor
vehicle which itself is to be used as evidence in a criminal proceeding or
prosecution, which contains or contained any item of evidence to be introduced
in a criminal proceeding or prosecution, or which is subject to forfeiture by
federal, state or local law enforcement officials.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§§ 3-99—3-100 RESERVED.
§ 3-101 IMPEDING FLOW OF TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle in any airport roadway,
driveway, ramp, taxiway, gate, parking area, passenger loading zone, loading
zone or in front or near any entrance or exit to any building at the airport so
as to block, obstruct or impede the free passage of any vehicles, pedestrians
or aircraft.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-102 VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN COMMUNICATIONS IN AIRPORT MOVEMENT AREAS.
   (a)   Taxiing aircraft shall have the right-of-way in preference over
pedestrians and all other motor vehicles at all airports.
   (b)   At any airport with a control tower in operation, it shall be unlawful
for any person to walk or drive a vehicle on or across any portion of a
movement area unless:
      (1)   That person has received proper authorization from the control
tower to walk or drive on or across any portion of the movement area and is in
and maintains constant radio contact with the control tower while walking or
driving on or across any portion of the movement area; or
      (2)   For an operator of an aircraft or other motor vehicle, that person
has received a light signal or similar clear permission from the control tower
prior to operating such aircraft or other motor vehicle on any portion of the
movement area.
   (c)   At any airport that does not have a control tower in operation, it
shall be unlawful for any person to walk or drive a vehicle on or across any
portion of the movement area unless that person has received proper
authorization from the director or authorized designee to walk or drive on or
across any portion of the movement area and:
      (1)   Is in and maintains constant contact with the authorized UNICOM
operator by way of two-way radio; or
      (2)   Is under escort by an individual who is in and maintains constant
contact with the authorized UNICOM operator by way of two-way radio.
   (d)   A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor criminal
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 23517-12-2018, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 3-103 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle maintenance, for either aeronautical or nonaeronautical use,
shall be performed in any public area, without prior consent of the director.
(Ord. 23517-12-2018, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 3-104 RESERVED.
§ 3-105 ACCESS TO AIRPORT PROPERTY.
   Notwithstanding anything in this division, the director or his or her
designee may restrict the access of any vehicle or person to any part of the
airport, both public and leased, to ensure the safety or security of the
airport.
(Ord. 23517-12-2018, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 3-106 UNAUTHORIZED AOA ACCESS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to access the AOA of an airport without expressed
approval from the airport or be under escort by an authorized entity. Gate
codes and access cards are specific to individuals and are non-transferable.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to follow a vehicle through a gate or "piggyback"
to gain entry to the AOA without the use of a gate code or access card or to
allow "piggybacking" to occur. A violation of this section shall result in a
fine of up to $500. Addition ally, at the discretion of the director, a
violation of this section may result in the revocation of AOA access
privileges.
(Ord. 23517-12-2018, passed 12-11-2018)
§ 3-107 TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Trailers, water craft and recreational vehicles are permitted on airport
property only if they can be stored within a facility and not impede the
ingress and egress of aircraft to that facility. The primary use of a hangar
must remain aeronautical. The director, in his discretion, shall have authority
to allow trailers used for an aeronautical purpose outside of building
facilities on a temporary basis.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-108 AIRPORT PERIMETER ROADS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized vehicle to access any airport
perimeter roads. All vehicles accessing an airport perimeter road are required
to be marked and lighted.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§§ 3-109—3-115 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: REGULATION OF AIRCRAFT
§ 3-116 PARKING; FEES.
   (a)   Parked aircraft. Aircraft shall be parked only in assigned, currently
leased or otherwise properly designated and authorized areas. Parked and
unattended aircraft shall be chocked or tied down if remaining overnight. No
aircraft shall be parked in restricted areas without the permission of an
Airport Official.
   (b)   Schedule of fees; failure to pay; violation. The director shall
establish and maintain a schedule of fees to be charged for the parking of
aircraft on the public-use transient apron and on other designated public
parking areas. It shall be unlawful to park an aircraft on any such public
parking area between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the
required overnight parking fees have been paid. Failure to pay the required
parking fee may subject the owner or operator of the aircraft to criminal
sanctions or may result in the impoundment of the aircraft as hereinafter
provided. There will be no fee for the parking of military aircraft. If any
aircraft is found parked in violation of this section, and the identity of the
operator cannot be determined, the owner, or person in whose name such aircraft
is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-117 ILLEGALLY PARKED AIRCRAFT; REMEDIES.
   Aircraft which are parked, stored or abandoned contrary to the provisions of
§
3-116, may be impounded. Redemption of aircraft which have been impounded will
necessitate the owner or operator paying all fees accrued against such aircraft
to include towing and storage fees incident to impoundment. The city may remove
such aircraft from an illegal parking place by engaging private towing services
or a fixed base operator. Any charges resulting from such activities shall be
charged against the registered owner of the aircraft.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-118 ACCIDENTS; DAMAGED PROPERTY; REPAIRS TO AIRCRAFT.
   (a)   All accidents, incidents or damage of any nature involving aircraft or
vehicles shall be reported to the director as soon as possible after the
occurrence of same.
   (b)   Any damage to airport installations, equipment or property as a direct
or indirect consequences of flight operations shall be, prima facie, the
responsibility of the owner of the aircraft causally related to such damage.
Repair of such damage shall be ordered and accomplished by the Airport Manager
by sending an invoice covering the cost thereof, payable upon receipt, to the
registered owner.
   (c)   The owner of a damaged or disabled aircraft shall promptly remove it
from any portion of the movement area, unless otherwise directed by the FAA,
NTSB or an airport official. Failure of the owner or operator to so remove an
aircraft may result in removal by the aviation department, and all expenses of
this removal will be the responsibility of the owner.
   (d)   Damaged or disabled aircraft parked or stored in an authorized,
assigned, leased or otherwise properly designated area in excess of 30 days
without undertaking repair or restoration thereof to operable condition will,
in the absence of special arrangements with and permission of the Airport
Manager, be deemed abandoned aircraft and subject to impoundment as illegally
parked aircraft under §
3-117.
   (e)   Repairs to aircraft damaged while in motion or parked on the airport
are the sole responsibility of the owner.
   (f)   No repairs to or maintenance of aircraft shall be performed on any
public area of an airport, unless authorized by the director.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-119 LIEN ON IMPOUNDED AIRCRAFT.
   (a)   The city shall have a lien on impounded aircraft for the storage and
care thereof. Notification to the owner of impounded aircraft shall be
conclusively presumed given if, after accrual of 60 days of unpaid storage
charges or fees, the registered owner of such aircraft is advised by registered
or certified letter, return receipt requested, of the fact of impoundment,
delinquency in payment of charges, the city's lien for the payment of same and
the contemplated public sale of such aircraft following the expiration of 30
days from the mailing of such notice unless payment or suitable arrangements
for payment have been made.
   (b)   The owner of any aircraft which is parked, stored or abandoned
contrary to the provisions of §
3-116 shall be presumed to have consented to the creation of a lien under this
section.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-120 CITY FREE FROM LIABILITY.
   No liability shall accrue to the city, its officers, agents or employees for
the towing, removal, impoundment, storage or disposition of aircraft or their
contents under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-121 AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   Licenses, registrations, etc., available. All aircraft and ground
operations shall be conducted in accordance with current Federal Aviation
Administration rules and regulations. All persons operating an aircraft shall
have all licenses, registrations, certificates and other required documentation
available on their person, or in the aircraft, in accordance with same.
   (b)   Authority to prohibit operations. Except for emergency landings, the
director or his designee may prohibit aircraft landings and takeoffs at any
time and under any circumstances which he or she deems likely to endanger
persons or property.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-122 AIRCRAFT MOVEMENT.
   (a)   Takeoffs and landings. No aircraft shall land at or take off from the
airport without permission from ATC, during hours that ATC services are
provided. During hours that ATC services are not provided, landings and
takeoffs will be at pilots' discretion and in accordance with all Federal
Aviation Regulations for operating aircraft on an uncontrolled airport.
   (b)   Taxiing. No person shall taxi an aircraft on any portion of the
movement area without permission of ATC, during hours that ATC services are
provided. During hours that ATC services are not provided, taxiing will be at
pilots' discretion and in accordance with all Federal Aviation Regulations for
operating aircraft on an uncontrolled airport. No aircraft shall be taxied into
or out of a hangar under its own power.
   (c)   Aircraft lights. Every person operating a towing vehicle at night
shall operate the equipment with the lights on and ensure that any towed
aircraft is either lighted (i.e., all aircraft position lights are on) or
clearly illuminated (i.e., external lights are shining onto the aircraft to
make it clearly illuminated). Additional means of compliance may be granted
with approval from the Aviation Director, if all applicable FAA rules,
regulations, policies, and procedures are followed.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 27910-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-
26-2025, eff. 10-17-2025)
§ 3-123 AIRCRAFT NOISE.
   (a)   Noise abatement. All persons operating an aircraft will at all times
adhere to any and all noise abatement procedures in effect at the airports,
except in the case of an emergency.
   (b)   Engine run-ups.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an aircraft engine
run-up at any airport except at the times set forth in the following schedule:
 
Sundays    8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Mondays    6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Tuesdays   6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Wednesdays 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Thursdays  6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Fridays    6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Saturdays  6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
 
      (2)   Aircraft engine run-ups at any airport shall be conducted only at
locations at the airport designated by the director for that purpose. A person
conducting an engine run-up shall ensure that other persons, hangars, shops,
other buildings and parked vehicles are not in or likely to be in the path of a
propeller or jet blast.
      (3)   A violation of this subsection (b) shall constitute a misdemeanor
criminal offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-124 RADAR.
   Surveillance radar equipment in aircraft shall not be operated within 300
feet of any fuel servicing or other operation in which flammable liquids or
vapors may be present or created.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§§ 3-125—3-135 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: PERSONAL CONDUCT
§ 3-136 GENERALLY.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed as limitations upon
the civil or criminal laws of this state which are in full force and effect
within the airports.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-137 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (a)   The director shall have authority to designate restricted areas at the
airport.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful, without specific authorization from the
director, to enter or travel, in a vehicle or on foot, upon any area designated
as a restricted area.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is upon any restricted area of
the airport to fail or refuse to produce proper identification (driver's
license, Social Security card or some similar authoritative indicia of
identity) upon the request of an Airport Official, city employee, or a peace
officer of the city or the county or other state or federal law enforcement
officer.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-138 ANIMALS.
   At all times while within the AOA, all animals must be kept either:
   (a)   On a leash and under the direct physical control of the owner or
handler at all times; or
   (b)   Properly restrained or confined for shipment.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-139 SOLICITING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to solicit funds or anything of value for any
purpose at the airport without a permit or other specific written authority
from the city.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any article or
merchandise on the airport without a permit or concession from the city. This
is not intended to prohibit business enterprises leasing premises on the
airports from inviting salesmen, mobile lunch trucks and similar activities to
their leased premises, for the convenience of customers and employees of such
business enterprises only.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to solicit any business or trade, including
transportation of persons or baggage for hire, on the airports without a
necessary permit or concession from the city as provided elsewhere in this
code.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-140 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to post, distribute or display signs, advertisements,
handbills, circulars or printed or written matter of a commercial nature at the
airports without specific authorization from the director, or his designee.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-141 LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful to place, discharge or deposit in any manner any
litter, offal, garbage, trash, debris, junk or any refuse on the airport,
except at such places and under such conditions as the director may from time
to time prescribe.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-142 AIRSPACE HAZARDS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate or release any kite, balloon, model rocket
or parachute upon or above the airport without written permission from the
director.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-143 DEMONSTRATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for organizations, groups of individuals or
individuals to conduct or participate in parades, marches, patrols or
demonstrations on the airport unless a permit has been granted by the aviation
department.
   (b)    It shall be unlawful, while engaging in any such activity otherwise
permitted as described above, to prevent or interfere with access to or egress
from any airport facility or premises or to hamper or curtail the conduct of
business at the airport and no person while so engaged shall in any manner, by
words or physical force, assail, coerce, threaten or intimidate any member of
the public.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-144 RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to use airport premises for the purpose of camping,
athletic games, contests, hunting or picnicking unless permission for such
activity is granted in writing by the director and is in compliance with all
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-145 COMMERCIAL VIDEOGRAPHY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to utilize moving picture equipment for the
purpose of commercial videography unless such person has obtained written
permission to access the property from the director or applicable tenant.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to conduct polls, opinion surveys, name listings
or to solicit any other commercial data or information on airport premises
without a permit from the airport director.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-146 TAMPERING WITH PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to tamper with or obstruct the operation of private or
public property at an airport in any manner which may result in damage to
persons or property.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-147 GRILLS.
   It shall be unlawful to use a cooking grill within 50 feet of any fuel truck
or fueling facility or within ten feet of a building or structure.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§§ 3-148—3-154 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: AIRCRAFT FUELING AND FIRE SAFETY
§ 3-155 UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The provisions of the most recently city council-adopted International Fire
Code, and NFPA section 407 "Aviation Facilities," is hereby adopted as a part
of this code, by reference. The International Fire Code and the NFPA Section
407 is on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-156 SELF-FUELING AIRCRAFT.
   Any aircraft engaging in self-fueling shall be required to fully comply with
applicable regulatory measures, and have an approved permit from the aviation
department.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-157—3-159 RESERVED.
DIVISION 6: ENFORCEMENT
§ 3-160 INTENT.
   This division is designed to establish and define enforcement authority
necessary to ensure the maintenance and promotion of the peace, good government
and welfare of the city's aviation assets; for the performance of the functions
thereof; for the order and security of its inhabitants, users and visitors; and
to protect the peace, lives, health and property of such inhabitants, users and
visitors.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-161 AIRPORT SECURITY.
   (a)   General. The primary responsibility for the design, establishment,
promulgation and coordination of any special police, fire and health
instructions and procedures effective at and upon city airfields shall rest
with the director, advised and assisted by the aviation advisory board, the
chief of police, the fire marshal, the director of the department of
transportation and public works and such other departments and agencies of the
city, as special problems and circumstances may from time to time require.
   (b)   Power of the director and assistants to require identification. The
director and other regularly appointed employees of the aviation department
specifically designated by the director shall have the right and power to
request identification and require any person to give his or her true name and
residence address to such director or designated employee when acting in an
official capacity in matters connected with the aviation department, including
the enforcement of this article (Fort Worth Airport Rules and Regulations). It
shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally refuse to report or give a
false report of his or her name or residence address to the director or
designated employee who has requested the information when acting in an
official capacity in a matter connected with the aviation department including
the enforcement of this article.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-162 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY; PENALTIES.
   Any peace officer of the city, the director and other regularly appointed
employees of the aviation department specifically designated by the director
shall have the right and power to enforce any and all regulations contained in
this chapter. Such persons shall have the power to issue citations for any
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 22838-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017)
§ 3-163—3-175 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS
Cross-reference:
   Subdivision regulations, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 3-176—3-190 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: DALLAS-FORT WORTH INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Statutory reference:
   Airport zoning regulations, see Tex. Local Government Code Ch. 241
§ 3-191 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Airport Zoning
Ordinance of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport.”
(Ord. 6687, § 1, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-192 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES. Those agencies which have the responsibility for
the administration and enforcement of this division.
   AIRPORT. The Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, located in Dallas and
Tarrant Counties, Texas.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on the
usable landing area, such elevation being 606 feet above mean sea level.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, installation, electronic and/or visual
interference, or use of land or water which obstructs the airspace required for
the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water under the imaginary surfaces
as established in §
3-194 upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as
provided in this division.
   AIRPORT ZONE. The space between the earth’s surface and the imaginary
surfaces as established in §
3-194.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A board consisting of five members appointed by the
joint airport zoning board as provided by state law, specifically Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 22.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this division and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be measured
in mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   INSTALLATION. Any electronic or visual interference that is not included
within the definition of structure or tree.
   JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD. A board having as members two representatives
appointed by each political subdivision participating in its creation and in
addition a chairperson elected by a majority of the members so appointed.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in
existence at the time the regulation is prescribed in the ordinance or an
amendment thereto becomes effective and does not then meet the requirement of
such regulation.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any municipality, city, town, village or county.
   RUNWAY. The paved surface of an airport designated for the landing and
taking off of aircraft.
   STRUCTURE. An object permanent, or temporarily constructed or installed by
humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and
overhead transmission lines.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   ZONING MAP. “The Hazard Zoning Maps Of The Joint Airport Zoning Board For
The Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport.”
(Ord. 6687, § 2, passed 6-19-1972)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 3-193 INCORPORATION OF HAZARD ZONING MAPS.
   The hazard zoning maps for the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport,
prepared by the engineering and architectural firm of Tippetts-Abbott-McCarthy-
Stratton, consisting of 20 pages and dated December, 1970, is hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this division for all purposes.
(Ord. 6687, § 3, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-194 IMAGINARY SURFACES.
   (a)   The following imaginary surfaces are established to implement the
provisions of this division.
   (b)   The dimensions, elevations above mean sea level, slopes and radii
applicable to the imaginary surfaces shall be as shown on the zoning map.
      (1)   Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway, and
extending beyond the ends of the runway. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
      (2)   Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane surface 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs.
      (3)   Conical surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the
entire perimeter of the horizontal surface, at a specified slope and for a
specified distance.
      (4)   Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface for a specified distance at a specified slope, and expands its
horizontal dimension uniformly to a specified width.
      (5)   Transitional surfaces. A surface extending outward and upward at
right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
specified slope from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the
approach surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the conical
surfaces extend a specified distance measured horizontally from the edge of the
approach surface and at right angles to the runway centerline.
(Ord. 6687, § 4, passed 6-10-1972)
§ 3-195 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise may be provided in this division, no structure, tree or
installation shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained within
the airport hazard zoning area which will be above the imaginary surfaces as
established by and shown on the zoning map.
(Ord. 6687, § 5, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-196 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, no use may be made of
land or water nor installation placed on land or water within the airport
hazard area that will create interference with radio communication between the
airport and aircraft; or that will create interference with any air navigation
facility, airport visual approach or landing aid, aircraft arresting device or
meteorological device; or that will result in glare in the eyes of flyers using
the airport but this prohibition shall not include momentary glare or glare
from vertical or downward reflecting windows or glass panels used in the
construction of structures; or that will impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport, attract birds or that will otherwise endanger the landing, taking
off or maneuvering of aircraft operating through the facilities of the airport.
No other airport or landing field shall be constructed within the airport
hazard area.
(Ord. 6687, § 6, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-197 EXISTING NONCONFORMITIES.
   Structures, trees or installations existing prior to the effective date of
these regulations which do not conform to the requirements of this division
shall be considered as legal nonconforming uses. This division shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, change or alteration of any legal
nonconforming use structure, tree or installation. A permit shall be required
for a legal nonconforming use and shall be issued on application of the owner
or agent accompanied by affidavit that the use, structure, tree or installation
was in existence on the effective date of these regulations. Application for
permits for nonconforming users shall be made within 180 days from the
effective date of these regulations.
(Ord. 6687, § 7, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-198 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Before any new structure or use which could be defined as an airport hazard
under this division may be constructed or established and before any such
existing use or structure may be increased in height or otherwise altered, a
permit to do so must be secured by the owner involved or his or her agent. All
permit applications shall be made to the administrative agency having
jurisdiction, or their designated representatives under §
3-202. If any administrative agency issues a permit erroneously allowing the
beginning of erection of any structure or tree, such permit shall not
constitute a variance or be construed in any manner to allow any person to
penetrate the imaginary surfaces established. It will remain incumbent on the
sponsor, builder, property owner or their agents, as the case may be, to
prevent the creation of any object that will cause an airport hazard within the
meaning of this division. When such permits are requested for construction and/
or alteration within the city limits of a municipality the administrative
agency having jurisdiction shall be the municipality itself and the county
administrative agency shall have no jurisdiction within the city limits of
municipalities.
(Ord. 6687, § 8, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-199 NOTICE TO FAA.
   Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any owner, sponsor
or agent from the requirement for filing a notice of proposed construction or
alteration with the appropriate Federal Aviation Administration authority.
(Ord. 6687, § 9, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-200 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her
property in violation of this division may apply to the board of adjustment for
a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances shall be
allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted
would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be
in accordance with the spirit of this division; provided that any variances
allowed shall be subject to any reasonable conditions that the board of
adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division.
(Ord. 6687, § 10, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-201 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   Any permit granted under this division may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purposes of this division and reasonable in the
circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure, tree
or installation in question to permit the proper authority to install, operate
and maintain thereon such markers and lights as the board may find necessary to
indicate the presence of the airport hazard.
(Ord. 6687, § 11, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-202 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES.
   (a)   The administration and enforcement of all regulations adopted by the
joint airport zoning board is vested in the governing bodies of each of the
political subdivisions represented on the board, and who have adopted the
regulations each respectively by ordinance.
   (b)   Each political subdivision shall:
      (1)   Establish its own administrative and enforcement agency;
      (2)   Designate another political subdivision to administer and enforce
this division in its behalf; or
      (3)   Request the joint airport zoning board to designate an agency to
act in this capacity in its behalf.
(Ord. 6687, § 12, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-203 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The joint airport zoning board shall adopt rules of procedure to govern its
actions and to inform permit applicants and administrative agencies and
officials of the procedures required in connection with issuance of permits.
(Ord. 6687, § 13, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-204 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made in the enforcement of this division;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division
upon which such board of adjustment may be required to pass by subsequent
regulations; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (b)   The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be
appointed for a term of two years and removable for cause upon written charges
and after public hearing. All vacancies shall be filled by appointment of new
members by the joint airport zoning board. The chairperson of the board of
adjustment will be elected by the members and from the members of the board of
adjustment.
   (c)   The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and
procedure in harmony with the provisions of this division. Meetings of the
board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such
times as the board of adjustment shall determine. The chairperson, or in his or
her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be
public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the
board of adjustment, and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 6687, § 14, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-205 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of an
administrative agency made in its administration of airport zoning regulations
adopted under this division, or any governing body of a political subdivision,
or any joint airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a decision of
such an administrative agency is an improper application of airport zoning
regulations of concern to such governing body or board, may appeal to the board
of adjustment authorized to hear and decide appeals from the decisions of such
administrative agency.
   (b)   All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a reasonable
time, as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the
administrative agency and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative agency shall forthwith
transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
   (c)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative agency certified to the board of
adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause
imminent perils to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the
administrative agency and on due cause shown.
   (d)   The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appeal in
person or by agent or by attorney.
   (e)   The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
division, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the administrative agency.
   (f)   The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law, giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusion from such facts in reversing or affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this division.
   (g)   The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the administrative agency or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this division or to effect any
variation in this division.
(Ord. 6687, § 15, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-206 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of
adjustment, or any governing body of a political subdivision or the joint
airport zoning board or administrative agency which is of the opinion that a
decision of the board of adjustment is illegal may, within ten days after the
decision is filed in the office of the board, present a verified petition to a
court of competent jurisdiction for relief in a manner as provided in Tex.
Revised Civil Statutes Article 46e-11(1).
(Ord. 6687, § 16, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-207 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   In addition, the political subdivision or agency adopting the zoning
regulations in this division may institute in any court of competent
jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of
such regulations or enforcement, and may be granted such relief by way of
injunction as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case.
(Ord. 6687, § 17, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-208 PENALTIES.
   Each violation of this division or of any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated under this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and be
punishable as provided in §
1-6. Jurisdiction for any offense providing a criminal penalty under this
division shall lie in the municipal court in the municipality in which the
violation occurs; however, if the offense in an area not incorporated within a
municipality, jurisdiction shall lie in the justice of the peace court of the
precinct in which the offense occurs.
(Ord. 6687, § 18, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-209 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS.
   Where this division imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the
use of land, height of a structure or tree, or the establishing or maintaining
of any other airport hazard as defined in this division, than is imposed by
other ordinances or regulations applicable to the same area or location, the
provisions of this division shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 6687, § 19, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-210 AMENDMENTS.
   This division may be amended or changed by the joint airport zoning board
for the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport except as otherwise provided by
the Airport Zoning Act, Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 46e, after a public
hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days’ notice of the hearing shall
be published in an official paper, or a paper of general circulation, in the
political subdivision in which is located the airport hazard area.
(Ord. 6687, § 21, passed 6-19-1972)
§ 3-211—3-225 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: MEACHAM FIELD
§ 3-226 TITLE.
   This division shall be known and may be cited as the “Airport Zoning
Ordinance of the Meacham Field Airport.”
(Ord. 101, § I, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-227 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES. Those agencies which have the responsibility for
the administration and enforcement of this division.
   AIRPORT. The Meacham Field Municipal Airport, located in Tarrant County,
Texas.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on the
usable landing area, such elevation being 710 feet above mean sea level.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, installation, electronic and/or visual
interference, or use of land or water which obstructs the airspace required for
the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided in this division.
   AIRPORT ZONE. The space between the earth’s surface and the imaginary
surfaces as established in §
3-229.
   AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION. The commission appointed by the joint airport
zoning board to make a preliminary report, hold public hearings thereon and
make a final report and recommendation to the board.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A board consisting of five members appointed by the
joint airport zoning board as provided by Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 22.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this division and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be measured
in feet above mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   INSTALLATION. Any electronic or visual interference that is not included
within the definition of structure or tree.
   JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD. A board having as members two representatives
appointed by each political subdivision participating in its creation and in
addition a chairperson elected by a majority of the members so appointed.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in
existence at the time the regulation prescribed in this division or any
amendment thereto becomes effective and which does not meet the requirements of
such regulation.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any municipality, city, town, village or county.
   RUNWAY. The surface of an airport designated for the landing and taking off
of aircraft.
   STRUCTURE. An object permanently or temporarily constructed or installed by
humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and
overhead transmission lines.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   ZONING MAP. “The Zoning Map for Meacham Field Municipal Airport, City of
Fort Worth, Texas.”
(Ord. 101, § II, passed 7-22-1974)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 3-228 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAP.
   The zoning map for the airport, Carter and Burgess, Inc., Engineers-
Planners, dated June, 1970, revised April, 1972, same being marked as Exhibit
“A,” is hereby incorporated in this division and attached to this division for
all purposes incident to the administration concerning and enforcement of this
division.
(Ord. 101, § III, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-229 IMAGINARY SURFACES.
   (a)   The following imaginary surfaces are established to implement the
provisions of this division.
   (b)   The dimensions, elevations above mean sea level, slopes and radii
applicable to the imaginary surfaces shall be as shown on the zoning map.
      (1)   Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway, and
extending beyond the ends of the runway. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
      (2)   Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane surface 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs.
      (3)   Conical surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the
entire perimeter of the horizontal surface at a specified slope and for a
specified distance.
      (4)   Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface for a specified distance at a specified slope, and expands its
horizontal dimension uniformly to a specified width.
      (5)   Transitional surface. A surface extending outward and upward at
right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
specified slope from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the
approach surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the conical
surfaces extend a specified distance measured horizontally from the edge of the
approach surface and at right angles to the runway centerline.
(Ord. 101, § IV, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-230 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise may be provided in this division, no structure, tree or
installation shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained within
the airport hazard area which will be above the imaginary surfaces as
established by and shown on the zoning map.
(Ord. 101, § V, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-231 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, no use may be made of
land or water nor installation placed on land or water within the airport
hazard area that will create interference with radio communication between the
airport and aircraft; or that will create interference with any air navigation
facility, airport visual approach or landing aid, aircraft arresting device or
meteorological device; or that will result in glare in the eyes of flyers using
the airport; or that will impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
attract birds or that will otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft operating through the facilities of the airport. No
other airport or landing field shall be constructed within the airport hazard
area; nor shall any area of land or water within the airport hazard area be
used for landing and taking off of aircraft, except under specific Federal
Aviation Administration approval unless the same has been issued a valid
nonconforming use permit. Structures, trees, installations or land uses
lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this division which do not
conform to the requirements of this division shall be considered as legal
nonconforming uses. This division shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering, change or alteration of any legal nonconforming use,
structure, tree or installation. A permit shall be required for a legal
nonconforming use and shall be issued on application of the owner or agent
accompanied by affidavit that the use, structure, tree or installation was in
existence on the effective date of this division. Applications for permits for
nonconforming uses shall be made within 180 days from the effective date of
this division.
(Ord. 101, § VI, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-232 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Before any new structure or use which could be defined as an airport hazard
under this division may be constructed or established and before any such
existing use or structure may be increased in height or otherwise altered, a
permit to do so must be secured by the owner involved or his or her agent. All
permit applications shall be made to the administrative agency having
jurisdiction, or their designated representatives under §
3-236. If any administrative agency issues a permit erroneously allowing the
beginning of erection of any structure or tree, such permit shall not
constitute a variance or be construed in any manner to allow any person to
penetrate the imaginary surfaces established. It will remain incumbent on the
sponsor, builder, property owner or their agents, as the case may be, to
prevent the creation of any object or use that will cause an airport hazard
within the meaning of this division.
(Ord. 101, § VIII, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-233 DIVISION NOT RELIEVE OWNER, ETC., OF DUTY TO GIVE NOTICE TO FAA.
   Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any owner, sponsor,
agent or user from the requirement for filing a notice of proposed
construction, alteration or use with the appropriate Federal Aviation
Administration authority.
(Ord. 101, § IX, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-234 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her
property in violation of this division may apply to the board of adjustment for
a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances may be
allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted
would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be
in accordance with the spirit of this division; provided that any variances
allowed shall be subject to any reasonable conditions that the board of
adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division.
(Ord. 101, § X, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-235 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   Any permit granted under this division may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purposes of this division and reasonable in the
circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure, tree
or installation in question to permit the proper authority to install, operate
and maintain thereon such markers and lights as the board may find necessary to
indicate the presence of the airport hazard.
(Ord. 101, § XI, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-236 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES.
   (a)   The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division
and all regulations adopted by the joint airport zoning board are vested in the
governing bodies of each of the political subdivisions represented on the board
which have respectively adopted by ordinance such provisions and regulations.
   (b)   Each such political subdivision shall:
      (1)   Establish its own administrative and enforcement agency;
      (2)   Designate another political subdivision to administer and enforce
these regulations in its behalf; or
      (3)   Request the joint airport zoning board to designate an agency to
act in this capacity in its behalf.
(Ord. 101, § XII, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-237 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The joint airport zoning board shall adopt rules and procedure to govern its
actions and to inform permit applicants and administrative agencies and
officials of the procedures required in connection with issuance of permits.
(Ord. 101, § XIII, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-238 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made in the enforcement of this division;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division
upon which such board of adjustment may be required to pass by subsequent
regulations; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (b)   The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be
appointed by the joint airport zoning board for a term of two years and
removable for cause by such joint airport zoning board upon written charges and
after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by such joint airport zoning
board for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The
chairperson of the board of adjustment shall be elected by and from the members
of the board of adjustment.
   (c)   The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and
procedure in harmony with the provisions of this division. Meetings of the
board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such
times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson, or in his or
her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be
public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the
board of adjustment, and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 101, § XIV, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-239 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of an
administrative agency made in its administration of airport zoning regulations
adopted under this division, or any governing body of a political subdivision,
or any joint airport zoning board, which is of the opinion that a decision of
such administrative agency is an improper application of airport zoning
regulations of concern to such governing body or board, may appeal to the board
of adjustment authorized to hear and decide appeals from the decisions of such
administrative agency.
   (b)   All appeals taken under this section must be taken within a reasonable
time, as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the
administrative agency and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative agency shall forthwith
transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
   (c)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the administrative agency certifies to the board of
adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the
administrative agency and on due cause shown.
   (d)   The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may appeal in
person or by agent or by attorney.
   (e)   The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
division, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order,
requirement decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the administrative agency.
   (f)   The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and
conclusions of law, giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing or affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this division.
   (g)   The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall
be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the administrative agency or to decide in favor of the
applicant concerning any matter upon which it is required to pass under the
provisions of this division or to effect any variation in the application of
the provisions of this division.
(Ord. 101, § XV, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-240 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved or taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of
adjustment or any governing body of a political subdivision or administrative
agency or the joint airport zoning board which is of the opinion that a
decision of the board of adjustment is illegal may, within ten days after the
decision is filed in the office of the board, present a verified petition to a
court of competent jurisdiction for relief in a manner as provided in Tex.
Revised Civil Statutes Article 46e-11.
(Ord. 101, § XVI, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-241 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other authorized remedies, the political subdivision or
agency adopting the zoning regulations in this division may institute in any
court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate any violation of the provisions of this division or to enforce such
provisions and may be granted such relief, by way of injunction or otherwise,
as may be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case.
(Ord. 101, § XVII, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-242 PENALTIES.
   Each violation of any provision of this division or of any regulation, order
or ruling promulgated under this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and be
punishable as provided in §
1-6 of this code. Jurisdiction for any offense providing a penalty under this
division shall lie in the municipal court in the municipality in which the
violation occurs; however, if the offense occurs in an area not incorporated
within a municipality, jurisdiction shall lie in the justice of the peace court
of the precinct in which the offense occurs.
(Ord. 101, § XVIII, passed 7-22-1974)
§ 3-243 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where this division imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the
use of land, height of a structure or tree, or the establishing or maintaining
of any other airport hazard as defined in this division, than is imposed by
other ordinances or regulations applicable to the same area or location, the
provisions of this division shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 101, § XIX, passed 7-22-1974)
§§ 3-244—3-259 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: FORT WORTH ALLIANCE AIRPORT ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICT
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10121, § 1, adopted June 2, 1988, repealed Ord. 10078, adopted March
15, 1988, which had comprised Division 4, §§
3-260 through
3-274, concerning North Fort Worth Airport Zoning Overlay District. Section 2
of Ord. 10121 added a new Division 4 as herein set out.
§ 3-260 SHORT TITLE.
   This division shall be known and may be cited as the “Fort Worth Alliance
Airport Fort Worth Overlay Zoning District.”
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-261 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ACT. The Airport Zoning Act, Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 241, as
amended.
   AIRPORT. The area of land located within the City of Fort Worth referred to
as the Fort Worth Alliance Airport which is designed and set aside for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and used or to be used in the interest of
the public for such purpose. The term includes an area with installations
relating to flights, including installations, facilities and bases of
operations for tracking flights or acquiring data concerning flights.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. A structure or object of natural growth that obstructs the
airspace required for the taking off, landing and maneuvering of aircraft or
that interferes with visual, radar, radio or other systems for tracking,
acquiring data relating to, monitoring or controlling aircraft.
   AIRPORT HEIGHT CONTROL AREA. The Fort Worth Alliance Airport height control
area more particularly described on Exhibit “A” to Ord. 10121.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   COMPATIBLE LAND USE. A use of land adjacent to the airport that does not
endanger the health, safety or welfare of the owners, occupants or users of the
land because of levels of noise or vibrations or the risk of personal injury or
property damage created by the operations of the airport, including the taking
off and landing of aircraft.
   COVERAGE. The percentage of gross lot area covered by a roof, floor or other
structure.
   DEVELOPMENT ZONE. The Fort Worth Alliance Airport development zone more
particularly described on Exhibit “B” to Ord. 10121.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the planning and development department of the
city, or his or her designee.
   FORT WORTH DEVELOPMENT ZONE. That portion of the development zone located
within the corporate limits of the city.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The quotient of the net floor area divided by the gross
lot area.
   GROSS LOT AREA. The total ground area of the site, from property line to
property line, including any ground area subject to any easement or license.
   NET FLOOR AREA. The area in the various floors of a building, measured
between the exterior faces of the building, including mezzanines and interior
balconies, but excluding:
      (1)   All basements, sub-basements and cellars whose ceilings are at or
below grade (ground level of the finished building);
      (2)   All interior spaces devoted exclusively to vehicular parking and
loading and all access ramps and maneuvering areas accessory thereto;
      (3)   All arcades which have at least a 14 foot ceiling and are open to
public traverse during the normal business hours of the building;
      (4)   All courts;
      (5)   All shafts as defined in the building code of the city;
      (6)   All stairwells; and
      (7)   Customary accessory uses such as elevator penthouses or bulkheads,
mechanical equipment cooling towers or tanks and ornamental cupolas and domes
erected on the top of a building.
   OBSTRUCTION. A structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object,
that exceeds a limiting height established by federal regulations or by this
division.
   SITE. The total area of a lot or tract of land, from property line to
property line, including any land subject to any easement or license. A SITE
shall be a homogeneous parcel under single ownership or unified control.
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by one or more persons and
includes a building, tower, smokestack and overhead transmission line.
   ZONING MAP. The “Fort Worth Alliance Airport Zoning Map.”
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3-262 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAPS.
   The zoning maps, including legal descriptions of the airport height control
area and the airport development zone, marked Exhibit “A” and Exhibit “B,”
respectively, to this division, are hereby incorporated in this division and
attached to this division for all purposes incident to the administration and
enforcement of this division.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “A” and Exhibit “B” to Ord. 10121, the ordinance enacting this
division, are not included herein but are kept on file and available for public
inspection at the office of the city clerk.
§ 3-263 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   This division imposes airport compatible land use zoning regulations
on the development zone that are in addition to existing or future use
regulations, if any, applicable in the development zone because of any
underlying zoning classifications enacted by any political subdivision. All
uses permitted by any underlying zoning classifications shall be permitted in
the development zone unless such uses are prohibited by this division or are
otherwise in conflict with or are inconsistent with this division, in which
case this division shall control.
   (b)   This division imposes airport height control area zoning regulations
on the airport height control area that are in addition to existing or future
height regulations, if any, applicable in the airport height control area
because of any underlying zoning classifications enacted by any political
subdivision. All height regulations imposed by any underlying zoning
classifications shall apply in the airport height control area unless such
regulations are in conflict with or are inconsistent with this division, in
which case:
      (1)   If the conflict or inconsistency affects land in the development
zone, this shall control; or
      (2)   If the conflict or inconsistency affects land outside the
development zone, the more stringent regulations shall control.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-264 DEVELOPMENT ZONE AND AIRPORT HEIGHT CONTROL AREA.
   The airport height control area zoning regulations set forth in this
division shall apply to the airport height control area. The airport compatible
land use zoning regulations set forth in this division shall apply to the
development zone.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-265 COMPATIBLE LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   All uses from time to time permitted by any underlying zoning
classifications, if any, enacted by political subdivisions and applicable to
the development zone shall be permitted in the development zone except the
following uses which are prohibited in this development zone:
      (1)   All residential uses; provided, however, residential uses that are
incidental to or ancillary to the operation of the airport or to the conduct of
the aviation-related activities, including for example and without limitation,
crew rest quarters and temporary housing for aviation trainees permitted by
this division, shall be permitted as a matter of right in the development zone;
      (2)   Kindergarten through twelfth grade educational uses and child care
facilities. All other educational uses, including, without limitation, colleges
and universities, including courses offered by colleges and universities which
serve as credit for both college degree programs and high school graduation,
facilities for employee or client training, schools for flight instruction and
vocational schools shall be permitted as a matter of right in the development
zone; and
      (3)   Hospitals; nursing homes, institutions or any other facilities
providing convalescent or rehabilitative care; establishments for the care,
treatment or rehabilitation of alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients;
residence homes for the aged; and institutions, homes or rehabilitation centers
for persons convicted of crimes; provided, however, notwithstanding anything
contained herein in the contrary, medical, dental or optical clinics for the
examination, consultation or treatment of patients, medical laboratories,
establishments for the sale or rental of or industrial facilities for the
manufacture of medical or optical supplies and equipment, pharmacies,
veterinarian clinics and related facilities, emergency medical facilities
operated by or in connection with the airport shall be permitted as a matter of
right in the development zone.
   (b)   Heliports, helistops and any other facilities for the landing and
taking off of helicopters, and accessory uses thereto, shall be permitted as a
matter of right in the development zone; provided, however, no heliport,
helistop or other facility for the landing and taking off of helicopters shall
be located within 1,000 feet of any church, library or public park. The city
council may, however, approve the location of a heliport, helistop or other
facility for the landing and taking off of helicopters that is less than 1,000
feet from any church, library or public park.
   (c)   Hotels and motels shall be permitted as a matter of right in the
development zone without the imposition of limitations or conditions.
   (d)   No use may be made of land or water within the development zone that
will create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, or that will create
interference with any internavigation facility, airport visual approach or
landing aid, aircraft arresting device or meteorological device, or that will
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other
lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft using the airport.
   (e)   Setback requirements applicable in the Fort Worth development zone
shall be as follows.
      (1)   Front yard setback. If the site contains two acres or less, a
minimum front yard of 30 feet shall be required; if the site contains more than
two acres, a minimum front yard of 50 feet shall be required.
      (2)   Rear yard setback. A minimum rear yard of 25 feet shall be
required.
      (3)   Side yard setback. A minimum side yard of 25 feet shall be required
for at least one side yard. If one side yard measures at least 25 feet, the
other side yard may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet.
   (f)   Landscaping requirements applicable in the Fort Worth development zone
shall be as follows. A minimum of 5% of the aggregate gross area in required
front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped in such a way as to preserve and
enhance natural beauty, environment and open space.
   (g)   Site plan requirements applicable in the Fort Worth development zone
shall be as follows. As a condition to obtaining a building permit, a property
owner shall submit to the city a site plan or development plan evidencing the
compliance of any proposed structure with applicable zoning code and building
code requirements of the city. The city shall approve all plans that evidence
compliance with applicable zoning code and building code requirements.
   (h)   No coverage requirements shall be applicable in the Fort Worth
development zone.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988; Ord. 18103-05-2008, § 1, passed 5-20-2008)
§ 3-266 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   All structures hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged in the
airport height control area, and all objects of natural growth placed,
replaced, planted, replanted or altered in the airport height control area,
shall comply with height restrictions, rules and regulations from time to time
promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration (the “FAA”). The airport
height control area shown on the zoning map is hereby adopted and shall be
automatically amended from time to time to be in conformity with the height
regulations, restrictions and rules promulgated from time to time by the FAA.
Except as limited by the foregoing FAA height restrictions, rules and
regulations, all structures located in the Fort Worth development zone may be
erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged to a height limited only be a floor
area ratio of 12.0.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-267 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.
   The director of the planning and development department of the city or his
or her designee (the “director”) is hereby designated as the administrative
agency to administer and enforce the airport height control area zoning
regulations and airport compatible land use zone regulations prescribed by this
division and to hear and decide all applications for permits made pursuant to
this division. The director may not exercise any of the powers herein delegated
to the Fort Worth alliance airport board of adjustment.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3-268 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Regulations not retroactive. Notwithstanding any restrictions
contained in this division to the contrary, this division shall not be
construed:
      (1)   To require changes in nonconforming land use existing on the
effective date hereof;
      (2)   To require the removal, lowering or other change of any structure
that does not conform to this division on the effective date hereof, including
all phases or elements of a multiphase structure, regardless of whether actual
construction has commenced, that received a determination of no hazard by the
FAA before the effective date hereof;
      (3)   To require the removal, lowering or other change of an object of
natural growth that does not conform to this division on the effective date
hereof; or
      (4)   To interfere with the continuation of a use that does not conform
to this division on the effective date hereof.
   (b)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)
above, the director or the Fort Worth Alliance Airport board of adjustment may,
in its reasonable discretion, require, as a condition to the issuance of a
permit by the director or the grant of a variance by the board, that the owner
of a structure or object of natural growth allow the installation, operation
and maintenance thereon of any markers and lights that the director or board
deems necessary to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of an airport hazard. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.
   (c)   Abandonment or destruction.
      (1)   Whenever the director determines that a legal nonconforming use of
a structure has been discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period
exceeding 12 calendar months, such discontinued or abandoned use shall not
thereafter be resumed, continued or reestablished.
      (2)   Whenever the director determines that a legal nonconforming
structure ceases to be used in a bona fide manner for a period exceeding 12
calendar months, such nonconforming structure shall not thereafter be used or
occupied until such structure fully complies with this division.
      (3)   Whenever the director determines that a legal nonconforming object
of natural growth has been abandoned for a period exceeding 12 calendar months,
such nonconforming object of natural growth shall not thereafter be allowed to
remain unless it fully complies with this division.
      (4)   Whenever the director determines that more than 75% of a legal
nonconforming structure or legal nonconforming object of natural growth has
been destroyed or torn down or become physically deteriorate or decayed, such
nonconforming structure or nonconforming object of natural growth shall not be
rebuilt, repaired or replaced in violation of this division.
      (5)   A legal nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall
not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-269 PERMITS.
   (a)   Permit required. The owner of any property located within the
development zone or the airport height control area shall obtain a permit
issued by the director before:
      (1)   A nonconforming structure may be replaced, rebuilt, substantially
changed or substantially repaired;
      (2)   A nonconforming object of natural growth may be replaced,
substantially changed, allowed to grow higher or replanted;
      (3)   A new structure is constructed; or
      (4)   An existing structure is substantially repaired or substantially
changed.
   (b)   Issuance of permits. Except as prohibited by subsection (c) below, the
director shall issue a permit if the owner files an application certifying the
use to which the property will be put (which certified use must be permitted by
this division) and including reasonable written evidence that the height of all
structures and objects of natural growth are in compliance with this division.
The permits required by this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other permits required by the city or by any other city located within the
airport height control area or development zone. The director shall act upon
each permit application within 15 calendar days from the filing date thereof.
If a permit application has not been disapproved by the director in writing
within such 15-day period, the permit application shall be deemed to have been
approved by the director. A certificate showing the filing date of a permit
application and the failure to disapprove same within the period herein
required shall on demand be immediately issued by the director, and such
certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of any other evidence of permit
application approval otherwise provided by the director. The director shall not
impose any charge or fee for obtaining a permit applicable to property located
within the corporate limits of another city or town without the prior consent
of such city or town.
   (c)   No permits allowed for certain uses. The director shall have no power
or authority to issue a permit that allows:
      (1)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard;
      (2)   Any use prohibited by this division;
      (3)   A nonconforming structure or nonconforming object of natural growth
to become higher than it was as of the effective date hereof or at the time of
the application for the permit; or
      (4)   A nonconforming structure or nonconforming object of natural growth
to become a greater hazard to air navigation that it was as of the effective
date hereof or at the time of the application for the permit.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-270 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   Creation of the board.
      (1)   The existing zoning board of adjustment for the city is hereby
designated as the Fort Worth Alliance Airport board of adjustment (hereinafter
called the “board”). The board shall adopt rules consistent with this division
and the Act. The board may set reasonable fees for the applications filed
before it. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson
and at other times as determined by the board. The chairperson or acting
chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
hearings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, including minutes of its
proceedings indicating the vote of each member on each question or indicating a
member’s absence or failure to vote. Minutes and records shall be public
documents and shall be filed immediately in the board’s office. The board shall
have and exercise the following (and only the following) powers:
         a.   To hear and decide appeals from an order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the director in the enforcement or administration of
the airport height control area zoning regulations and airport compatible land
use zoning regulations contained in this division; and
         b.   To hear and decide specific variance applications under this
division.
      (2)   The concurring vote of at least four-fifths of the members of the
board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the director or to grant a variance under this division.
   (b)   Appeal to the board.
      (1)   An order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
director in the enforcement or administration of this division may be appealed
to the board by:
         a.   A person aggrieved by the order, requirement, decision or
determination;
         b.   A taxpayer affected by the order, requirement, decision or
determination; or
         c.   The city council if the council believes the order, requirement,
decision or determination is an improper application of this division.
      (2)   The appellant must file with the board and with the director a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, within a reasonable
time as determined by the rules of the board. Upon receipt of the appellant’s
notice, the director shall immediately transmit to the board copies of all
papers constituting the director’s record of the action that is the subject of
the appeal.
      (3)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that
is the subject of the appeal unless the director certifies in writing to the
board facts supporting the opinion of the director that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings may be stayed
only by an order of the board, after notice to the director, if due cause is
shown.
      (4)   The board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and
shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in
interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or
attorney. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time as
determined by the rules of the board.
      (5)   The board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
director’s order, requirement, decision or determination from which the appeal
is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination,
and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the director.
      (6)   The board shall file as part of its records written conclusions
stating the facts upon which it relied when reversing, affirming or modifying
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the director or when
granting or denying any variance under this division.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning board of adjustment, see App. A, § 2.101
§ 3-271 VARIANCES.
   (a)   Any person who desires to erect or increase the height of a structure,
permit growth of an object of natural growth or otherwise use property located
within the development zone or the airport hazard area in violation of the
height restrictions imposed by this division or in violation of the use
restrictions imposed by §
3-265(d), (e) or (f) of this division may apply to the board for a variance.
   (b)   The board shall allow a variance from the height restrictions imposed
by this division or from the use regulations imposed by §
3-265(d), (e) of (f) of this division if:
      (1)   A literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and
      (2)   The granting of the relief would:
         a.   Result in substantial justice being done;
         b.   Not be contrary to the public interest; and
         c.   Be in accordance with the spirit of this division and the Act;
provided, however, the board may impose any reasonable conditions (including,
but not limited to, the conditions described in §
3-268(b) hereof) on the granting of the variance that the board considers
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Act.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-272 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person who is aggrieved or any taxpayer who is affected by a decision of
the board, or the city council if the council believes that a decision of the
board is illegal, may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided
under Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 241, Subchapter D.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-273 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   The city council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an
action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this division or
any violation of any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
director in connection with the administration or enforcement hereof,
including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by
Tex. Local Government Code § 241.044.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§ 3-274 PENALTIES.
   Each violation of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day
that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Jurisdiction for any offense providing a criminal penalty hereunder shall be in
the municipal court of the city.
(Ord. 10121, § 2, passed 6-2-1988)
§§ 3-275—3-279 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: FORT WORTH ALLIANCE AIRPORT ACCESS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16931, § 1, adopted May 9, 2006, amended Art. VII in its entirety to
read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VII
pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 3-280 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Fort Worth Alliance
Airport Access Ordinance.”
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
§ 3-281 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms as used in this article shall have the following
meanings.
   ACCESS AREA. That portion of an off-airport parcel that is designated by the
off-airport user of that parcel as the only area of such parcel in which
aircraft may be maneuvered, stored, repaired, operated or otherwise permitted,
except for aircraft in the process of original manufacture, which will be
permitted on any part of such parcel until the original manufacturing process
for such aircraft has been completed. The access area shall not include any
part of an access taxiway.
   ACCESS TAXIWAY. An aircraft taxiway located on property other than the
airport that connects into a taxiway on the airport and that is constructed for
the purpose of allowing aircraft to taxi between the airport and off-airport
parcels.
   AIRPORT. The area of land known as the Fort Worth Alliance Airport which is
designated and set aside for aviation related activities and which is to be
used in the interest of the public for such purpose.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   OFF-AIRPORT PARCEL. Any tract of land not located on the airport that abuts
or is adjacent to or will abut or be adjacent to an access taxiway as such may
exist from time to time.
   OFF-AIRPORT USER. An off-airport user is either a large aircraft user or a
small aircraft user.
   LARGE AIRCRAFT USER. An owner or user of an off-airport parcel that is also
an owner or operator of, or user through contract of aircraft over 80,000
pounds maximum certified gross landed weight ("MCGLW") for providing commercial
or noncommercial aviation services or the owner or operator of aircraft over
80,000 pounds MCGLW.
   SMALL AIRCRAFT USER. An owner or user of an off-airport parcel who also owns
or operates aircraft less than 80,0000 pounds MCGLW used for providing
commercial or noncommercial aviation services.
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
§ 3-282 ACCESS RIGHT.
   (a)   Access to the airport is granted to off-airport users, subject to the
terms and conditions of this article and of the access permit granted to each
off-airport user, as provided in §
3-284 of this article, (the "access right"). The access granted shall be for
the purpose of allowing the off-airport user to conduct aviation related
activities and aircraft operations on the access area of its off-airport
parcel, so that it will have unobstructed access to airport taxiways leading to
runways, for the purpose of maneuvering, taking off and landing of aircraft.
The access right granted is irrevocable as long as all rules and regulations in
this Article are followed and shall be in force and effect so long as the
airport is used for airport purposes.
   (b)   The city shall execute a written grant, in the form of the attached
Exhibit "A" granting and establishing this access right as a property right
appurtenant to off-airport parcels (the "access grant"). The city manager is
authorized and directed to execute and record in the deed records of Tarrant
and Denton Counties, Texas, an access grant covering off-airport parcels, when
requested to do so by the owner or user of the parcel.
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “A” to Ord. 24885-06-2021 is not included herein but is kept on file
and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk.
§ 3-283 OFF-AIRPORT PARCEL USES; ACCESS AREA; ACCESS TAXIWAYS; PROHIBITED USES.
   (a)   Each off-airport parcel may contain an access area, as defined in §
3-281 of this article. The access area shall be separated from the remainder of
the off-airport parcel by a wall, fence or other physical barrier. The city or
any other regulatory authority responsible for operation and safety of the
airport shall have the right to enter the access area to inspect or perform
other regulatory requirements. All safety and operational rules and regulations
(hereinafter "regulations") applicable to the airport shall be applicable to
access areas. No rules or regulations of the city shall affect the access
right, other than this article and the regulations.
   (b)   An off-airport user may construct access taxiways to connect its
parcel with airport taxiways. The number, exact location and configuration of
the access taxiways will be determined from time to time by the off-airport
users, subject to the approval of the city and the FAA; provided, however, the
off-airport users shall be afforded maximum flexibility as to the number,
location and configuration of the access taxiways subject only to limitations
imposed by reason of operational safety and efficiency considerations as
determined by the city and the FAA. Access taxiways will be available for use
by off-airport users on off-airport parcels abutting any portion of such
taxiways, it being the intent of the city to maximize the number of off-airport
users that can take advantage of the access right. Plans and specifications for
taxiways shall be approved by city prior to construction, and taxiways shall be
designed and constructed to meet the same standards of taxiway construction as
those for airport taxiways. Off-airport users shall plat access taxiways
according to state statutes and city procedures for platting; provided,
however, that simultaneous platting of the property adjacent to such taxiways
shall not be required.
   (c)   After completion of construction, inspection and approval by city, any
portion of the access taxiways located on airport property shall be dedicated
to the city and shall be maintained by city. The city shall maintain any
dedicated portion of the access taxiway and related lighting in accordance with
commercial aviation standards for maintenance of public taxiways.
   (d)   (1)   Fixed-based operators ("FBOs") will be operated only on the
airport. No business offering to the general public FBO services will operate
on an off-airport parcel. Services offered by FBOs to the general public are:
maintenance and repair of aircraft; aircraft storage; inspection and licensing
of aircraft; sale of miscellaneous aircraft parts, equipment and accessories;
flight training for small general aviation aircraft; and sale of fuel.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, an off-airport user is not precluded
from conducting aviation uses on an off-airport parcel which:
         a.   Support the off-airport user's own aircraft (i.e., storage
corporate flight department, maintenance and self-fueling); or
         b.   Are associated with an off-airport user's aviation related
business of manufacturing of or performing major repairs and modifications on
aircraft or aircraft parts and components.
      (3)   Except as specifically referenced above, an off-airport parcel may
be used for any lawful purpose, subject to applicable zoning regulations.
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
§ 3-284 ACCESS PERMIT.
   (a)   Application; granting of permit. Any off-airport user who desires
access to the airport from an off-airport parcel shall apply to the city's
director or his or her designated representative for an access permit. The off-
airport user shall deliver to the director or his or her designated
representative a survey plat of the access area, including a computation of the
size of the access area in square footage, on that user's off-airport parcel.
The director or his or her designated representative shall promptly inspect
such access area.
   (b)   Conditions for granting; access permit granted. If the survey plat and
access area comply with terms and conditions of this article and the
regulations, the director or his or her designated representative shall issue
an access permit. The granting of the access permit shall entitle the holder to
commence using the access right granted in §
3-282. The permit shall continue for an indefinite period, unless surrendered
by the holder or revoked by the director or his or her designated
representative.
   (c)   Contents of permit; amendment of permit. The access permit shall
specify the size of the access area and the initial fee to be charged pursuant
to §
3-285 of this division. An off-airport user shall have the right to change the
access area on its off-airport parcel from time to time provided that such user
notifies the director or his or her designated representative of such change,
and provides a new survey of the revised access area, and applies for an access
permit for such revised access area, which permit shall be issued if such
revised access area complies with the provision of this article and the
regulations.
   (d)   Revocation; reinstatement.
      (1)   The director may revoke the access permit of any off-airport user
who either:
         a.   Fails to pay its applicable fee or otherwise to comply with any
provision of this article or the regulations, with such failure not being
corrected within 20 days after written notice thereof is given by the director
to such user; or
         b.   Fails to pay prior to delinquency, the lawfully assessed and
levied city ad valorem taxes on its off-airport parcel.
      (2)   Any access permit that has been revoked shall be reinstated upon
payment of such fee, the correction of any such noncompliance or the payment of
such taxes plus all penalties and interest, as applicable.
   (e)   Prohibition against unpermitted access; penalty. It shall be unlawful
for any person to utilize an access right unless such person holds a valid
access permit. Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor and
be punishable as provided in §
1-6 of this code.
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
§ 3-285 ACCESS PERMIT FEE; LANDING FEE; FUEL FLOWAGE FEE; TIME FOR PAYMENT;
AMOUNT OF FEE; ABATEMENT OF FEE; USE OF FEES BY CITY.
   (a)   At the time of issuance of an access permit pursuant to §
3-284, off-airport users shall be charged a permit fee (the "fee" or "permit
fee"). No other fee shall be charged for use of the access right.
      (1)   Off-airport user access permit fees. The fee for a large aircraft
user and small aircraft user shall be at fixed rates prescribed in the aviation
department's current year's schedule of rates and charges, payable beginning on
the effective date of such user's access permit and annually thereafter for so
long as such access permit remains effective. The fee shall be charged on a
city fiscal year basis (October 1 through September 30) and shall be prorated
for any partial year during which such user's access permit is effective. The
fee due by such user shall be billed by the city not later than October 1 of
the year for which such fee is due, and shall be due and payable not later than
November 1 of that year.
   (b)   In addition to the permit fee, a large aircraft user will pay the
landing fee as established by the then current schedule of rates and charges
published by the City of Fort Worth or as negotiated.
   (c)   In addition to the permit fee, small aircraft user will pay the
standard fuel flowage fee as established by the then current schedule of rates
and charges published by the City of Fort Worth or as negotiated. The fuel
flowage fee will be paid directly to the City of Fort Worth if the general
aviation or small aircraft user conducts self-fueling or by the approved public
fuels permitted agent in accordance with the airport minimum standards.
   (d)   All fees (whether permit fee, landing fees, fuel flowage fees or
otherwise) are subject to adjustments from time to time as established by the
then current schedule of rates and charges published by the City of Fort Worth
or as negotiated.
   (e)   All revenues generated from airport, including, but not limited to,
the fees from off-airport users, fuel flowage fees and landing fees shall be
used by the city to operate and maintain airport as a high quality, first class
airport.
(Ord. 16931, § 1, passed 5-9-2006; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 2, passed 5-18-2021,
eff. 5-27-2021; Ord. 24885-06-2021, § 2, passed 6-22-2021, eff. 7-2-2021)
CHAPTER 4: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Cross-reference:
   Food and food establishments, see §§
16-101 et seq.
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, see
Ch. 23
   Police, see
Ch. 27
   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on ball fields, see §
24-17
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy license fee of one-half state fee, see Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code Annotated § 61.36
   Authority to levy permit fees of one-half state fee, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code Annotated § 11.38
Section
   
4-1   Local fees
   
4-2   Reserved
   
4-3   Issuance of permit
   
4-3.1   Mixed beverage late hours permit
   
4-4   Sale near churches, schools, hospitals
   
4-5   Possession or consumption near homeless shelters or substance abuse
centers
   
4-6   Possession or consumption of alcohol in certain public places
   
4-7   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   West 7th Ordinance Boundary
§ 4-1 LOCAL FEES.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 22650-04-2017, adopted April 4, 2017, repealed former § 4-
1, permit fees, derived from § 5-1 of the 1964 Code, as amended by § 1 of Ord.
8950, adopted October 18, 1983, and §§ 1, 2 of Ord. 14657, adopted June 12,
2001. See also Code Comparative Table.
   There is hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected a fee from every
person, firm, corporation or association of persons pursuing or engaging in any
businesses in the City of Fort Worth, Texas, for which a permit or license is
required under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended from time to time.
The fee shall be in the maximum amount permitted by the Legislature of the
State of Texas.
(Ord. 22650-04-2017, § 2, passed 4-4-2017)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 4-2 RESERVED.
Editor’s Note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 22650-04-2017, adopted April 4, 2017, repealed § 4-2,
license fees, derived from § 5-2 of the 1964 Code, as amended by § 2 of Ord.
8950, adopted October 18, 1983. See also Code Comparative Table.
§ 4-3 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon the payment of the applicable tax or fee prescribed in this chapter to
the city assessor and collector and exhibition to him or her of a permit duly
issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such tax or fee, the city
assessor and collector shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to
such applicant or person a permit to engage in the business in the city of the
character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such
applicant or person, the permit so issued in the name of the city shall
authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the
permit from the state, and shall remain in force only so long as such permit
from the state remains in force.
(1964 Code, § 5-3)
§ 4-3.1 MIXED BEVERAGE LATE HOURS PERMIT.
   It shall be lawful for the holder of a mixed beverage permit within the
corporate limits of the city to acquire a mixed beverage late hours permit and
under such mixed beverage late hours permit to sell or offer for sale any
alcoholic beverages during the extended hours allowed by the state alcoholic
beverage code.
(Ord. 14439, § 1, passed 12-19-2000)
§ 4-4 SALE NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS.
   (a)   No person shall sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is
within 300 feet of any church, public school or public hospital.
   (b)   No person shall sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is
within 300 feet of any private school, except that this subsection (b) does not
apply to the holder of:
      (1)   A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate;
or
      (2)   A permit for a package store.
   (c)   No person shall sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is
within 1,000 feet of any private school if the city council has by resolution
adopted a request from the governing body of the private school to prohibit
such sales, except that this subsection (c) does not apply to the holder of:
      (1)   A retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50%
of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages;
      (2)   A retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50% of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject
to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
      (3)   A wholesaler’s, distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s and
rectifier’s, winery, wine bottler’s or manufacturer’s permit or license, or any
other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are
ordinarily used and understood in Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 102;
      (4)   A license or permit issued under Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code
Chapter 27 (temporary and special wine and beer retailer’s permit), Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 31 (caterer’s permit) or Tex. Alcoholic
Beverage Code Chapter 72 (temporary license) who is operating on the premises
of the private school; or
      (5)   A permit for a package store.
   (d)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the
property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in
direct line across intersections.
   (e)   The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or private school shall be in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the
property line of the place of business and in a direct line across
intersections, except that where the permit or license holder is located on or
above the fifth story of a multistory building, measurement shall be in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the
property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections,
and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on
which the permit or license holder is located. As to any dealer who held a
license or permit issued by the Texas alcoholic beverage commission and the
city on September 1, 1983, in a location where a regulation under this section
was in effect on that date, the measurement of the distance between the place
of business and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street
fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections.
   (f)   (1)   The city council may allow a variance to this section if it
determines that the enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is
not in the best interests of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use
of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a
license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, or is not effective or
necessary, or that a previous permit was issued for the premises in error and
enforcement of the regulation would be inequitable, or for any other reason the
city council determines, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare
of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the
best interest of the community. No variance may be granted under this
subsection (f) except after a public hearing for which notice has been given.
Notice of a request for a variance from subsections (a) or (b) above shall be
given to owners of property within 300 feet of the business. Notice of a
request for a variance from subsection (c) above shall be given to owners of
real property within 1,000 feet of the business. The notice area for a variance
request relating to a public hospital or church shall be measured in a direct
line from the front door of the place of business. The notice area for a
variance request relating to a public or private school shall be measured in a
direct line from the property line of the place of business. The notice shall
be sent by regular United States mail not less than ten days before the date
set for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their property for city
taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
      (2)   When an application has been denied by the city council or when the
applicant has withdrawn a request after the giving of public notice, no new
application for a variance shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a
hearing within period of 12 months from the date of a denial or withdrawal
unless the variance request is denied without prejudice.
   (g)   If the city secretary certifies that a premises satisfies the
requirements regarding distance from churches, public or private schools and
public hospitals at the time an alcoholic beverage license or permit is granted
by the Texas alcoholic beverage commission for the premises, the premises shall
be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of
the license or permit, unless the premises no longer complies with the
exceptions set out in subsections (b) and (c) above, including without
limitation cancellation of the food and beverage certificate or sale of
alcoholic beverages exceeding 50% of gross revenues. On the sale or transfer of
the premises or the business on the premises for which a new Texas alcoholic
beverage commission license or permit is required, the premises shall be deemed
to satisfy the distance requirements as if the issuance of the new license or
permit were a renewal of the previously held license or permit. If an alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued by the Texas alcoholic beverage commission
expires or is terminated and a bona fide application for a new license or
permit for the premises is not filed with the Texas alcoholic beverage
commission within one year thereafter, or if the use of the premises is changed
to a use that does not involve the sale of alcoholic beverages, the provisions
of this section shall not apply, and the premises shall be subject to the
distance regulations set out above for all subsequent applications.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a PRIVATE SCHOOL means a private school,
including a parochial school, that offers a course of instruction for students
in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than 100
students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
   (i)   This section shall not apply where a public or private school or
public hospital is located within the central business zoning district or
within the following mixed-use or form-based zoning districts:
      (1)   Near Southside;
      (2)   Panther Island; or
      (3)   West 7th Urban Village.
(1964 Code, § 5-4) (Ord. 9036, § 1, passed 2-21-1984; Ord. 11975, §§ 1, 2,
passed 5-30-1995; Ord. 12109, § 1, passed 8-29-1995; Ord. 14657, § 3, passed 6-
12-2001; Ord. 17124, § 1, passed 8-29-2006; Ord. 20781-06-2013, § 1, passed 6-
4-2012, eff. 6-11-2013; Ord. 22336-08-2016, § 1, passed 8-2-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to control sale of alcoholic beverages within three
hundred feet of any church, public school or public building, see Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code Annotated § 109.33
§ 4-5 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION NEAR HOMELESS SHELTERS OR SUBSTANCE ABUSE
CENTERS.
   (a)   No person may possess an open container or consume an alcoholic
beverage on a public street, public alley or public sidewalk within 1,000 feet
of the property line of a homeless shelter that is not located in a central
business district or a substance abuse treatment center that is not located in
the central business district.
   (b)   Special temporary events/activities/festivals approved by the city
council and events/activities/festivals lasting no longer than three days that
are open to the public for the purpose of providing entertainment/food and/or
sales of merchandise are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a) above.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions will apply.
      CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. A compact and contiguous geographical area of
a municipality used for commercial purposes that has historically been the
primary location in the municipality where business has been transacted.
      HOMELESS SHELTER. A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter or
other facility that is designed to provide temporary living accommodations to
individuals who lack a fixed regular and adequate residence.
      OPEN CONTAINER. A container that is no longer sealed or the meaning
assigned by Tex Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.35, whichever is more
restrictive.
(Ord. 17689, § 1, passed 8-9-2007)
§ 4-6 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   OPEN CONTAINER. A container that is no longer sealed.
   WEST 7TH AREA. The area as depicted in Appendix A to this chapter.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he possesses an open container of, or
consumes, an alcoholic beverage in or on any public street, sidewalk, alley or
pedestrian way located in the West 7th Area as defined in this section.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) if the person:
      (1)   Was attending a special event that was authorized by the City and
for which a valid permit or license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages was
issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission:
      (2)   Was inside a building not owned or controlled by the City;
      (3)   Was inside a residential structure;
      (4)   Was within the area of an establishment licensed by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission for alcohol consumption on the premises;
      (5)   Was within the area authorized for a sidewalk cafe as described in
Article IX, Chapter 20, evidenced by a properly issued permit.
   (d)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or otherwise control
the manufacture, sale, distribution, transportation, or possession of alcoholic
beverages, except to the extent allowed by state law.
   (e)   Each violation of Section 4-6 is a Class C Misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars.
§ 4-7 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall fail to pay any tax or fee prescribed by this chapter
and secure a permit before engaging in any business for which the payment of
any such fee and securing of any such permit is required by the terms of this
chapter, or who shall engage in any such business without holding an unrevoked
or unexpired permit from the city authorizing the same shall be in violation of
this chapter. Each violation is a Class C Misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, as provided in §
1-6 of this code.
(1964 Code, § 5-5) (Ord. 17689, § 1, passed 8-9-2007; Ord. 25836-11-2022, § 1,
passed 11-8-2022, eff. 11-16-2022)
APPENDIX A: WEST 7TH ORDINANCE BOUNDARY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9899.png]
(Ord. 25836-11-2022, § 1, passed 11-8-2022, eff. 11-16-2022)
CHAPTER 5: AMBULANCES/EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   BOARDS; THE AUTHORITY
      
III.   VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; TRAFFIC LAW EXEMPTION
      
IV.   AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS
Cross-reference:
   Authorized emergency vehicles to have right-of-way, see §
22-80
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
   Interference with authorized emergency vehicles, see §
22-81
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles, see §
22-79
   Privileges of drivers of authorized emergency vehicles, see §
22-8
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10094, § 1, adopted April 12, 1988, effective August 1, 1988, repealed
and reenacted Ch. 5, to read as set out in Exhibit “A” of said ordinance, which
has been included as a new
Ch. 5, §§
5-1 through
5-6,
5-16 through
5-22,
5-31, at the editor’s discretion. Subsequently, Ord. 13667, § 1, adopted
December 1, 1998, amended Ch. 5, in its entirety. Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1,
adopted February 21, 2017 then repealed and reenacted §§
5-1 through
5-3,
5-16 through
5-21, and
5-31 through
5-33 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table.
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Medical Services, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4447o, §§ 1.01 through 3.18
   Municipal authority to regulate staffing or equipment of emergency medical
services vehicles, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4447o, § 3.10
Section
Article I: In General
   
5-1   Statutory authority
   
5-2   General purposes and intent of chapter
   
5-3   Definitions
   5-4—5-15   Reserved
Article II: Boards; The Authority
   
5-16   Emergency physicians advisory board
   
5-17   Metropolitan area EMS authority
   
5-18   Powers and duties of metropolitan area EMS authority
   
5-19   Membership of metropolitan area EMS authority
   
5-20   First responder advisory board
   5-21—5-30   Reserved
Article III: Violations; Penalties; Traffic Law Exemption
   
5-31   Violations
   
5-32   Penalties
   
5-33   Traffic laws; exemption
   5-34—5-39   Reserved
Article IV: Automated External Defibrillators
   
5-40   Definition
   
5-41   Training
   
5-42   Maintenance
   
5-43   Notifying local emergency medical services provider
   
5-44   Possession of automated external defibrillators
   
5-45   Hospital exemption
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 5-1 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted by the City of Fort Worth ("this Jurisdiction"),
pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 773.051, which provides that local
governments may establish standards for ambulances, and pursuant to Tex.
Government Code Chapter 791, which authorizes combinations of local
governmental units to contract for the provision of governmental services,
including the creation of administrative agencies to promote public health and
welfare.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-2 GENERAL PURPOSES AND INTENT OF ORDINANCE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter:
   (a)   To establish a regulated prehospital emergency medical services and
medical transportation system which can provide quality clinical care with
performance measures and standards, with the goal of facilitating the best
possible outcomes for each patient;
   (b)   To establish a mobile integrated healthcare program with effective
medical direction and quality assurance and review;
   (c)   To form an administrative agency to administer and operate the
prehospital emergency medical services and medical transportation system in a
service area comprised of member jurisdictions and to administer and operate
the mobile integrated healthcare program;
   (d)   To designate the administrative agency as the sole-provider of
emergency and non-emergency ambulance service within this jurisdiction to
maintain consistent, high-quality service while controlling costs through
efficiencies and economies of scale;
   (e)   To provide for effective medical direction by establishing a multi-
jurisdictional emergency physicians advisory board to advise the administrative
agency's board and to provide independent medical oversight for all clinical
aspects of prehospital emergency medical services, the administrative agency's
mobile integrated healthcare program, and medical transportation which affect
patient care in the service area; and
   (f)   To provide for effective coordination and communication between first
responder agencies in the service area, the emergency physicians advisory
board, and the board of the administrative agency by establishing a multi-
jurisdictional first responder advisory board.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT. Out-of-hospital care that uses invasive medical acts
(as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 773.003(1).
   AEROMEDICAL TRANSPORTATION UNIT. Any rotary or fixed wing aircraft providing
basic or advanced life support services and patient transportation that
originates within the service area.
   AMBULANCE MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT. A written agreement between the authority
and one or more entities whereby the signing parties agree to provide backup
ambulance service to one another under the terms and conditions specified in
the agreement.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. The transportation of patients by emergency or non-
emergency ambulance.
   ASSOCIATE MEDICAL DIRECTOR. A licensed physician who assists the medical
director in carrying out his or her duties under this chapter and the Restated
and Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement.
   AUTHORITY (METROPOLITAN AREA EMS AUTHORITY). The public administrative
agency established to administer and operate the medical transportation and
prehospital emergency medical services system and the program for MIH (as
hereinafter defined) established by this chapter.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT. Out-of-hospital care that uses noninvasive medical acts
(as defined in § 773.003(2), Tex. Health and Safety Code).
   BOARD. The board of directors of the authority.
   EMERGENCY CARE ATTENDANT.  A person certified as an "emergency care
attendant" under § 773.046 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (EMT). A person certified as an "emergency
medical technician" under § 773.047 or an "advanced emergency medical
technician" under § 773.048 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code, and any other
class of EMT recognized by state law or regulation.
   EMS COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. The facility designated by the authority as the
central communications center from which all services offered by the authority
shall be dispatched and controlled.
   FIRST RESPONDER. Any agency that provides first response to requests for
emergency medical services and, in cooperation with the ambulance service,
provides immediate on-scene care to ill or injured persons but does not
transport those persons to healthcare facilities.
   MEDICAL DIRECTOR. The licensed physician retained through a contract with or
employed by the board who is responsible for carrying out his or her duties
under this chapter and the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative
Agreement and for directing the office of the medical director.
   MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION. The transportation of patients by ambulance,
specialized mobile intensive care unit, specialty care transport, or
aeromedical transportation unit, including both emergency and non-emergency
transports, where such transportation originates within the service area.
   MOBILE INTEGRATED HEALTHCARE (MIH). Services provided by the authority that
are designed to enhance, coordinate, effectively manage, and integrate out of
hospital care, in order to improve outcomes, enhance the client's experience of
care, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services
provided to the enrolled clients.
   OFFICE OF MEDICAL DIRECTOR. The clinical office of the authority through
which the medical director carries out his/her rights and duties under this
chapter and the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement. The
office of the medical director is comprised of the medical director, and any
associate medical directors, and the employees of the authority in the office
of the medical director to assist the medical directors in carrying out the
medical director's rights and duties under this chapter and the Restated and
Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement.
   PARAMEDIC. A person qualified as a certified or licensed "paramedic" as
defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 773.049 and 773.0495.
   PATIENT. An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated, and in need of or at risk of needing medical care at the scene
of a medical emergency or during transport to or from a healthcare facility.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
governmental entity, or other group, or a combination of the same acting as a
unit.
   RESTATED AND AMENDED INTERLOCAL COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT. The interlocal
contract, as it may be amended from time to time, adopted by this jurisdiction
concurrently with the passage of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 791 of the
Tex. Government Code (the Interlocal Cooperation Act).
   SERVICE AREA. That geographical area which is contained within the
boundaries of all the jurisdictions which become members of the Authority by
adopting this Uniform EMS Ordinance and executing the Restated and Amended
Interlocal Cooperative Agreement.
   SPECIAL EVENT.  Any public event located within the service area for which
standby ambulance service is arranged in advance, and for which an ambulance is
hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party.
   SPECIALTY CARE TRANSPORT. The transportation of a critically injured or ill
patient at a level of service beyond the scope of the EMT-Paramedic when the
patient's condition requires ongoing care that must be furnished by one or more
health professionals in an appropriate specialty area; for example, emergency
or critical care nursing, emergency medicine, respiratory care, cardiovascular
care, or a paramedic with additional training.
   SPECIALIZED MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT. A vehicle which is specially
constructed, equipped, staffed, and employed in the inter-facility transport of
patients whose requirements for en route medical support are likely to exceed
the clinical capabilities of an advanced life support ambulance.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-4—5-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: BOARDS; THE AUTHORITY
§ 5-16 EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby created an Emergency Physicians Advisory Board
("EPAB") which shall, on behalf of this jurisdiction, provide independent
medical oversight for and advise and inform the authority on all clinical
aspects of medical transportation, the Authority's MIH program, and prehospital
emergency medical services in this Jurisdiction, including such services
provided by the authority and first responders, and shall exercise independent
professional judgment in all matters related to patient care.
   (b)   EPAB's membership and other matters relating to EPAB shall be set
forth in the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement and in the
Bylaws adopted by EPAB.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-17 METROPOLITAN AREA EMS AUTHORITY.
   By adopting this chapter and executing and approving the Restated and
Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement, this jurisdiction has joined the
authority, which shall now be known as the metropolitan area EMS authority.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-18 POWERS AND DUTIES OF METROPOLITAN AREA EMS AUTHORITY.
   The authority shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   The authority is hereby designated as the sole provider of ambulance
service and special event ambulance standby service within this jurisdiction,
whether directly or indirectly through contractors, pursuant to the terms,
conditions and provisions of the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative
Agreement, except for those services exempted by §
5-31(b).
   (b)   The authority shall comply with all terms of the Restated and Amended
Interlocal Cooperative Agreement and have all the powers and duties enumerated
therein.
   (c)   The authority is required to provide this jurisdiction with basic and
advanced life support ambulance service in accordance with system performance
standards and all applicable law, rules and regulations, as well as all patient
care standards that the medical director may from time to time promulgate;
   (d)   The authority is authorized to operate an MIH program on a non-
exclusive basis in this jurisdiction.
   (e)   The authority shall enter into a first responder agreement with this
jurisdiction and may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the delivery
of first responder services in this jurisdiction by other agencies, subject to
the credentialing process by the medical director and subject to rights of
appeal to the board.
   (f)   The authority shall adopt standards approved by the medical director
governing the operation of specialized mobile intensive care units and for
specialty care transport within the service area, including standards limiting
the types of patients which may be transported thereby, and, subject to the
credentialing process by the office of the medical director, may issue,
suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the operation of such units as required
by this chapter.
   (h)   The authority shall adopt standards approved by the medical director
governing the operation of aeromedical transportation units within the service
area, including standards defining the circumstances under which such units may
be deployed to emergency scenes and, subject to the credentialing process by
the office of the medical director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew
permits for the operation of such units as required by this chapter.
   (i)   The authority shall adopt standards approved by the medical director
governing the provision of special event ambulance standby service within the
service area, and, subject to the credentialing process by the medical
director, may issue, suspend, revoke, and renew permits for the provision of
such ambulance standby service; provided, however, nothing contained in this
Chapter 5 establishes the authority as the sole provider of non-ambulance
standby emergency medical services, nor shall it limit the authority of the
city to regulate, manage, or govern standby emergency medical services and the
provider(s) thereof.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-19 MEMBERSHIP OF METROPOLITAN AREA EMS AUTHORITY.
   The authority board's membership and other matters relating to the authority
shall be set forth in the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement
and in the Bylaws adopted by the authority's board.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-20 FIRST RESPONDER ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby created a first responder advisory board ("FRAB")
which shall advise and inform the authority and EPAB on matters related to
first response and prehospital emergency medical services in the service area.
   (b)   The FRAB's membership and other matters relating to the board shall be
set forth in the Restated and Amended Interlocal Cooperative Agreement and in
the Bylaws adopted by the FRAB.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-21—5-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; TRAFFIC LAW EXEMPTION
§ 5-31 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an
ambulance or aeromedical transportation unit;
      (2)   To perform duties as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency ambulance
dispatcher without current credentials issued by the office of the medical
director, unless participating in a training program approved by office of the
medical director;
      (3)   To permit a person to work as an ECA, EMT, paramedic or emergency
ambulance dispatcher without current credentials issued by the office of the
medical director, unless participating in a training program approved by office
of the medical director;
      (4)   To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance service other than the
authority, except as permitted in subsection (b) below;
      (5)   For any person or entity other than the authority to provide
ambulance service within this jurisdiction, unless pursuant to a written
agreement with the authority;
      (6)   For any person to provide medical transportation originating in the
service area without a permit issued by the authority;
      (7)   For any agency to provide first responder services without a first
responder permit issued by the authority, unless pursuant to a first responder
agreement with the authority or a written automatic aid or mutual aid agreement
with this jurisdiction;
      (8)   To use an ambulance for the transportation of persons other than in
connection with the transportation of a patient.
   (b)   It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section that a
vehicle is being used or service is provided solely in any of the following
manners:
      (1)   As a privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of
transporting persons who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
      (2)   Rendering service as an ambulance at the request of the EMS
communications center upon the declaration of a disaster by this jurisdiction,
the State of Texas, or the United States; or a declaration of a major
catastrophe or extreme system overload by the chief executive officer of the
authority;
      (3)   Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government;
      (4)   Ambulance mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to an ambulance
mutual aid agreement approved by the authority;
      (5)   Special event ambulance standby coverage, so long as such service
is provided without charge by an emergency medical services volunteer provider,
as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 773.003(13), or the authority has
first declined to provide coverage and the entity providing coverage has been
issued a permit by the authority;
      (6)   Wheelchair transport services for persons other than patients, when
the service is not provided by ambulance; and
      (7)   Medical transportation of a patient where the transport originates
outside the service area.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-32 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
5-31 shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 (Tex. Penal Code § 12.23).
   (b)   This section does not serve to limit any other remedies available to
the jurisdiction in law or equity.
   (c)   Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-33 TRAFFIC LAWS; EXEMPTION.
   When the driver of an emergency medical response vehicle has reasonable
grounds to believe that an emergency exists, as determined by the EMS
communication center, the vehicle shall be treated as an "authorized emergency
vehicle" within the meaning of Chapter 546 of the Tex. Transp. Code and shall
be exempt from traffic laws as provided therein.
(Ord. 22613-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 24213-05-2020, § 1, passed 5-
19-2020, eff. 5-28-2020)
§ 5-34—5-39 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS
§ 5-40 DEFINITION.
   AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR A heart monitor and defibrillator that:
      (1)   Has received approval from the United States Food and Drug
Administration of its premarket notification filed under 21 U.S.C. § 360(k), as
amended;
      (2)   Is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of ventricular
fibrillation or rapid ventricular tachycardia and is capable of determining,
without interpretation of cardiac rhythm by an operator, whether defibrillation
should be performed; and
      (3)   On determining that defibrillation should be performed,
automatically charges and requests delivery of an electrical impulse to an
individual’s heart.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 5-41 TRAINING.
   A person or entity that acquires an automated external defibrillator shall
ensure that:
   (a)   Each user of the automated external defibrillator receives training
given or approved by the Texas Department of Health in:
      (1)   Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and
      (2)   Use of the automated external defibrillator.
   (b)   A licensed physician is involved in the training program to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 5-42 MAINTENANCE.
   A person or entity that owns or leases an automated external defibrillator
shall maintain and test the automated external defibrillator according to the
manufacturer’s guidelines.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 5-43 NOTIFYING LOCAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDER.
   (a)   A person or entity that provides emergency care to a person in cardiac
arrest by using an automated external defibrillator shall promptly notify the
emergency physicians’ advisory board.
   (b)   When a person or entity acquires an automated external defibrillator,
the person or entity shall notify the emergency physicians’ advisory board of
the existence, location and type of automated external defibrillator.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 5-44 POSSESSION OF AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS.
   Each person or entity that acquires an automated external defibrillator,
other than that of a licenses practitioner, shall ensure that:
   (a)   The automated external defibrillator has been delivered to that person
or entity by a licensed practitioner in the course of his or her professional
practice or upon a prescription or other order lawfully issued in the course of
his or her professional practice; or
   (b)   If the automated external defibrillator is acquired for the purpose of
sale or lease, the person or entity shall be in conformance with the applicable
requirements found in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 483.041.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 5-45 HOSPITAL EXEMPTION.
   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals licensed under Tex. Health and
Safety Code Chapter 241.
(Ord. 16262, § 2, passed 1-18-2005)
CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS AND FOWL
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
      
III.   DANGEROUS AND AGGRESSIVE DOGS
      
IV.   RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS
      
V.   DOG AND CAT REGISTRATION AND PERMITS
      
VI.   RABIES CONTROL
      
VII.   ANIMAL CONTROL IMPOUNDMENT; FEES
      
VIII.   ADOPTIONS AND STERILIZATION FOR ADOPTED DOGS AND CATS; MANDATORY
STERILIZATION FOR UNRESTRAINED DOGS AND CATS
      
IX.   CARE AND HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
      
X.   ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
      
XI.   MINIATURE SWINE
      
XII.   ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Cross-reference:
   Animal nuisances, see
App. B, §§
11A-18 et seq.
   Animals on aircraft landing fields, see §
3-138
   Depositing dead animals on streets, see §
16-294
   Dogs to be on leash in parks, etc., see §
24-9
   Rendering processes, see §
16-296
   Use of parks re animals restricted, see §§
24-10,
24-16
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10553, § 1, adopted March 27, 1990, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to
read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment, Ch. 6 pertained to the same
subject matter, substantive sections thereof being §§ 6-1 through 6-9, 6-26, 6-
27, 6-41 through 6-45, 6-61 though 6-65, derived from the 1964 Code, §§ 7-1—7-
20; and Ord. 9227, § 1, adopted October 2, 1984; except that former § 6-8 bore
no history note. Subsequently, Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, adopted June 26, 2018,
effective July 6, 2018, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety, to read as herein set
out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject
matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
Section
Article I: In General
   
6-1   Definitions
   
6-2   Purpose and scope
   
6-3   Animal care and control authority; animal care and control
   
6-4   Exemption of city officials from liability
   
6-5   Violations; penalties
   
6-6   Incorporation by reference
   
6-7   Interference with animal care and control officer
   
6-8   Sanitary standards
   
6-9   Inspection of animals and premises
   
6-10   Noncomplying premises; remedies
   
6-11   Number of dogs and cats at residences
   
6-12   Nuisances declared
   
6-12.1   Parental responsibility
   
6-12.2   Feral and stray cat trap, neuter and return program
Article II: Restraint of Animals
   
6-13   Restraint of animals
Article III: Dangerous and Aggressive Dogs
Division 1: Aggressive Dogs
   
6-14   Nuisance declared
   
6-14.1   Aggressive dog determination
   
6-14.2   Requirements for owner of an aggressive dog
   
6-14.3   Attack by an aggressive dog
   
6-14.4   Violations
   
6-14.5   Defense
Division 2: Dangerous Dogs
   
6-15.1   Nuisance declared
   
6-15.2   Reserved
   
6-15.3   Dangerous dog determination
   
6-15.4   Requirements for owners of a dangerous dog
   
6-15.5   Compliance hearing
   
6-15.6   Dangerous dog registration
   
6-15.7   Defenses
   
6-15.8   Violations
Article IV: Retail Sale of Animals
   
6-16   Commerce in live animals
Article V: Dog and Cat Registration and Permits
   
6-17   Dog and cat microchipping required
   
6-18   Validity of previously issued license
   
6-19   Maintaining current microchip registration
   
6-20   Reserved
   
6-21   Violations
   
6-22   Intact pet permit
   
6-23   Multi-pet permit
   
6-24   Penalty
   
6-25—6-40   Reserved
Article VI: Rabies Control
   
6-41   Rabies vaccination
   
6-42   Domestic animals that reasonably expose humans to rabies
Article VII: Animal Control Impoundment; Fees
   
6-43   Impoundment; notice; disposition
   
6-44   Time; fees: impoundment; bite; boarding; vaccination or license
   
6-45   Release from impoundment
Article VIII: Adoptions and Sterilization for Adopted Dogs and Cats; Mandatory
Sterilization for Unrestrained Dogs and Cats
   
6-46   Requirements for adoption and reclamation
   
6-47   Confirmation of sterilization and vaccination, death or lost or stolen
animal
   
6-48   Noncompliance with sterilization agreement; animal care and control
center right of reclamation
   
6-49   Reserved
   
6-50   Reserved
   
6-51—6-60   Reserved
Article IX: Care and Humane Treatment of Animals
   
6-61   Unlawful acts enumerated
   
6-62   Keeping of certain animals prohibited
   
6-63   Guard dogs
   
6-64   Dead animal pickup
   
6-65   Proper care of animals
   
6-66   Wildlife abatement
Article X: Animal Establishments
   
6-67   Compliance
   
6-68   Minimum standards for animal establishments
   
6-69   Multifamily dwelling complexes
Article XI: Miniature Swine
   
6-70   Miniature swine generally
   
6-71   Vaccination requirements
   
6-72   Registration requirements
   
6-73   Conditions
   
6-74   Violations; penalties
Article XII: Animal Shelter Advisory Committee
   
6-75   Creation
   
6-76   Meetings
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.
   ADEQUATE ENCLOSURE.
      (1)   Means an enclosure or structure that complies with all of the
requirements of §
6-13(b) of this code and is completely surrounded by a substantial fence or
other structure of sufficient strength, height, construction, materials and
design as to prevent the domestic animal from escaping from the area and to
isolate the animal from the public and other animals outside of the enclosure.
      (2)   ADEQUATE ENCLOSURE does not mean enclosure or confinement by an
invisible or electronic fence.
   ADOPTION OF A DOG OR CAT. The release of the animal from the care, custody,
control or ownership of the animal care and control center to a person who
agrees to assume ownership responsibilities for the care of that animal as
defined in this chapter.
   AGGRESSIVE DOG. Any dog that has:
      (1)   Made an unprovoked attack on another domestic animal that causes
bodily injury to the animal and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in
which the dog was being kept;
      (2)   On more than one occasion, bitten one or more persons who are
lawfully inside the dog's enclosure;
      (3)   Repeatedly attempted, successfully or unsuccessfully, to climb
over, dig under, chew through, break or otherwise escape from its enclosure in
an attempt to attack, chase or harass a person or another domestic animal as
observed by a person charged with enforcing this chapter; or
      (4)   Committed unprovoked acts that would cause a person to reasonably
believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal.
   ANIMAL. Any living, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than homo
sapiens.
   ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL AUTHORITY. A municipal animal care and control
division which is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL CENTER. Any facility operated by the city for the
purpose of impounding and caring for animals as prescribed by law.
   ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL OFFICER. The director and his or her authorized
agents or employees of the animal care and control division.
   ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction,
performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of
domestic animals, excluding veterinary clinics, hospitals, animal shelters and
individuals caring for animals in their private residence in compliance with
the terms of this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility that keeps or legally impounds stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted animals.
   APPLICABLE FEES. Those reasonable charges incurred for the care and
maintenance provided by the animal care and control center for impounded
animals.
   ASSISTANCE ANIMAL. An assistance or service animal as defined under Tex.
Hum. Res. Code § 121.002.
   AT LARGE or RUNNING AT LARGE. Any animal not kept under restraint.
     BODILY INJURY. Physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical
condition.
   CAT. A commonly domesticated member of the Felidae (feline) family, other
than a lion, tiger, bobcat, jaguar, panther, leopard, cougar or other
prohibited animal.
   CIRCUS. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal, other than a dog, that the director determines
to be or that may become a danger to human life, health, or safety.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury
and occurs in a place other than the enclosure in which the dog is normally
kept or was being kept; or
      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than the enclosure in
which the dog is normally kept or was being kept and those acts cause a person
to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the City of Fort Worth code compliance department
or the director's designee.
   DOG. A commonly domesticated member of the Canidae (canine) family, other
than a wolf, jackal, fox, dingo, coyote or other prohibited canines.
   DOG TETHERING. Using a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device to
attach a dog to a stationary object or trolley system.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes livestock, caged or penned fowl other than
raptors, normal household pets, such as, but not limited to, dogs, cats,
cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or small,
nonpoisonous reptiles, snakes or amphibians.
   EMU. A member of a family of ratite fowl.
   FERAL CAT. Any homeless, wild or untamed cat.
   FOWL. Any bird.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog which has been trained for the purpose of protecting
property by a guard dog company which is required to be licensed pursuant to
Tex. Occ. Code Ch. 1702, as amended from time to time.
   HIGH RISK ANIMALS. Animals which have a high probability of transmitting
rabies, including but not limited to, skunks, bats, coyotes and raccoons.
   IMMEDIATE CONTROL. Within the owner's observation and in such close
proximity as to permit the owner reasonable opportunity to control the animal
should it become necessary to do so in order to protect the animal, a human or
another animal from harm.
   IMPOUND. To take an animal into custody by the city or the director;
impoundment begins at the time any animal care and control officer, police
officer or the director takes control of an animal.
   INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. As defined by Tex. Educ. Code § 61.003(8),
as amended from time to time.
   INTACT ANIMAL. An unaltered or unsterilized animal.
   KENNEL. Any premises in which four or more dogs three months of age or older
are kept; or where the business of buying, selling, breeding, grooming,
training or boarding of dogs is conducted; does not include veterinary clinics
or hospitals, or humane societies.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A human being authorized to practice veterinary
medicine who is currently licensed by the Texas Board of Veterinary Medical
Examiners.
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats, llamas, alpacas,
exotic livestock, including elk and elk hybrids or emu, ostrich or rhea, and
hogs, unless otherwise defined.
   LOCAL RABIES CONTROL AUTHORITY. The director of the code compliance
department as designated by the city under the Tex. Health & Safety Code §
826.017 or his or her designee.
   LOW RISK ANIMALS. Animals which have a low probability of transmitting
rabies, including but not limited to, all animals of the orders Marsupialia,
Insectivora, Rodentia, Lagomorpha and Xenarthra.
   MICROCHIPPED. An animal that:
      (1)   Has an identifying microchip implanted; and
      (2)   The animal, owner and microchip are registered with a national
microchip registry.
   MINIATURE SWINE. Any member of the swine family which has, through selective
breeding, been genetically manipulated so as to attain a maximum height of 20
inches at the shoulder and a maximum weight of 120 pounds.
   OSTRICH. A member of a family of ratite fowl.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, keeps, shelters, maintains, feeds, harbors or
has temporary or permanent custody of a domestic or prohibited animal, or who
knowingly permits a domestic or prohibited animal to remain on or about any
premises over which that person has control. The term shall include a person
who harbored, fed or sheltered the animal for three consecutive days or more.
   PERSON. An individual, association, partnership, corporation, trust, estate,
joint-stock company or foundation.
   PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility or a service animal.
   PET SHOP. A commercial enterprise regularly engaged in the buying, selling,
grooming, breeding or boarding of animals.
   PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any place where people congregate, such as public
buildings, parks, schools, flea markets and recreations areas; does not include
a private residence, residential or commercial street.
   PROHIBITED ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any wild or exotic animal or any animal not normally born and
raised in captivity, including, but not limited to, the following:
         a.   Reptiles: venomous lizards, venomous snakes, crocodiles,
alligators, caimans and gharial;
         b.   Mammals:
            1.   Felines (such as lions, tigers, bobcats, jaguars, leopards and
cougars), except commonly domesticated cats;
            2.   Canines (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes, foxes and jackals
and any hybrid of a canine), except commonly domesticated dogs;
            3.   Mustelids (such as weasels, skunks, martins, minks, badgers
and otters) except ferrets;
            4.   Procyonids (such as raccoons and coati);
            5.   Bears;
            6.   Marsupials (such as kangaroos, opossums, koala bears,
wallabies, bandicoots and wombats);
            7.   Bats;
            8.   Sloths, anteaters, armadillo, and related species;
            9.   Elephants;
            10.   Primates (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans and
gorillas);
            11.   Rodents (such as beavers and porcupines), except commonly
domesticated rodents kept as pets including hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs,
rats, mice, and chinchillas; and
         c.   Amphibians: poisonous frogs.
      (2)   Does not include nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous amphibians.
      (3)   Does not include livestock, fowl or normal household pets, such as,
but not limited to, dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs,
gerbils, rabbits, fish or small, nonpoisonous reptiles, snakes or amphibians.
   PROPERLY FITTED WITH RESPECT TO A COLLAR OR OTHER NECK RESTRAINT. A collar
or other neck restraint that measures the circumference of a dog's neck plus at
least one inch. With respect to a harness, PROPERLY FITTED means a harness that
is of an adequate size, design and construction as appropriate for the dog's
size and weight.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Whatever is declared by the director to be dangerous to
human life, health or welfare, or to threaten to become detrimental to the
public health or welfare.
   QUARANTINE. Strict confinement of an animal specified in an order of the
director or his or her designee: (1) on the private premises of the animal's
owner or at a facility approved by the director or his or her designee; and (2)
under restraint by closed cage or paddock or in any other manner approved by
the animal care and control authority. The quarantine period for a dog, cat or
a domestic ferret in rabies quarantine is ten days from the date of exposure,
or as recommended by the regional veterinarian of the Texas Department of
Health.
   RABIES. An acute viral disease of humans and animals affecting the central
nervous system and usually transmitted by an animal bite.
   RELEASING AGENCY. Animal care and control center, animal shelter or
nonprofit organization engaged in caring for animals.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is under RESTRAINT when the owner or responsible person
exercises diligent care and control of his or her animal and:
      (1)   It is kept in an adequate enclosure or an appropriately sized
portable cage with top, bottom and sides of sufficient strength, height,
construction, materials and design as to prevent the animal from escaping; or
      (2)   It is accompanied by its owner or trainer at a bona fide dog show,
field trial or exhibition; or
      (3)   It is secured by a leash; or
      (4)   It is under the immediate control of its owner or responsible
person; and
         a.   Is subject to and responsive to the verbal, visual or other
commands of the owner or other person asserting control of the animal; and
         b.   Is not on a street or sidewalk within a residential area or a
residentially zoned district; and
         c.   Is not in violation of §
20-426(i), prohibited conduct during events; and
         d.   Is not in violation of §
24-9, dogs to be on leash in city parks and recreation areas; and
         e.   Is not in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or
law; or
      (5)   It is under the immediate control of its owner or responsible
person and it is a service animal in the performance of duty; or
      (6)   It is a guard dog in the performance of duty in an enclosed
building or securely fenced and locked area which is marked on all sides with
signs in four-inch letters stating "Guard Dog" and clearly visible to the
public; or
      (7)   It is a cat on the boundaries of the premises of the person who has
charge, care or ownership of the cat.
   RHEA. A member of a family of ratite fowl.
   SANITARY. Any condition of good order and cleanliness which discourages and
limits disease transmission.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. An enclosure which meets all of the requirements of an
adequate enclosure and is of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an
enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to
confine a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which may be
taken by the owner. Such enclosure is securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and is designed to prevent the animal(s) from
escaping from the enclosure. A building, including a residence, may be a secure
enclosure if it meets all elements of this definition.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or
severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonable prudent
person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
treatment.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. An assistance or service animal as defined under Tex. Hum.
Res. Code § 121.002.
   STERILIZATION. Surgical or chemical treatment of the reproductive organs of
a dog or cat to render the animal unable to reproduce.
   STRAY. An animal which is roaming with no restraint beyond the premises of
an animal's owner or keeper.
   TRAP, NEUTER AND RETURN (TNR) PROGRAM. A program authorized by the city in
which stray cats are trapped, sterilized, vaccinated, eartipped and returned to
an approved person.
   UNPROVOKED ATTACK BY A DOG. An incident in which a dog that attacked a human
being or an animal was not hit, kicked or struck by a human being with any
object or part of a human being's body, nor was any part of the dog's body,
directly or indirectly, struck, pulled, pinched or squeezed by a human being or
other animal, nor was the dog cornered, beckoned, held, taunted or teased by
any human being, nor was the attacked human being or other animal in the dog's
territory on the property of the dog's owner at the time of the attack.
   VACCINATED ANIMAL. Unless otherwise indicated, a vaccinated animal:
      (1)   Which has been vaccinated against rabies with a vaccine licensed by
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) for that species at or after
the minimum age requirement and using the recommended route of administration
for the vaccine; and
      (2)   Which has been vaccinated against rabies by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed veterinarian; and
      (3)   The time elapsed since the most recent vaccination has not exceeded
the recommended interval for booster vaccination as established by the
manufacturer.
   VACCINATION CERTIFICATE. The certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian
on a form approved by the Texas Department of Health.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of disease and injuries to
animals.
   ZOOLOGICAL PARK. Any permanent collection of living animals for public
display, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more
species of animals.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-2 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this chapter:
      (1)   To provide regulations by which the transmission of rabies to human
beings and domestic animals can be prevented and controlled in the city;
      (2)   To decrease the number of unwanted and stray dogs and cats in the
city;
      (3)   To promote humane animal care;
      (4)   To encourage responsible animal ownership and care; and
      (5)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the
keeping of any animal in violation of any other city ordinance, state or
federal statute or law.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-3 ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL AUTHORITY; ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL.
   (a)   The animal care and control authority shall be a unit of the
department of code compliance and shall be in the charge of a person having
suitable qualifications and designated by the city as the director.
   (b)   In addition to the duties specifically prescribed in this chapter, it
shall be the responsibility of the director to execute such other duties under
the jurisdiction of the department of code compliance as the director may
delegate.
   (c)   The director or his or her designee shall manage the operation of the
city animal care and control center.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-4 EXEMPTION OF CITY OFFICIALS FROM LIABILITY.
   All of the regulations provided in this chapter and the functions and duties
of all officers, agents, servants or employees of the city in the enforcement
of this chapter are declared to be governmental and for the benefit, health and
welfare of the general public. Any city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, acting for the city in the discharge of his or her
duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable by the
performance of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her
duties.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-5 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any violation, disobedience, omission, neglect, failure or refusal to
comply with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation. Unless otherwise
specifically stated in this chapter, any violation of this chapter that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500 does not require a culpable
mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any
such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, any
violation of this chapter that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500 shall
require a culpable mental state as specified by § 6.02(c) of the Texas Penal
Code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (b)   If any person is found guilty of having violated §
6-61 of this chapter, any permit held by such person under this chapter shall
be automatically revoked.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-6 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   Any reference made in this chapter to any other law, statute, code,
ordinance, rule or regulation is intended to incorporate such material as it
presently exists and also any future amendments, changes, revisions, repeals or
recodifications of such material, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-7 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal care and
control officer while engaged in the performance of his or her duties. Such
interference includes, but is not limited to:
   (a)   Releasing or causing an animal to be released after an animal care and
control officer has impounded the animal; or
   (b)   Physically constraining the movement of an animal care and control
officer or his or her vehicle or equipment by:
      (1)   Placing any part of the person or person's property in the way of
the animal care and control officer's progress in the performance of the
officer's duties; or
      (2)   Taking or moving an animal care and control officer's equipment
which causes a time delay in the officer's ability to use the equipment.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-8 SANITARY STANDARDS.
   (a)   The owner of any animal allowed by this chapter to be kept in the city
shall comply with the following standards of sanitation for that animal:
      (1)   Remove manure and droppings from pens, stables, yards, cages and
other enclosures and handle or dispose of the excretions in such manner as to
keep the premises free of any nuisance;
      (2)   Place food only in impervious containers or on impervious surfaces;
      (3)   Equip watering troughs or tanks with adequate facilities for
draining the overflow; and
      (4)   Remove all refuse as defined in
Chapter 16 of the city code, on the premises and dispose of same by a means
approved by the director.
   (b)   Such standards of sanitation shall be administered by the director.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-9 INSPECTION OF ANIMALS AND PREMISES.
   The city code compliance department shall have the authority to inspect
animals and premises. For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the
provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, an animal care and control
officer may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-10 NONCOMPLYING PREMISES; REMEDIES.
   Where premises do not comply with the provisions of this chapter or if any
health, code or other ordinance or law is not observed, the director may, upon
written notice to the person owning or controlling the premises, order the
correction of the objectionable conditions. In addition to any criminal
proceeding, failure to comply with such order shall entitle the city to obtain
relief by injunction.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-11 NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS AT RESIDENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided by §
6-23, an owner shall not allow any residence within the city and over which
that person has control to house more than three dogs over the age of eight
weeks. Except as provided by §
6-23, an owner shall not allow any residence within the city and over which
that person has control to house more than three cats over the age of eight
weeks. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this subsection
(a) that any cats in excess of three are feral or stray cats in the city's
trap, neuter and return program.
   (b)   Residences registered with the director as a foster for the animal
care and control authority and that have been inspected by the director within
the preceding 12 months are exempt from subsection (a).
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-12 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   The keeping of any animal which causes a sound or noise in violation of §
23-8 of this code is declared a nuisance in violation of this section. Whatever
the director determines to be dangerous to human life or health, or that is
offensive to the senses, or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the
public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful, and
the specific acts, conditions and things set forth in this chapter are, among
others, declared to be nuisances and prohibited and made unlawful.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-12.1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   If an animal is owned or purported to be owned by an individual who is
younger than 17 years of age, responsibility and liability for compliance with
this chapter with respect to such an animal shall be imposed on the parent,
legal guardian or other person who has the duty of control and reasonable
discipline of the minor individual, regardless of whether the parent, legal
guardian or other person otherwise meets the definition of "owner" with respect
to the animal at issue.
   (b)   Financial liability imposed under subsection (a) of this provision
shall not exceed limits imposed by state law.
   (c)   It shall be an affirmative defense to imposition of responsibility and
liability under subsection (a) above that the parent, legal guardian or other
person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a
reasonable good faith effort to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-12.2 FERAL AND STRAY CAT TRAP, NEUTER AND RETURN PROGRAM.
   The director shall develop and administer a Trap, Neuter and Return (TNR)
Program designed to reduce the number of feral and stray cats which are
euthanized, to establish standards for the management of feral and stray cats,
and to provide for the minimization and abatement of nuisances caused by feral
and stray cats.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE II: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS
§ 6-13 RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal to fail or refuse:
      (1)   To keep an animal under restraint; and
      (2)   To exercise diligent care and control of his or her animal to
prevent such animal from becoming a public nuisance.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal to fail to provide for
the animal an adequate enclosure, which is one that complies with all of the
requirements of this subsection (b) and is completely surrounded by a
substantial fence or other structure of sufficient strength, height,
construction, materials and design as to prevent the domestic animal from
escaping from the area and to isolate the animal from the public and other
animals outside the enclosure.
      (1)   An enclosure shall be designed, erected and maintained in
accordance with all applicable zoning and building regulations of this code.
      (2)   All non-building portions of an enclosure, including gates, shall
be constructed of chain link, welded wire, wrought iron, brick, mortared stone,
concrete block, wood stockade or other similar fencing-type material approved
by the director.
      (3)   Where a building forms a part of an enclosure, there shall be
minimal separation between the building and the remaining parts of the
enclosure to prevent escape of the animal or animals intended to be contained.
      (4)   When not in use, all gates shall be closed and secured in a manner
that prevents an animal from leaving the enclosure.
      (5)   Broken or damaged portions of an enclosure shall be repaired with
like material and provide a seamless barrier that reasonably inhibits or
prevents escape.
      (6)   For all dogs, an enclosure shall have an outside-perimeter barrier
that is a minimum height of 48 inches when measured from the ground. For
aggressive dogs, an enclosure shall have an outside-perimeter barrier that is a
minimum height of 72 inches when measured from the ground. Any portion of a
building that is intended to form part of an enclosure must have a continuous
wall (inclusive of windows and doors) that meets the applicable height
requirement.
      (7)   If petitioned by an owner, the director may modify or waive the
requirements of subsections (2), (5) and (6) above, provided that the director
determines that proposed alternate measures will adequately contain the animal
(s) intended to be restrained. In considering a petition, the director may take
into account factors that include, but are not limited to, zoning requirements,
deed restrictions and covenants, and the size and physical characteristics of
the animal or animals to be enclosed. The decision of the director shall be
final and non-appealable.
      (8)   An outdoor enclosure confining an animal for a substantial portion
of the day must provide at least 48 square feet of space for each animal that
it contains that is at least six months old. It is presumed that an animal is
being confined for a substantial portion of the day if a police officer, animal
care and control officer, code enforcement officer or the person charged with
enforcing this chapter witnesses the animal in said enclosure at least twice on
the same day at two separate times that are at least five hours apart.
      (9)   Subsection (8) shall not apply to:
         a.   Registered non-profit agencies that keep animals for purposes of
rescue, rehabilitation or adoption so long as such animals are otherwise
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or
         b.   Situations in which animals are being boarded for a period of
less than 30 days so long as such animals are otherwise maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person having charge, care or ownership of
a cat to fail to keep the cat from roaming beyond the boundaries of the
person's premises. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
subsection (c) that the cat is a feral cat in the city's trap, neuter and
return program.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope, tether, leash,
cable or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or trolley system.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (d) above
that the dog tethering:
      (1)   Is during a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming,
training or law enforcement activity; or
      (2)   Is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or the
dog, and the dog's owner maintains immediate control of the dog; or
      (3)   Occurs in the immediate control of the owner in a city park as
provided by §
24-10; or
      (4)   Occurs on the owner's premises and:
         a.   While the dog is within the owner's immediate control; and
         b.   Prevents the dog from advancing to within 15 feet of the edge of
any public street.
   (f)   The affirmative defenses provided in subsection (e) above are only
available if the following specifications are met:
      (1)   The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device is attached
to a properly fitted collar or harness worn by the dog;
      (2)   The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device is not placed
directly around the dog's neck;
      (3)   The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device does not
exceed one-twentieth of the dog's body weight;
      (4)   The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device, by design
and placement allows the dog a reasonable and unobstructed range of motion
without entanglement; and
      (5)   The dog has access to adequate shelter and clean and wholesome
water.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of an animal to
carry or transport the animal on any public roadway in an unenclosed vehicle
(such as a pick-up or flatbed truck, jeep or similar vehicle) unless the animal
is:
      (1)   Contained in a closed, vented animal carrier that is secured in
such a manner as to prevent the carrier from being thrown from the vehicle in
the event of a collision; or
      (2)   Secured by a leash or other device that is cross-connected to
prevent the animal from falling, jumping or being thrown from the motor vehicle
and from strangling on a single lead.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with this
section.
      (1)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. If a person
fails to comply with this section with respect to more than one dog, the
person's conduct with respect to each dog constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
   (i)   This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a
hand-held leash.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE III: DANGEROUS AND AGGRESSIVE DOGS
DIVISION 1: AGGRESSIVE DOGS
§ 6-14 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that a person harbors, keeps
or maintains an aggressive dog in the city unless the person complies with the
requirements of this article.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-14.1 AGGRESSIVE DOG DETERMINATION.
   (a)   A person is the owner of an aggressive dog when:
      (1)   The owner knows that the dog has made an unprovoked attack on
another domestic animal that causes bodily injury to the animal and which
occurred in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept;
      (2)   The owner knows that the dog has, on more than one occasion, bitten
one or more persons who are lawfully inside the dog's enclosure;
      (3)   The owner knows that the dog has repeatedly attempted, successfully
or unsuccessfully, to climb over, dig under, chew through, break or otherwise
escape from its enclosure in an attempt to attack a person or another domestic
animal;
      (4)   The owner knows that the dog has committed unprovoked acts that
would cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause
bodily injury to a person or domestic animal; or
      (5)   The owner is informed by the animal care and control authority that
the animal care and control authority has determined that the dog is an
aggressive dog.
   (b)   If a person reports a suspected or purported aggressive dog, the
animal care and control authority may investigate. The animal care and control
authority may accept sworn statements from all victims and witnesses to the
incident. If the animal care and control authority determines that the dog is
an aggressive dog, it shall notify the owner in writing of the determination.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, the owner may appeal the
determination of the animal care and control authority that a dog owned by the
owner is an aggressive dog to the director, no later than 15 calendar days
after the date notice of the determination is mailed to the owner.
   (d)   To file an appeal under subsection (c), the owner must:
      (1)   File a notice of appeal of the animal care and control authority's
aggressive dog determination with the director;
      (2)   Attach a copy of the determination from the animal care and control
authority; and
      (3)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the director by mailing the
notice through the United States Postal Service.
   (e)   The decision of the director shall be final and non-appealable.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-14.2 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNER OF AN AGGRESSIVE DOG.
   The owner of an aggressive dog shall restrain the aggressive dog at all
times, including during any appeal of an aggressive dog determination:
   (a)   On a leash in the direct physical control of a person; or
   (b)   In an adequate enclosure as defined in §
6-1.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-14.3 ATTACK BY AN AGGRESSIVE DOG.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of an
aggressive dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on a person or domestic
animal outside the animal's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the person or
domestic animal.
   (b)   An offense under this section is a punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
   (c)   If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section and the
unprovoked attack was not on a person, the court may order that the owner of
the aggressive dog comply with additional requirements as deemed appropriate by
the court.
   (d)   If an aggressive dog makes an unprovoked attack on a person, the
dangerous dog determination process outlined in §§
6-15.1 through
6-15.8 of this chapter shall also apply.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-14.4 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A person who owns or keeps custody or control of an aggressive dog
commits an offense if the person fails to comply with §
6-14.2.
   (b)   Violation of any section under this division is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $2,000.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-14.5 DEFENSE.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
6-14.3 or
6-14.4 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by
a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or a political
subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals, and has temporary
ownership, custody or control of the animal; provided, however, that for any
person to claim a defense under this section, that person must be acting within
the course and scope of his or her official duties in regards to the aggressive
dog.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
DIVISION 2: DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 6-15.1 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other
person harbors, keeps or maintains a dangerous dog in the city unless the owner
complies with the requirements of this article and state statutes regulating
dangerous dogs.
   (b)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other
person harbors, keeps or maintains in the city or brings to the city a dog that
has been declared dangerous outside of the city under one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 822;
      (2)   A local law or ordinance adopted in accordance with Tex. Health &
Safety Code Ch. 822; or
      (3)   A statute or ordinance that is substantially similar to Tex. Health
& Safety Code Ch. 822 and that was adopted by a political subdivision outside
of the State of Texas.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.2 RESERVED.
§ 6-15.3 DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION.
   (a)   The director or his or her designee may investigate all reports of
incidents as described in the definition of dangerous dog in §
6-1. The director may accept sworn statements from all victims and witnesses to
the attack. If the director determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, the
director shall notify the owner in writing of the determination.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, an owner, not later than the 15th
day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a
dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the director to municipal court.
   (c)   To file an appeal under subsection (b), the owner must:
      (1)   File a notice of appeal of the director's dangerous dog
determination with the municipal court;
      (2)   Attach a copy of the determination from the director; and
      (3)   Serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the director by mailing the
notice through the United States Postal Service.
   (d)   An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court under
subsection (c) in the manner described by Tex. Health & Safety Code § 822.0424.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.4 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERS OF A DANGEROUS DOG.
   (a)   Immediately after a person learns that the person is the owner of a
dangerous dog, and during any appeal of a dangerous dog determination, the
person shall:
      (1)   Restrain the dangerous dog at all times:
         a.   On a leash in the immediate control of a person; or
         b.   In a secure enclosure as defined in §
6-1; and
      (2)   Secure the dangerous dog with a muzzle in a manner that will not
cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall
prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous dog is taken off
the property of the owner for any reason;
   (b)   Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is
the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall:
      (1)   Register the dangerous dog with the animal care and control
authority and pay an annual registration fee of $500;
      (2)   Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage or show financial
responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000 to cover damages resulting
from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and
provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial
responsibility to the animal care and control authority;
      (3)   Spay or neuter the dangerous dog;
      (4)   Post signs in four-inch letters on all sides of the secure
enclosure warning of the presence of dangerous dogs and shall include a symbol
of dangerous dogs understandable by young children; and
      (5)   Comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   If the director determines that the owner of a dangerous dog has not
complied with subsection (a) or (b) within the required times after learning
that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog, the director shall provide
written notice of such determination to the owner. Said owner shall, within 15
days of notice, deliver the dog to the animal care and control authority which
shall refer the case to the municipal court for notice and hearing.
   (d)   The animal care and control authority may request the owner of a
dangerous dog to show proof of compliance with subsections (a) and (b) above.
If proof is requested, after the expiration of three days, if the animal care
and control authority determines that the owner of a dangerous dog has not
sufficiently presented proof that he or she is in compliance with subsections
(a) and (b) above, the director shall provide written notice of such
determination to the owner. Said owner shall, within 15 days of notice, deliver
the dog to the animal care and control authority which shall refer the case to
the municipal court for notice and hearing.
   (e)   If, after notice and hearing as provided by §
6-15.5, the court finds that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply
with subsections (c) and (d) above, the court shall order the animal care and
control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the
seizure. The animal care and control authority shall seize the dog or order its
seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane
conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.5 COMPLIANCE HEARING.
   (a)   The court, on appeal of the animal care and control authority's
dangerous dog determination under §
6-15.4(c) or application by any person, including the animal care and control
authority, and upon finding that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to
comply with §
6-15.8(b), shall set a time for a hearing. The hearing must be held not later
than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered.
   (b)   The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to:
      (1)   The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized;
and
      (2)   The person who made the complaint.
   (c)   Any interested party, including the county or city attorney, is
entitled to present evidence at the hearing.
   (d)   The court shall determine the estimated costs to house and care for
the impounded dog during the appeal process and shall set the amount of bond
for an appeal adequate to cover those estimated costs. An owner or person
filing the action may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the manner
described by Tex. Health & Safety Code § 822.0424.
   (e)   The court shall order the animal care and control authority to
humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with §
6-15.4(a) and (b) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized
or delivered to the animal care and control authority, except that,
notwithstanding any other law or local regulation, the court may not order the
destruction of a dog during the pendency of an appeal under Tex. Health &
Safety Code § 822.0424. If, based on the recommendation of the animal care and
control authority, the court determines, either after a hearing or without a
hearing, that the owner has complied with §
6-15.4(a) and (b) above before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is
seized or delivered to the animal care and control authority, the court shall
order the animal care and control authority to return the dog to the owner.
   (f)   An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the
municipal court in the manner described by Tex. Health & Safety Code §
822.0424. During the appeal period, the dog shall remain in the custody, care
and control of the animal care and control authority. If the appeal is
ultimately unsuccessful, the owner of the dog shall be responsible for the
dog's impoundment fees during the period the case was being appealed.
   (g)   The owner shall pay all costs and or fees assessed by the municipality
related to the seizure and impoundment of the dog, including, but not limited
to, boarding fees, microchip procedure and rabies vaccination, and the cost of
euthanasia of the dog if ordered by the court.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.6 DANGEROUS DOG REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal care and control
authority within 24 hours if the dangerous dog is at large, unconfined, has
attacked a human being or another animal, has died or has been sold or given
away.
   (b)   If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a
new address, that owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale
or move, shall notify the animal care and control authority for the area in
which the new address is located. Upon selling or moving the registered
dangerous dog, that owner must notify the new owner or person who has care and
control of the dog that he or she is keeping or taking ownership of a dog that
has been declared dangerous.
   (c)   The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in
which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes
on people or other animals.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.7 DEFENSES.
   (a)   It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is
a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal
shelter or person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state
to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody or control of
the dog; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense under this
section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or her
official duties with regard to the dangerous dog.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is
an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal
Justice or of a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law
enforcement or corrections purposes; provided, however, that for any person to
claim a defense under this section, that person must be acting within the
course and scope of his or her official duties with regard to the dangerous
dog.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the dog at
issue is a trained guard dog in the performance of official duties while
confined or under the control of its handler.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-15.8 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog
commits an offense if the person fails to comply with any section of this
division.
   (b)   It shall be a separate violation of this division for any person to
refuse or fail to surrender a dog subject to this article, or harbor, hide or
secret, transport or secure the transport of a dog subject to this article, for
the purpose of preventing its impoundment.
   (c)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE IV: RETAIL SALE OF ANIMALS
§ 6-16 COMMERCE IN LIVE ANIMALS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person exchanges a cat or dog for
consideration, regardless of the age of the cat or dog, at a location other
than where the cat or dog was born.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person sells, trades, barters,
leases, rents, gives away, or displays for a commercial purpose a live animal
on a roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground, swimming
pool, other recreation area, commercial or retail parking lot, or at an outdoor
special sale, swap meet, flea market, parking lot sale, or similar event.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person exchanges a dog or cat for
consideration and fails to implant in the dog or cat an identification
microchip and register the microchip with a national registry with the name,
address and contact information of the new owner.
   (d)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   The animal care and control center or an animal care and control
center certified partner or a not-for-profit 501(c)(3) animal welfare
organization;
      (2)   An event primarily for the exhibition and judging of cats or dogs;
or
      (3)   A mobile pet adoption event at which consideration is paid if it is
operated by an organization that is exempt pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of
this section.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) above
that the person is working on the behalf of a veterinary clinic; animal
hospital; animal shelter; not-for-profit 501(c)(3) animal welfare, rescue or
adoption organization; bona fide zoological park; circus; educational
institution; museum; licensed laboratory; publicly owned nature center; bona
fide educational or scientific association or society approved by the director
of health; or organization holding permits from an agency of the state or the
United States for the care and keeping of animals for rehabilitative purposes.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE V: DOG AND CAT REGISTRATION AND PERMITS
§ 6-17 DOG AND CAT MICROCHIPPING REQUIRED.
   (a)   The owner of any dog or cat must have the animal implanted with a
registered microchip before the animal attains four months of age.
   (b)   A dog or cat is exempt from this requirement if the dog or cat is
licensed by the city. Such license shall require a fee as established by city
council. A person who is the owner of a dog or a cat that is exempt from this
requirement shall, at all times, display on such dog or cat a valid city
license.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-18 VALIDITY OF PREVIOUSLY ISSUED LICENSE.
   A dog or cat license which is valid at the time of the effective date of
this chapter shall continue to be valid until its expiration. On or before its
expiration, the owner shall have the animal implanted with a registered
microchip or licensed in accordance with § 6-17.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-19 MAINTAINING CURRENT MICROCHIP REGISTRATION.
   (a)   The owner of a microchipped dog or cat shall maintain current
registration with a microchip registration company.
   (b)   If there is a change in contact information of an owner of a
registered microchipped dog or cat, the owner shall update contact information,
including new address or telephone number, with the microchip registration
company within 30 days of the date of the change in contact information.
   (c)   If there is a change in ownership of a registered dog or cat, the
previous owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the microchip is no
longer registered in the previous owner's name within 30 days of the date of
change in ownership. The new owner shall be responsible for re-registering the
microchip to include any new address and telephone number and have the
registration information transferred to the new owner's name within 30 days
after the change in ownership.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-20 RESERVED.
§ 6-21 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, keeps, harbors or has
custody of any dog or cat over four months of age without complying with this
article.
   (b)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that at the time
of the offense the person was using the animal in a research program at an
institution of higher education which is accredited by the American Association
for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the dog or
cat owner is a nonresident of this city and is keeping the subject pet in the
city for fewer than 60 days;
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the dog or
cat owner has been a resident of this city for fewer than 30 days; or
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the dog or
cat had been abandoned or lost and the temporary owner has had the dog or cat
for fewer than 30 days.
      (5)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
section that the animal is a feral cat in the city's trap, neuter and return
program.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-22 INTACT PET PERMIT.
   (a)   Offenses.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, keeps, harbors or
has custody of any dog or cat over six months of age that is intact unless such
dog or cat is subject to a valid intact pet permit issued in accordance with
this section.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, harbors or has
custody of an intact dog or cat at the residence or business property of an
individual who has had an intact pet permit revoked under subsection (e) below,
regardless of whether another person at the same property owns a dog or cat
subject to a valid permit.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person advertises for sale
within the city an unaltered dog or cat over six months of age and fails to
include in such advertisement the identification number of the dog or cat's
city-issued intact pet permit.
   (b)   Application.
      (1)   An application for an intact pet permit must be made on the form
prescribed by the director and shall include the following information:
         a.   The name, telephone number and physical address of the applicant;
         b.   The description of the animal sought to be included under the
permit and the species, breed, gender and age of the animal;
         c.   A statement from a licensed veterinarian that the animal is
current on all veterinary recommendations, including examinations,
vaccinations, preventative medicine, and treatments; and
         d.   A statement affirming that the applicant is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and agrees to maintain all animals in accordance
with applicable legal requirements.
      (2)   a.   An application must be accompanied by either:
            1.   Payment of an application fee in the amount adopted annually
by the city council; or
            2.    Documentation evidencing that the applicant has completed a
responsible-pet-owner class approved by the director.
         b.   This application fee shall be in addition to all other applicable
permits and registration fees required under this chapter. An application fee
is not refundable.
      (3)   An application must be accompanied by photographic evidence, in
digital or printed form, showing the enclosure or enclosures where the
unaltered animals are to be kept.
      (4)   The animal care and control authority may require additional
information and documentation as deemed necessary to determine whether a permit
should be issued.
   (c)   Consideration of application.
      (1)   An application for permit may be denied if the applicant:
         a.   Fails or refuses to submit a complete application;
         b.   Fails or refuses to submit any information or supporting
documentation required under this section or pursuant to a request of the
animal care and control authority;
         c.   Fails or refuses to submit the fee or documentation required
under subsection (b)(2) above;
         d.   Provides false information on or in connection with the
application;
         e.   Has, within the preceding 24 months, been convicted of, received
deferred adjudication or pleaded guilty or no contest to one or more violations
of this chapter, of any state law relating to the care and humane treatment of
animals, or both;
         f.   Has, within the preceding 24 months failed to appear in court to
respond to a citation relating to an alleged violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any state law relating to the care and humane treatment of
animals;
         g.   Has, within the preceding 60 months, been convicted of, received
deferred adjudication or pleaded guilty or no contest to one or more violations
of any provision of this chapter or of any state law relating to animal
cruelty;
         h.   Has previously had a permit revoked pursuant to subsection (e)
below; or
         i.   Resides at the same physical address as another individual whose
permit has been revoked pursuant to subsection (e) below.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (c)(1) above, an application for permit
may also be denied if specific circumstances exist indicating that the issuance
of the permit would not be in the best interest of the animals involved or of
the health and safety of the public. If a permit is denied pursuant to this
subsection (c), the animal care and control authority shall issue a written
statement citing the specific reason or reasons for the denial.
      (3)   If an application for permit is denied, the applicant may appeal to
the director. Such appeal must be made in writing and received within 30 days
of the date the application was originally rejected. The decision of the
director shall be final and non-appealable.
   (d)   Issuance and maintenance of permit.
      (1)   A permit is issued for an individual animal to an individual
person. A permit is not transferable to another animal or to another person.
      (2)   A permit is valid unless and until it is revoked.
      (3)   To maintain an intact pet permit, the permit holder must keep the
animal care and control authority apprised of current contact information for
holder and identifying and registration information for each animal subject to
an intact pet permit. In particular, a permit holder must notify the animal
care and control authority of any change of address or telephone number no
later 90 days after the new address or phone number is effective. In addition,
within 90 days of obtaining an intact animal not subject to an intact pet
permit, the permit holder must provide the animal control division with the
species, breed, gender, and age of such animal.
   (e)   Revocation of permit.
      (1)   The animal care and control authority may revoke a permit if the
owner of the animal issued an intact pet permit:
         a.   Is convicted, receives deferred adjudication or pleads guilty or
no contest with respect to one or more violations of this chapter, of any state
law relating to the care and humane treatment of animals, or both;
         b.   Fails to appear in court to respond to a citation relating to an
alleged violation of any provision of this chapter or of any state law relating
to the care and humane treatment of animals;
         c.   Is convicted, receives deferred adjudication or pleads guilty or
no contest with respect to any violation of any provision of this chapter or of
any state law relating to animal cruelty;
         d.   Is discovered to have provided false or inaccurate information on
or in connection with an application for an intact pet permit;
         e.   Fails to vaccinate any animal in accordance with the requirements
of state law or this chapter;
         f.   Fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (d)(3) above;
or
         g.   Fails to provide a current statement described in (b)(1)c. above
within 30 days of when requested by the animal care and control authority.
      (2)   a.   If a permit is revoked by the animal care and control
authority, the applicant may appeal to the director. Such appeal must be made
in writing and received within 30 days of the date the application was
originally revoked.
         b.   The director may:
            1.   Reinstate the permit pursuant to its original terms;
            2.   Reinstate the permit subject to the holder meeting additional
specified conditions; or
            3.   Affirm the revocation of the permit.
         c.   The decision of the director shall be final and non-appealable.
         d.   Revocation of a permit will not result in the refund of any
permit or application fee.
   (f)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)
above if an owner produces a signed, written opinion from a licensed
veterinarian that the animal in question should not be spayed or neutered due
to health concerns.
      (2)   It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)
above that the animal was owned, kept or harbored by, or in the custody of, an
animal establishment or releasing agency, was kept under restraint on the
premises of the animal establishment or releasing agency, and was being offered
for sale or adoption.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)
above that the person who owned the animal was not a permanent resident of the
city and was keeping the animal within the city for less than 60 days.
      (4)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)
above that, at the time of the offense, the person was in compliance with a
valid spay neuter contract.
      (5)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)
above that, at the time of the offense, the person was using the animal in a
research program at an institution of higher education that is accredited by
the American Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-23 MULTI-PET PERMIT.
   (a)   A person may file an application for a permit to keep dogs or cats in
excess of the number allowed in §
6-11. The applicant shall pay an application fee at the time of filing in an
amount established by the city council.
      (1)   The application shall be filed with the animal care and control
authority on a form provided by the director.
      (2)   At a minimum, the application form shall require the applicant's
name, address and telephone numbers; the number, gender (including spay or
neuter status), size and species of dogs and cats currently housed at the
address and their registered microchip or license information; the number of
dogs and cats the applicant wants to keep at the address; and information on
the type and size of the residence, the area where the animals will be kept,
and the distance that such area is from abutting residences.
      (3)   The application form shall also contain forms and instructions for
providing notice of the application to the occupants or owners of abutting
residences. The applicant shall notify said occupants or owners prior to filing
the application with the animal care and control authority.
   (b)   An inspection of the animals and the property will be conducted by the
animal control officer.
      (1)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the applicant will be able to
properly care for the number of animals requested without the animals creating
noise or odor nuisances or otherwise creating a public nuisance.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide proof to the director that all persons
required to be notified of the application were served with notice either in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   At the conclusion of the inspection, the director or his or her
designee shall either approve the application, modify the application or deny
the application.
   (d)   The director may deny the application if the applicant:
      (1)   Has not met the requirements in subsections (a) and (b) above;
      (2)   Has within the preceding 24 months been cited for violating this
chapter, been the subject of animal nuisance complaints or been charged with
violating state law relating to the care and humane treatment of animals;
      (3)   Has not properly vaccinated and microchipped or licensed all dogs
and cats at the residence in accordance with this chapter; or
      (4)   Has not complied with §
6-22 or has more than three intact dogs over six months of age or more than
three intact cats over six months of age irrespective of compliance with §
6-22.
   (e)   If the director determines that the applicant will not be able to care
for the number of animals requested without the creation of noise or odor
nuisances or without being otherwise detrimental to the public health, the
director may modify the application and approve the keeping of more than three
dogs or more than three cats, but fewer than the number requested in the
application.
   (f)   A permit issued under this section shall be valid for an indefinite
term, but shall be subject to revocation for violation of its conditions. The
permit shall specify the number of animals the permittee shall be able to keep,
and shall not be specific to individual animals. The permit shall remain valid
if the permittee moves and properly notifies the director of the change of
residence.
   (g)   A permit issued under this section is subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   A permittee shall notify the director, in writing, prior to
changing residences;
      (2)   A permittee shall keep all dogs and cats housed at permittee's
residence vaccinated and microchipped or licensed in accordance with this
chapter;
      (3)   A permittee shall comply with §
6-22 and have no more than three intact dogs over six months of age or no more
than three intact cats over six months of age irrespective of compliance with §
6-22.
      (4)   A permittee shall not maintain any animal odor or noise which
creates a public nuisance at the residence;
      (5)   A permittee shall keep his or her animals under restraint at all
times in accordance with this chapter;
      (6)   A permittee shall cooperate with the animal care and control
authority should any of the animals be involved in a bite or otherwise create a
condition which could reasonably expose or transmit rabies to any human being,
and shall follow all rabies quarantine procedures as outlined by the Rabies
Control Act of 1981, Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 826 and this chapter. If the
director determines that any of the permittee's dogs is a dangerous dog, such
determination shall subject the permit to revocation;
      (7)   A permittee shall comply with all other reasonable conditions
placed upon the permit by the director.
   (h)   If the director determines that grounds exist to revoke a permit
issued under this section or if requested by an occupant or owner of an
abutting residence, the director may set a hearing, providing the following:
      (1)   Written notice shall be served on the permittee in person or by
registered mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall
specify the date, time and place of the hearing, as well as any allegations of
permit condition violations.
      (2)   Notice that is mailed shall be deemed received five days after it
is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
      (3)   No decision may be rendered at a hearing by reason of the
permittee's failure to appear unless proof of actual service is shown.
      (4)   A decision to revoke a permit shall be based on a preponderance of
the evidence. The city shall have the burden of proof. At the conclusion of the
hearing the director's designee shall make written findings of fact and shall
issue a written decision within 30 days.
   (i)   At revocation hearings, the following shall apply:
      (1)   The director's designee shall be empowered to administer oaths, to
promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the hearing and shall act as the
hearing officer.
      (2)   A hearing under this section shall exhaust all administrative
remedies of the applicant or permittee.
   (j)   Revocation of a permit will not result in the refund of any permit or
application fee.
   (k)   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday,
Sunday or a city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular
city business day.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-24 PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article shall upon
conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined a sum not to
exceed $2,000. However, a violation of §
6-17 is subject to a penalty not to exceed $500.
   (b)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§§ 6-25—6-40 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: RABIES CONTROL
§ 6-41 RABIES VACCINATION.
   (a)   Vaccine required.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, keeps, harbors or
has custody of a dog or cat over four months of age that has not been immunized
against rabies as required by Tex. Health & Safety Code § 826.021.
      (2)   The same animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval
following the animal's initial vaccination.
      (3)   The same animal must be revaccinated against rabies according to
the maximum labeled duration of immunity for the most recently administered
vaccine or at a minimum of at least once every three years.
      (4)   In the prosecution of this subsection (a), it is an exception that
the dog or cat was kept, harbored or in the custody of an animal shelter.
   (b)   Every owner of a dog or cat immunized against rabies shall procure a
rabies vaccination certificate from the veterinarian administering the vaccine.
   (c)   The provisions restricting the use and sale of rabies vaccine for
animals as set forth in the state statute enacting the "Rabies Control Act of
1981" are hereby adopted by reference, as contained in Tex. Health & Safety
Code Ch. 826, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary,
and as amended from time to time.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a person to administer, sell or distribute
rabies vaccine for animals in a manner not authorized by subsection (c) above.
   (e)   Every veterinarian whose office or place of business is located within
the city and every designated veterinarian, whose office or place of business
is located within or outside the city, shall keep detailed records of animal
rabies vaccinations and, upon request of the director, shall provide rabies
vaccination information to the animal care and control section.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-42 DOMESTIC ANIMALS THAT REASONABLY EXPOSE HUMANS TO RABIES.
   (a)   When a domestic dog, cat or ferret bites or otherwise creates a
condition which could reasonably expose or transmit rabies to any human being,
the animal shall be immediately quarantined as provided in Texas Administrative
Code Title 25, § 169.27 for a minimum period of ten days from the date that the
bite or exposure occurred, or longer as the local rabies control authority may
deem necessary.
   (b)   The owner shall submit the subject animal within 24 hours of
notification by the local rabies control authority for quarantine in a Texas
Department of Health approved facility or a licensed veterinarian's clinic in
the city which has the facilities for isolation cages, or in a home quarantine
as provided in subsection (c) below.
   (c)   Home quarantine. The owner or custodian of the dog, cat or ferret may
request permission from the local rabies control authority to place the animal
in home quarantine if the following criteria can be met:
      (1)   A secure enclosure approved by the local rabies control authority
must be used to prevent escape;
      (2)   The animal has been vaccinated against rabies and the time elapsed
since the most recent vaccination has not exceeded the manufacturer
recommendations for the vaccine. If an unvaccinated animal is not over 16 weeks
of age at the time of the potential exposure, it may be allowed home
confinement;
      (3)   During the confinement period, the animal's custodian must monitor
the animal's behavior and health status and immediately notify the local rabies
control authority if any change is noted;
      (4)   The local rabies control authority or a veterinarian must observe
the animal on the first and last days of the home confinement; and
      (5)   The animal must not be a stray, as defined in Tex. Health & Safety
Code § 826.002, at the time of the potential exposure.
   (d)   High risk animal. If the animal, whether owned or unowned, is a high
risk animal which bit, scratched or created a condition which may have exposed
or transmitted the rabies virus to a human being or another animal, it shall be
euthanized and a suitable sample submitted to the Texas Department of Health
laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
   (e)   Low risk animal. If the animal is a cage-raised, low risk animal which
bit, scratched or created a condition which may have exposed or transmitted the
rabies virus to a human being, neither quarantine nor a rabies test will be
required unless the local rabies control authority has cause to believe the
animal is rabid, in which case it should be euthanized and tested for rabies.
   (f)   Human bitten. A domestic animal which has bitten a human and has been
designated by the local rabies control authority as unclaimed or unowned may be
humanely euthanized and a suitable sample shall be submitted to the Texas State
Department of Health laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
   (g)   Multiple bite wounds. The local rabies control authority may require
an animal which has inflicted multiple bite wounds, punctures or lacerations to
a human being to be humanely euthanized and a suitable sample submitted to the
Texas Department of Health laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
   (h)   Quarantine. Any animal required to be quarantined under this section
which in the determination of the local rabies control authority cannot be or
is not being maintained in a secure quarantine, shall be humanely euthanized
and a suitable sample submitted to the Texas Department of Health laboratory
for rabies diagnosis.
   (i)   Humanely killed or confinement. If the animal is not included in
subsection (a), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of this section, the animal will be
humanely euthanized and a suitable sample tested for rabies or the local rabies
control authority may require the animal to be confined for a 30-day
observation period at a licensed veterinarian's animal clinic or the animal
care and control center. Home quarantine described in subsection (c) above does
not apply in this subsection (i). Notwithstanding any other ordinance, the
veterinarian or local rabies control authority may not destroy an animal
following the final day of the quarantine period unless the veterinarian or
local rabies control authority has notified the animal's owner, if available,
of the animal's scheduled destruction.
   (j)   Owner. The owner of any animal that is reported to have rabies or
symptoms thereof, or to have been exposed to rabies, or to have bitten,
scratched or otherwise created a condition which may have exposed or
transmitted the rabies virus to any human being or animal, or that the owner
knows or suspects to be rabid or to have bitten, scratched or otherwise created
a condition which may have exposed or transmitted the rabies virus to any human
being or animal, shall submit such animal for quarantine to the local rabies
control authority or to any police officer. If the animal dies prior to its
quarantine, the owner shall submit the animal to the animal care and control
center for rabies diagnosis.
   (k)   Knowledge. Any person who has knowledge of any animal that exhibits
symptoms of, or has been exposed to rabies, or of any animal which has bitten,
scratched or otherwise created a condition which may have exposed or
transmitted the rabies virus to any human being or animal, shall immediately
report the incident to the local rabies control authority. The report shall
include the name and address of the victim and owner of the animal, if known,
and any other information he or she has relating to the incident or animal.
   (l)   Veterinarian. Every veterinarian or other person who is called to
examine or professionally attend any animal with rabies or any other reportable
communicable disease shall within 24 hours thereafter, report the following in
writing to the local rabies control authority:
      (1)   Species and description of the animal;
      (2)   Location of such animal;
      (3)   Name and address of the owner thereof; and
      (4)   Type and character of the disease.
   (m)   Investigation and record. The local rabies control authority shall
investigate and record all cases of rabies and suspected rabies.
   (n)   Animal's body. The body of any animal that has died of rabies or that
dies or is destroyed while in quarantine shall not be disposed of except as
directed by the local rabies control authority.
   (o)   Owner of any animal quarantined. The owner of any animal quarantined
under this section shall pay all reasonable costs of the quarantine and
disposition of the animal, including charges for shipment of animal tissues, if
required, to the Texas Department of Health laboratory for testing.
   (p)   Release of quarantined animal. An animal which has been quarantined
may be released by the local rabies control authority at the end of the
observation period upon a written release from a licensed veterinarian under
the following conditions:
      (1)   Proof of vaccination or receipt of vaccination has been provided to
the local rabies control authority prior to release from quarantine; and
      (2)   All applicable costs have been paid; and
      (3)   The animal is not being held for legal proceedings.
   (q)   Unlawful to expose others. It shall be unlawful for the owner of an
animal that has rabies or symptoms which could reasonably indicate rabies, or
that bites, scratches or otherwise creates a condition which may expose or
transmit the rabies virus to any human being or other animal to fail or refuse
to comply with any provisions of this article.
   (r)   Currently vaccinated guide dogs or police dogs. Currently vaccinated
service animals or currently vaccinated police dogs shall not be required to be
placed in quarantine when a bite is inflicted in the line of duty.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE VII: ANIMAL CONTROL IMPOUNDMENT; FEES
§ 6-43 IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; DISPOSITION.
   (a)   Animals may be impounded by the director under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   An animal is at large;
      (2)   An animal is reasonably suspected of having inflicted bodily harm
on any human being or animal, or poses a threat to public safety or constitutes
a public nuisance;
      (3)   A dog, cat or domestic ferret does not have a valid current rabies
vaccination;
      (4)   A miniature swine does not have valid, current vaccinations for
erysipelas, parvo virus and leptospirosis;
      (5)   The animal is a prohibited animal;
      (6)   An animal is not cared for in violation of §
6-65;
      (7)   An animal has rabies or symptoms thereof, or is an animal that a
person could reasonably suspect as having rabies, or that bites, scratches or
otherwise creates a condition which may have exposed or transmitted the rabies
virus to any human being or animal;
      (8)   An animal is not kept in conformity with this chapter or state law;
or
      (9)   A cat is roaming beyond the boundaries of the premises of the
person having charge, care or ownership of the cat. A feral cat that is
otherwise in the city's trap, neuter and return program shall not be subject to
capture by the city merely for being at large.
   (b)   In order to abate the nuisance of unrestrained and unwanted animals,
the director shall be the designated caretaker of an animal at the time the
director:
      (1)   Takes custody of an impounded animal, or
      (2)   Identifies an unrestrained animal as a nuisance.
   (c)   Immediately upon intake, the director, as the designated caretaker, is
authorized to provide each impounded animal with appropriate immunizations and
parasite treatment and to implant a microchip for permanent identification. A
licensed veterinarian or a person under the veterinarian's supervision shall
perform any procedure or treatment that the veterinarian recommends or
determines is appropriate.
   (d)   If, by a microchip, tag or other means, the owner of an impounded
animal can be identified, the director shall, as soon as practicable after
impoundment, notify the owner, if reasonably possible, that if the impounded
animal is not redeemed within 96 hours after impoundment, disposition of the
impounded animal shall occur in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-44 TIME; FEES: IMPOUNDMENT; BITE; BOARDING; VACCINATION OR LICENSE.
   (a)   Impounded dogs, including those released from quarantine, shall be
kept for 96 hours from the date of impoundment. If the owner of such impounded
animal does not redeem it within 96 hours after impoundment, the disposition of
the animals will be in accordance with §
6-45. The animal may be disposed of prior to the expiration of such time if, in
the professional opinion of the director, disposition is necessary to avoid the
unnecessary suffering of a sick or injured animal.
   (b)   Impounded animals not found to have a microchip, including those
released from quarantine, shall have a microchip implanted in the animal by the
animal care and control authority.
   (c)   Impounded animals may be sterilized by the animal care and control
authority if the director determines that the animal has no microchip or tag
and a veterinarian determines that sterilization is appropriate for the animal.
   (d)   Impounded and quarantine released domestic animals shall be available
for immediate redemption to their owner upon presenting photo identification,
of which the city shall keep a copy, and paying all applicable fees.
   (e)   Impounded prohibited animals shall be available for immediate
redemption by the owner after presenting photo identification, of which the
city shall keep a copy, and after paying all applicable fees and signing an
agreement with the city stipulating that the owner
      (1)   Shall, within 72 hours, lawfully remove from the city limits the
prohibited animal and shall not allow the prohibited animal to return to the
city; and
      (2)   Consents to the city humanely destroying the prohibited animal if
the animal is found within the city limits. If the owner of a prohibited animal
fails to comply with this subsection (d), the prohibited animal may be either
euthanized or removed from the city as determined by the animal care and
control authority. The owner of a prohibited animal shall pay to the city the
applicable fees and costs of impoundment and handling.
   (f)   Amounts of the "applicable fees" are established by the city council.
Types of "applicable fees" which must be paid by the animal owner to reclaim
impounded or quarantined animals shall be determined in accordance with this
subsection (f).
      (1)   An impoundment and boarding charge will be charged for all
reclaimed animals. This charge shall take into account and reflect the species
of the animal in question and whether such animal is a prohibited animal, is
currently vaccinated against rabies, or is microchipped, or spayed or neutered.
      (2)   The impoundment and boarding charge shall also reflect whether the
animal required quarantine. This charge will also reflect, apart from any
quarantine issue, whether the animal could be housed with one or more others or
required its own cage due to size or temperament. This charge shall also take
into account and reflect the number of times that any dog or cat belonging to
the same owner has been impounded at the animal care and control center within
the preceding 12 months, for whatever reason. In each instance, the factors
affecting the amount of the impoundment and boarding charge shall be itemized
in the invoice provided to an owner at the time the animal is reclaimed.
      (3)   A microchip implantation fee will be charged if the impounded or
quarantined animal does not have microchip or other approved identification as
provided by this chapter prior to being impounded or quarantined.
      (4)   For any animal released pursuant to a sterilization and vaccination
agreement, a deposit may be charged in an amount established annually by the
city council. If an owner fails to provide proof to the animal care and control
authority from a veterinarian that each animal subject to such agreement was
sterilized and vaccinated within 30 days from the date the animal was
reclaimed, the amount of such deposit shall be forfeited and used to defray
costs associated with additional staff time required to ensure that each animal
in question was sterilized and vaccinated.
      (5)   An impoundment and boarding charge will be made for every day and
any part of a day that the animal is in the custody of the animal care and
control center.
      (6)   Where an owner cannot provide proof to the animal care and control
authority at the time of release from impoundment that the impounded animal is
currently vaccinated against rabies, then a charge for the legally required
vaccination will be made and a voucher provided to the owner to receive
vaccination services from a veterinarian.
      (7)   A schedule of the current "applicable fees" for reclaiming
impounded or quarantined animals is available for review at the animal care and
control center.
      (8)   It is not a defense to prosecution of any citations that applicable
impoundment, bite, boarding, vaccination, microchip or license fees have been
paid.
      (9)   Based on the criteria established in the policy approved by the
director, the director can waive or reduce fees for impoundment and boarding
charges based upon the owners existing or agreed compliance with this chapter,
or after the owners participation in the animal care and control authority's
responsible pet ownership class, volunteer or community service programs.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-45 RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT.
   Conditions for release of impounded animals are as follows:
   (a)   Before releasing any animal to the owner, the director shall require
sufficient proof that reasonable precautions have been taken to prevent further
violations of this chapter. If the owner does not submit sufficient proof of
such precautions, the animal may continue to be impounded for three additional
days. Upon the expiration of that second three-day period, the director shall
determine the disposition of the impounded animal in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   No impounded animal suffering from disease, ailment or injury may be
redeemed until the director is provided with sufficient information to
determine that arrangements have been made for proper treatment of the animal
by a licensed veterinarian.
   (c)   Except where otherwise provided in this chapter or by state law,
animals not redeemed within 96 hours following impoundment or release from
quarantine shall become the property of the city and shall at the direction of
the director be placed for adoption in a suitable home, transferred to a
qualified rescue or humane group, kept for city purposes, or be humanely
euthanized.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE VIII: ADOPTIONS AND STERILIZATION FOR ADOPTED DOGS AND CATS;
MANDATORY STERILIZATION FOR UNRESTRAINED DOGS AND CATS
§ 6-46 REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION AND RECLAMATION.
   (a)   (1)   The animal care and control center may not release a dog or cat
for adoption unless the animal:
         a.   Has a microchip or other approved license;
         b.   Has been sterilized; and
         c.   Has received rabies vaccination according to §
6-41.
      (2)   Vaccination and sterilization are not required if the release is
made to an owner who has signed an agreement to have the animal sterilized and
vaccinated by a private veterinarian and who has paid the deposit, if required,
in compliance with §
6-44(f)(4).
   (b)   (1)   The animal care and control center may not release a dog or cat
for reclamation unless the animal:
         a.   Has a microchip implanted or has an approved license in
compliance with §
6-17;
         b.   Has been sterilized; and
         c.   Has received rabies vaccination according to §
6-41.
      (2)   Vaccination is not required if the release is made to an owner who
provides proof that the animal is current on its vaccinations or has signed an
agreement to have the animal vaccinated by a private veterinarian and has paid
the deposit, if required in compliance with §
6-44(f)(4).
      (3)   Sterilization is not required if the release is made to an owner
who has signed an agreement to have the animal sterilized by a private
veterinarian and has paid the deposit, if required by §
6-44(f)(4), or to an owner who provides proof that:
         a.   The animal has been previously sterilized;
         b.   A veterinarian has issued a signed, written opinion that
sterilization would jeopardize the animal's health; or
         c.   The animal is the subject of a valid intact pet permit and has
not been previously impounded in the city.
      (4)   Sterilization is not required if the release is made to an owner
who applies for an intact pet permit at the time of the release and who has
paid a non-refundable after-the-fact application fee in the amount of $500. The
after-the-fact application fee may not be waived or reduced by participation in
the animal care and control authority's responsible pet ownership class.
   (c)   The sterilization and vaccination agreement must contain:
      (1)   A sterilization completion date, which is:
         a.   The 30th day after the date of adoption or reclamation in the
case of an adult animal; or
         b.   The 30th day after a specific date estimated to be the date an
infant animal becomes six months old; and
      (2)   A statement, printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization
and vaccination of the animal are required, and that if the animal is not
sterilized on or before the appropriate date or is not vaccinated within a
reasonable time, the owner commits a criminal offense punishable as a Class C
misdemeanor and forfeits any deposit paid under §
6-44(f)(4).
   (d)   Except as provided by this subsection (d), an owner who signs a
sterilization and vaccination agreement under this section shall have the
animal sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date stated in the
agreement. If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. The animal care and control center may
extend the deadline for 30 days on presentation of a written report from a
licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of the animal may be
jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit of the number of extensions that may
be granted for this reason.
   (e)   When adopting or reclaiming an animal from the city's animal care and
control center, an owner must sign an adoption or reclamation agreement and
must present government-issued photo identification to the city so that the
city can make a copy of it.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for a person who adopted or reclaimed a dog or
cat from the animal care and control center and executed a sterilization or
vaccination agreement for the subject animal:
      (1)   To fail or refuse to have the subject animal vaccinated within a
reasonable time; or
      (2)   To fail or refuse to have the subject animal sterilized by the date
specified in the agreement or in subsequent extension of the deadline as may be
granted by the animal care and control center pursuant to subsection (d) above.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-47 CONFIRMATION OF STERILIZATION AND VACCINATION, DEATH OR LOST OR STOLEN
ANIMAL.
   (a)   Except as provided by subsection (b) and (c) of this section, every
owner who signs a sterilization and vaccination agreement under §
6-46 of this article shall provide the animal care and control center from
which the owner adopted a dog or cat, a certificate of sterilization or
vaccination or both signed by the veterinarian who performed the surgery or
vaccination or both, as applicable; this certificate must include a brief
description of the animal and provide the date of sterilization or vaccination
or both, as applicable. It shall be unlawful for a person who adopts or
reclaims a dog or cat from the animal care and control center and who has
executed a sterilization and vaccination agreement for the subject animal to
fail or refuse to provide a certificate of sterilization or vaccination or
both, as applicable, for the animal to the animal care and control center by
seven days from the date the animal is sterilized or vaccinated or both.
   (b)   If the adopted or reclaimed animal dies on or before the deadline
provided by §
6-46 of this article, the owner shall provide to the animal care and control
center, no later than seven days from the date of the animal's death, a signed
letter stating that the animal has died, describing the cause of death, if
known, and providing the date of death. The letter required by this subsection
(b) is in lieu of the certificate required by subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   If an adopted or reclaimed animal is lost or stolen before the
sterilization completion date, the owner shall deliver to the animal care and
control center a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. The
letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the
animal's disappearance and must describe the circumstances surrounding the
disappearance and provide the approximate date of the disappearance. The letter
required by this subsection (c) is in lieu of the certificate required by
subsection (a) of this section.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-48 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH STERILIZATION AGREEMENT; ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
CENTER RIGHT OF RECLAMATION.
   The animal care and control center may promptly reclaim the adopted animal
from the new owner if the animal care and control center does not receive the
following from the new owner after the expiration of the seventh day after the
sterilization completion date agreed to under §
6-46:
   (a)   A certificate of sterilization under §
6-47(a);
   (b)   A letter stating the animal has died under §
6-47(b); or
   (c)   A letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen under §
6-47(c).
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-49 RESERVED.
§ 6-50 RESERVED.
§§ 6-51-6-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: CARE AND HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 6-61 UNLAWFUL ACTS ENUMERATED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person to crop a dog's ears, dock a tail,
remove dew claws or perform other surgical procedures on a dog or a cat except
as provided by the "Veterinary Licensing Act," Tex. Occ. Code Ch. 801, as
amended from time to time.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or deliver live chickens,
ducklings, goslings or rabbits less than eight weeks of age to any person in
quantities of less than five.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter or
display any living chickens, rabbits, ducks or any other fowl or animal which
has been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an
artificial color.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a person to give away any live animal as a
prize or inducement for the purpose of attracting trade or business.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for a person to use steel jaw or leg-hold traps
except in the case of rat control.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, starve, overwork or to
otherwise abuse any animal.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person having care and
control of any animal to abandon said animal.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful for a person to confine an animal in a parked or
standing vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety or
welfare. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety or welfare is
endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle for a
period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air temperature
measures above 85°F or below 35°F.
   (i)   Except as provided for in §
6-13 (e), it shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope, tether,
leash, cable or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or trolley
system. Restraint under such conditions is presumed to be cruel confinement for
purposes of this chapter.
   (j)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (j), it shall be
unlawful for a person to confine an animal for a substantial portion of the day
in an outdoor enclosure that provides less than 48 square feet of space for
each animal that it contains that is at least six months old. It is presumed
that an animal is being confined for a substantial portion of the day if a
police officer, animal care and control officer, code enforcement officer or
the person charged with enforcing this ordinance witnesses the animal in said
enclosure at least twice on the same day at two separate times that are at
least five hours apart.
      (2)   The prohibition in this subsection (j) shall not apply to:
         a.   Registered non-profit agencies that keep animals for purposes of
rescue, rehabilitation or adoption so long as such animals are otherwise
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; or
         b.   Situations in which animals are being boarded for a period of
less than 30 days so long as such animals are otherwise maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (k)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly manufacture, buy,
sell, barter, exchange, possess, advertise or otherwise offer equipment used
for training or handling a fighting bird, including, but not limited to, a
cage, decoy, pen, house for keeping a fighting bird, feeding apparatus,
training pen or a gaff, slasher or other sharp implement designed for
attachment to a fowl with the intent that the equipment be used in bird
fighting. For purposes of this provision, GAFF means an artificial steel spur
designed to attach to the leg of a fowl to replace or supplement the fowl's
natural spur, and SLASHER means a steel weapon resembling a curved knife blade
designed to attach to the foot of a fowl.
      (2)   For purposes of this subsection (k), it is presumed that equipment
is intended to be used for bird fighting if the decoy or gaff, slasher or other
implement:
         a.   Bears blood or other biological matter or residue; or
         b.   If a police officer, animal care and control officer, code
enforcement officer or other person charged with enforcing this article
witnesses the decoy or implement:
            1.   Attached to a bird; or
            2.   In the pen, coop or yard in which the bird is located.
   (l)   The actions prohibited by this section are in addition to any
prohibitions existing elsewhere in this code or any applicable state or federal
law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any duty imposed on an
owner by any other provision of this code or any applicable state or federal
law.
   (m)   (1)   Public safety officers, including officers in the city code
compliance department, public health, fire and police departments, shall have
the authority to seize any animal that is the subject of any violation of this
section if doing so is believed to be necessary to protect the animal's health,
safety or welfare.
      (2)   If an officer personally witnesses a violation of any provision of
this section occurring in plain view from or on public property, the officer
may seize the animal without seeking issuance of a warrant even if doing so
requires entering onto or into private property.
      (3)   If an animal is seized without a warrant under subsection (m)(2)
above, a timely post-seizure hearing shall be held to satisfy the
constitutional requirements of due process.
   (n)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent public safety
officers, including officers in the city code compliance department, public
health, fire and police departments from euthanizing animals when authorized to
do so by any statute, ordinance or law, or when such action is deemed necessary
to spare the animal unreasonable pain and suffering or in the interest of the
public health and safety.
   (o)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or other person having care and
control of a dog or cat to fail to promptly remove and dispose of, in a
sanitary manner, feces left by the dog or cat. It shall be an affirmative
defense to prosecution under this subsection (o) that the person in control of
the dog or cat is the owner of the premises, or the agent of the owner of the
premises, where the dog or cat deposits feces.
   (p)   It shall be unlawful to allow accumulation of animal feces and urine
in violation of
Appendix B of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (q)   It shall be unlawful to keep large animals in violation of
Appendix A of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (r)   It shall be unlawful to keep swine in violation of
Appendix B of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (s)   It shall be unlawful to keep pigeons and certain fowl in violation of
Appendix B of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (t)   It shall be unlawful to ride, tether or pasture any animal in parks or
recreation areas in violation of
Ch. 24 of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (u)   It shall be unlawful to walk a dog without a leash in a city park or
in an event area or otherwise be in violation of either
Ch. 24 or
Ch. 20 of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (v)   It shall be unlawful to walk a dog or ride a horse within the confines
of the Fort Worth Botanic Garden in violation of
Ch. 24 of the code of the City of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-62 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade,
keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under
such person's control any of the following:
   (a)   Any dangerous animal, pursuant to a final determination by the
director and in accordance with this chapter that the animal is dangerous;
   (b)   Any prohibited animal unless that person is exempted by Tex. Health &
Safety Code § 822.102, Subchapter E, Dangerous Wild Animals, as amended; or
      (1)   A prohibited animal is exempt from this section if:
         a.   The animal belongs to a bona fide zoological park, circus,
educational institution, museum, licensed laboratory, publicly owned nature
center or the animal is kept by bona fide members of an educational or
scientific association or society approved by the director of health, or
persons holding permits from an agency of the state or the United States for
the care and keeping of animals for rehabilitative purposes. If a person holds
a permit from the Texas State Department of Parks and Wildlife to operate a
wildcare center in the city, the permit holder must also comply with the city
comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended, and must keep any and all animals
or reptiles in cages of sufficient size, construction and strength to restrain
the animal or reptile at all times; or
         b.   The animal is a service animal, as defined herein, that has been
registered with the city and the following information has been provided to the
director:
            1.   Records of vaccination appropriate for the species of animal;
            2.    Documentation from a veterinarian that the animal is healthy;
            3.   Proof of proper restraint for the animal; and
            4.   Proof that the animal has been or is being trained to perform
tasks of an assistance or service animal.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-63 GUARD DOGS.
   (a)   All guard dogs shall be registered with the director prior to being
used as guard dogs and thereafter registered annually.
   (b)   A guard dog that commits an unprovoked bite upon a human being or
animal shall be quarantined as required in §
6-42. If a person committing a crime is bitten by a guard dog that is
protecting life or property, the animal may be observed at a kennel, or at the
animal care and control center as directed by the director or his or her
authorized representative.
   (c)   That portion of the "Private Security Act," Tex. Occ. Code Ch. 1702,
which refers to guard dog companies and restrictions on the use of guard dogs,
is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-64 DEAD ANIMAL PICKUP.
   (a)   If the city is asked to pick up a small dead animal from premises
which are used for nonresidential purposes, the owner of the animal or the
person in control of the premises on which the animal is located shall pay the
sum established by city council for each animal which the city picks up.
   (b)   Owners are responsible for the proper disposition of large dead
animals other than a dog or cat.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-65 PROPER CARE OF ANIMALS.
   Every owner or other person having care and control of any animal shall
provide the following for each animal under his or her care and control:
   (a)   Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served to the animal in
clean containers, to maintain the animal in good health;
   (b)   Sufficient clean and wholesome water, served to the animal in a clean
container, such water to be reasonably available to the animal at all times;
   (c)   Adequate shelter, which shall allow the animal to remain dry and
protected from the elements at all times and which shall provide either natural
or artificial shade for the animal to avoid direct sunlight. If the shelter is
provided by enclosure, the enclosure shall allow for adequate ventilation; and
   (d)   Veterinary care as needed to prevent suffering. It is a defense to
prosecution under subsection (c) that the animals are livestock animals kept in
accordance with generally accepted and otherwise lawful animal husbandry or
agriculture practices.
   (e)   Animals kept on or brought to day care center premises shall be in
compliance with this chapter and with §
16-434 of this code.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-66 WILDLIFE ABATEMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, the director may use lethal methods
approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association for humane euthanasia
for control and abatement of nuisance wildlife within the city.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE X: ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 6-67 COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an animal establishment to sell, trade or
give away any dog or cat, over three months of age, unless the dog or cat has
been microchipped or licensed and vaccinated as required by this chapter.
   (b)   The director shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment
and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable
time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-68 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this article, animal
establishments shall comply with the following minimum standards:
      (1)   Remove manure and droppings from pens, yards, cages and other
enclosures daily and handle or dispose of the excretions in such manner as to
keep the premises free of any nuisance;
      (2)   Place food in impervious containers on impervious surfaces;
      (3)   Remove all refuse on the premises and dispose of same by a means
approved by the city health officer;
      (4)   Such standards of sanitation shall be administered by the city
health officer; and
      (5)   Such establishments will comply with all laws and city ordinances.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any animal establishment to fail or refuse to
comply with any minimum standard set forth in this section.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-69 MULTIFAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES.
   In accordance with §
7-411 of this code, as it may be amended, the landlord of a multifamily
dwelling complex in which tenants or guests are allowed to own, keep or harbor
cats or dogs must require that each allowed animal, at the time of leasing and
upon each renewal of a lease, is in compliance with
Chapter 6 of this code, including that each animal over four months of age has
a registered microchip or license in compliance with §
6-19; and that each animal over six months of age is spayed, neutered or
subject to an intact pet permit in compliance with §
6-22.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE XI: MINIATURE SWINE
§ 6-70 MINIATURE SWINE GENERALLY.
   Miniature swine, as defined in §
6-1, may be kept as pets in the City of Fort Worth. The following requirements
shall apply to the keeping of miniature swine within the City of Fort Worth.
   (a)   There shall be a maximum of two swine per household or business. The
swine may be of any age. Under no circumstances may a person keep more than two
miniature swine per household or business.
   (b)   All swine must be either spayed or neutered. Under no circumstances
may a person engage in the propagation or breeding of miniature swine within
the city limits of the City of Fort Worth.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain miniature
swine outdoors. A person may permit miniature swine outdoors for brief periods
(but not to exceed one hour per occurrence), as necessary for exercise or for
the elimination of waste. The outdoor area used for exercise and waste
elimination must be a secure area from which the swine may not escape.
Miniature swine are subject to all other sections of this chapter, including
sections on restraint of animals.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-71 VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain miniature swine
unless the swine have received annual vaccinations against erysipelas, parvo
virus and leptospirosis. The first inoculations for such diseases must be
received before the animal is four months of age.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-72 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All miniature swine kept within the City of Fort Worth shall be microchipped
or licensed and be registered with a national registry within 14 days from the
time the animal is taken to its place of residence.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-73 CONDITIONS.
   All locations where miniature swine are kept shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. Exercise areas shall be cleaned of swine excrement on a
daily basis.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 6-74 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or failure or refusal
to comply with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation. Each day that
a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   If any person is found guilty of having violated any provision of this
article, such violation may result in revocation of such person's authorization
to keep or maintain miniature swine.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
ARTICLE XII: ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 6-75 CREATION.
   (a)   There is hereby created, pursuant to Tex. Health & Safety Code §
823.005, an animal shelter advisory committee.
   (b)   The purpose of the committee shall be to assist animal shelters
located in the City with compliance with Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 823.
Additionally, the committee may provide recommendations to the City regarding
its compliance with the Rabies Control Act of 1981, being Tex. Health & Safety
Code Ch. 826, and may recommend ways to improve the efficiency and cost
effectiveness of the city's animal care and control program.
   (c)   The committee shall consist of nine members appointed by a majority
vote of the city council. Committee members shall serve two-year terms except
as provided in subsection (d) below.
   (d)   Appointments shall be as follows:
      (1)   Places 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Terms expire on October 1 of each odd-
numbered year.
      (2)   Places 2, 4, 6 and 8. Terms expire on October 1 of each even-
numbered year.
   (e)   The composition of the committee shall include at least one licensed
veterinarian, at least one municipal official, at least one person whose duties
include the daily operation of an animal shelter, and at least one
representative from an animal welfare organization. The same person shall not
be appointed to fulfill more than one of these requirements. The city may
establish qualifications for other positions on the committee
   (f)   Members of the committee shall be subject to removal at any time by
the city council. Any vacancy in the membership of the committee shall be
filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the member whose place
has, by removal or otherwise, become vacant. Vacancies shall be filled within
60 days after the city council removes the member or within 60 days after the
city council receives notice of the member's resignation.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018; Ord. 27577-04-2025,
§ 1, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 6-76 MEETINGS.
   (a)   The committee shall meet a minimum of three times per calendar year.
   (b)   A quorum of the committee shall consist of a majority of the members,
excluding any vacancies. The presence of a quorum of the committee shall be
required prior to a meeting being called to order.
   (c)   Approval of all items before the committee shall require a majority
vote of those in attendance.
   (d)   The committee may adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings.
(Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 1, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
CHAPTER 7: BUILDINGS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
      
III.   INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
      
IIIA.   INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
      
IV.   MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
      
V.   INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
      
VI.   FALLOUT SHELTERS
      
VII.   MOVEMENT AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
      
VIII.   FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS
      
IX.   STANDARDS, REGISTRATION, AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIFAMILY
DWELLING COMPLEXES
      
X.   REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF ONE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
      
XI.   EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Cross-reference:
   Electrical regulations,
Ch. 11
   Fire prevention and protection,
Ch. 13
   Planning and development department, §§
2-310 et seq.
   Plumbing,
Ch. 26
   Public utilities,
Ch. 28
   Ratproofing of business buildings, §§
16-371 et seq.
   Signs,
Ch. 29
   Streets and sidewalks,
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance,
Ch. 31
   Transportation and public works department, §§
2-146 et seq.
   Water and sewers,
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations,
App. A
Section
Article I: In General
   
7-1   Building Administrative Code
   
7-2—7-40   Reserved
Article II: International Energy Conservation Code
   
7-41   The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code adopted
   
7-42   Amendments
   
7-43   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-44   Penalty for violation
   
7-45   Reserved
Article III: International Building Code
   
7-46   The 2021 Edition of the International Building Code adopted
   
7-47   Amendments
   
7-48   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-49   Penalty for violation
   
7-50   Accessibility standard for certain city assisted housing construction
programs
   
7-51—7-60   Reserved
Article IIIA: International Residential Code
   
7-61   The 2021 Edition of the International Residential Code adopted
   
7-62   Amendments
   
7-63   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-64   Penalty for violation
   
7-65   Reserved
Article IV: Minimum Building Standards Code
Division 1: In General
   
7-66   Short title
   
7-67   Purpose of article
   
7-68   Definitions
   
7-69—7-75   Reserved
Division 2: Administration
   
7-76   Director
   
7-77   Building standards commission
   
7-77.1   Abatement cases under the building standards commission
   
7-78—7-85   Reserved
Division 3: Minimum Standards for Buildings and Structures
   
7-86   Declaration of minimum standards; owner responsibility
   
7-87   Structural and materials standards
   
7-88   Mechanical standards
   
7-89   Plumbing standards
   
7-90   Electrical standards
   
7-91   Fire protection standards
   
7-92   Standards for provision of utilities to dwelling units by a landlord
   
7-93   Sanitation standards
   
7-94   Miscellaneous standards
   
7-95   Security devices
   
7-96   Tenant responsibilities
Division 4: Administrative and Civil Remedies
   
7-97   Notice of violation
   
7-98   Compliance agreement
   
7-99   Reserved
   
7-100   Proceedings before the commission
   
7-100A   Proceedings before municipal court
   
7-101   Notice of proceedings
   
7-102   Hearing before the commission
   
7-102A   Hearing before a municipal court
   
7-102B   Civil action in municipal court
   
7-103   Civil penalty
   
7-104   Work performed by city
   
7-105   Assessment of lien
   
7-106   Additional authority to secure a building or structure
   
7-107   Reserved
   
7-108   Judicial review
   
7-109   Preservation of historic properties
   
7-110   Quarterly report to city council of buildings or structures on the
demolition/rehabilitation list
   
7-111   Appointment of a receiver
   
7-112   Civil action without commission hearing
   
7-113—7-120   Reserved
Division 5: Criminal Enforcement
   
7-121   Maintaining a building or structure in violation of this article
   
7-122   Failure to secure a vacant building or structure
   
7-123   Occupancy of a building or structure posted with a notice to vacate
   
7-124   Removing or defacing a notice to vacate
   
7-125   Penalty
   
7-126   Criminal citation
   
7-127—7-165   Reserved
Article V: International Mechanical Code
   
7-166   The 2021 Edition of the International Mechanical Code adopted
   
7-167   Amendments
   
7-168   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-169   Penalty for violation
   
7-170—7-185   Reserved
Article VI: Fallout Shelters
   
7-186   Definitions
   
7-187   Civil defense fallout shelter board—Established; composition;
appointment of members
   
7-188   Same—Powers and duties
   
7-189   Compliance with article required
   
7-190   Approval of plans and specifications
   
7-191   Construction standards and requirements
   
7-192   Right of entry of enforcement officials
   
7-193   Appeals
   
7-194—7-215   Reserved
Article VII: Movement and Demolition of Buildings and Structures
Division 1: Generally
   
7-216   Permits—Required
   
7-217   Same—Expiration and invalidity
   
7-218   Same—Revocation
   
7-219   Vehicle escort
   
7-220   Utility company review
   
7-221   Performance bond
   
7-222   Completion of work
   
7-223   Inspection fee
   
7-224   License—Required
   
7-225   Same—Revocation
   
7-226   Business registration
   
7-227   Insurance required
   
7-228   Emergency authority
   
7-229   City liability
   
7-230—7-240   Reserved
Division 2: Moving of Buildings and Structures Governed by Building Code and
Minimum Building Standards Code
   
7-241   Moving application approval
   
7-242   Compliance with article prerequisite to application approval and
issuance of permit
   
7-243   Notification
   
7-244   Inspection
   
7-245   Issuance of permit
   
7-246   Applicant’s responsibility
   
7-247   Notification and responsibility for damage
   
7-248   Failure to repair or replace
   
7-249—7-260   Reserved
Division 3: Moving of Buildings and Structures Not Governed by Building Code
and Minimum Building Standards Code
   
7-261   Specific moving requirements governing weight load
   
7-262   Application for permit
   
7-263   Approval of permit application
   
7-264   Prima facie evidence of weight and size of load
   
7-265   Permit form
   
7-266   Issuance of permit
   
7-267—7-280   Reserved
Division 4: Demolition
   
7-281   Application approval
   
7-282   Special restrictions
   
7-283   Revocation of permit
   
7-284—7-300   Reserved
Article VIII: Floodplain Provisions
Division 1: Purpose, Objectives and Definitions
   
7-301   Findings of fact
   
7-302   Statement of purpose
   
7-303   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
7-304   Definitions
   
7-305—7-315   Reserved
Division 2: General Provisions
   
7-316   Lands to which this article applies
   
7-317   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
7-318   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
7-319—7-330   Reserved
Division 3: Administration
   
7-331   Designation of the local floodplain administrator
   
7-332   Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator
   
7-333   Permit procedures
   
7-334   Variance and appeal of interpretation procedures
   
7-335—7-345   Reserved
Division 4: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
7-346   General standards
   
7-347   Specific standards
   
7-348   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
7-349   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
   
7-350   Floodways
   
7-351   Penalties for noncompliance
   
7-352   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
7-353   Interpretation
   
7-354   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
7-355—7-370   Reserved
Division 5: Abatement
   
7-371   Order of abatement
   
7-372   Extension of time
   
7-373   Voluntary abatement
   
7-374   Failure to voluntarily abate a violation
   
7-375   Notice of public hearing
   
7-376   Hearing by the city council
   
7-377   Decision of the city council
   
7-378   Limitation on filing judicial actions
   
7-379   Service of abatement order
   
7-380   Abatement by property owner
   
7-381   Abatement by city
   
7-382   Record of abatement costs
   
7-383   Report; hearing and proceedings
   
7-384   Assessment of costs against property; lien
Division 6: Development Within the Trinity River Corridor
   
7-385   Statement of purpose
   
7-386   Definitions
   
7-387   Corridor Development Certificate Manual adopted Standards
   
7-388   CDC enforcement
   
7-389   CDC application
   
7-390   Review of application; approval; denial of approval
   
7-391   CDC exemptions and variances
   
7-392   Additional standards for development
Division 7: Development Within the City Flood Risk Areas
   
7-392.1   State of purpose
   
7-392.2   Definitions
   
7-392.3   Establishment of CFRA Certificate of Compliance
   
7-392.4   CFRA development procedures
   
7-392.5   Stormwater criteria manual adopted standards
   
7-392.6   CFRA development standards
   
7-392.7   Review of CFRA development; approval; denial of approval
   
7-392.8   CFRA variances
   
7-392.9   CFRA enforcement
Article IX: Standards, Registration, and Inspection Requirements for
Multifamily Dwelling Complexes
Division 1: General Provisions
   
7-393   Short title
   
7-394   Definitions
   
7-395   Purpose
   
7-396   Applicability and administration
   
7-397—7-399   Reserved
Division 2: Registration and Inspections
   
7-400   Certificate of occupancy
   
7-401   Registration required
   
7-402   Fees
   
7-403   Inspection by director
   
7-404   Landlord/tenant inspections
   
7-405   Probationary status, suspension and revocation of registration
   
7-406—7-409   Reserved
Division 3: Minimum Standards for Multifamily Dwelling Complexes
   
7-410   Crime prevention standards
   
7-411   Building, common area and operational standards for multifamily
dwelling complexes
   
7-412—7-415   Reserved
Division 4: Enforcement
   
7-416   Criminal enforcement
   
7-417   Civil enforcement
Article X: Registration and Inspection of One-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
Division 1: Generally
   
7-418   Definitions
   
7-419   Purpose
   
7-420   Applicability and administration
   
7-421   Registration required
   
7-422   Registration
   
7-423   Fees
   
7-424   Inspection and reporting
   
7-425   Criminal enforcement
   
7-426   Civil enforcement
   
7-427—7-429   Reserved
Division 2: TCU Residential Overlay District Registration of One-Family and
Two-Family Dwellings
   
7-429.1   Definitions
   
7-429.2   Purpose
   
7-429.3   Applicability and administration
   
7-429.4   Registration required
   
7-429.5   Registration
   
7-429.6   Fees
   
7-429.7   Violations
   
7-429.8   Enforcement
   
7-430   Reserved
Article XI: Existing Building Code
   
7-431   The 2021 edition of the International Existing Building Code adopted
   
7-432   Amendments
   
7-433   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-434   Penalty for violation
   
7-435—7-439   Reserved
Article XII: International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
7-440   The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
adopted
   
7-441   Amendments
   
7-442   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
7-443   Penalty for violation
Article XIII: Short-Term Rental Registration
Division 1: General Provisions
   
7-450   Title
   
7-451   Purpose
   
7-452   Applicability
   
7-453   Definitions
Division 2: General Regulations
   
7-454   Unregistered short-term rentals prohibited
   
7-455   Short-term rental registration required
   
7-456   Expiration of registration; renewals
   
7-457   Requirements of registration application
   
7-458   Designation of local responsible party required
   
7-459   Registration and renewal fees
   
7-460   Hotel occupancy taxes; request for occupancy history
   
7-461   Short-term rental registration nontransferable
   
7-462   Restrictions on number of occupants and reservations
   
7-463   Parking restrictions
   
7-464   Minimum stay required
   
7-465   Advertising, promoting or allowing of special events prohibited
   
7-466   Notice to occupants of short-term rentals
   
7-467   Registration to be displayed
   
7-468   Use of assigned registration number required
   
7-469   Use of unauthorized registration number prohibited
   
7-470   Miscellaneous restrictions
Division 3: Administrative Procedures
   
7-471   Revocation of registration
   
7-472   Appeal of revocation of registration
Division 4: Enforcement
   
7-473   Penalties
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§§ 7-1 BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.
FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
PART I - SCOPE AND APPLICATION
SECTION 101 - GENERAL
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Administrative
Code of the City of Fort Worth, herein referred to as "this Code."
   101.2 Scope. The provisions of this Code shall serve as the administrative,
organizational, and enforcement rules and regulations for the Fort Worth
Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel and Gas, Mechanical, Electrical, Sign,
Pool and Spa and Existing Building codes, herein referred to as "the Technical
Codes", which regulate the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
   101.2.1 Building Code. Any reference to the International Building Code
shall mean the Fort Worth Building Code as adopted with amendments. The
provisions of the Building Code shall apply to every building or structure or
any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures except
as provided for in the Residential Code.
   101.2.2 Residential Code. Any reference to the International Residential
Code shall mean the Fort Worth Residential Code as adopted with amendments. The
provisions of the Residential Code shall apply to detached one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more
than three stories above grade plane in height.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Townhouses are permitted to have a private, individual fourth level
roof deck in compliance with the following:
      i.   Except for required guards, and the minimum required penthouse
necessary to enclose the access stair, the deck shall be unenclosed and
unroofed.
      ii.   The minimum required penthouse necessary to enclose the access
stair shall not include any other occupiable space.
      iii.   The open deck shall not exceed 400 square feet.
      iv.   The guard shall be constructed of metal. The decking shall be
constructed of water resistant construction, and the structural design plans of
the building and deck shall be stamped by an engineer.
   When each unit of the townhouse building is provided with an automatic
sprinkler system, the fourth level roof deck may be as listed above and the
following:
   i.   with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1
or 903.3.1.2 with 903.3.1.2.1 of the Building Code:
      -   the 400 square foot area may be covered but open on the sides; and,
      -   part of the 400 square feet area may be an enclosed storage room not
to exceed 20 square feet.
   ii.   with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 903.3.1.2
(without 903.3.1.2.1) or 903.3.1.3 of the Building Code, or Section P2904 of
this Code, the provisions of "i" above apply except that the canopy must be
entirely non-combustible.
   101.2.3 Existing Building Code. Any reference to the International Existing
Building Code shall mean the Fort Worth Existing Building Code as adopted with
amendments. The provisions of the Existing Building Code shall apply to the
repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing
buildings.
   101.2.4 Energy Code. Any reference to the International Energy Conservation
Code shall mean the Fort Worth Energy Code as adopted with amendments and shall
apply to all matters governing the design and construction of commercial and
residential buildings for energy efficiency.
   101.2.5 Plumbing and Fuel Gas Code. Any reference to the International
Plumbing or Fuel Gas Code shall mean the Fort Worth Plumbing Code as adopted
with amendments. The provisions of the Plumbing Code shall apply as follows:
   1.   The erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems within this
jurisdiction, and outside this jurisdiction if the same are connected to the
city water or sewage systems.
   2.   Regulation of nonflammable medical gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum
piping, nonmedical oxygen systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection
systems.
   3.   The installation of fuel-gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel
gas appliances, water heater venting systems, gaseous hydrogen systems and
related accessories.
   4.   Gaseous hydrogen systems shall be regulated by Chapter 7 of the
International Fuel Gas Code.
   5.   Coverage of fuel gas piping systems shall extend from the point of
delivery to the outlet of the appliance shutoff valves. Piping system
requirements shall include design, materials, components, fabrication,
assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation and maintenance.
   6.   Requirements for gas appliances and related accessories shall include
installation, combustion and ventilation air and venting and connections to
piping systems.
   Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate means
of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International
Residential Code, except as provided for in that code.
   101.2.6 Mechanical Code. Any reference to the International Mechanical Code
shall mean the Fort Worth Mechanical Code as adopted with amendments and shall
apply to the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of
mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide
control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings.
   Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories high with separate means
of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International
Residential Code, except as provided for in that code.
   101.2.7 Electrical. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Fort Worth
Electrical Code as adopted with amendments and shall regulate:
   1.   The design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems,
electrical conductors, electrical equipment, signaling and communications
conductors and equipment, and fiber optic cables and raceways.
   2.   The installation and alteration of electrical equipment, which shall
include electrical conductors, fittings, devices, signs, sign primaries,
fixtures, motors, generators, starters, controls, raceways and that part of
elevator installations consisting of signal systems, fans, electrical lighting
fixtures, illuminated thresholds, feeder conductor and raceways to motor and
generator disconnect switches and controllers and all electrical installations
in connection with interlocking devices, other than on automatic elevators,
located within or on public and private buildings and premises, except as
excluded by paragraph (b) below.
   3.   Registration and licensing of those persons who will install or
maintain such electrical equipment.
   4.   The Fort Worth Electrical Code shall be used as the electrical
provisions of the Residential Code.
   1.2.8 Pool and Spa. The Provisions of the Pool and Spa Code shall not be
deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law, to include but
not limited to;
   1.   Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS); Standards for Public
Pools and Spas;
§285.181 through §285.208, (TDSHS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and
two- family dwellings or townhouses).
   2.   Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR); 2012 Texas
Accessibility Standards (TAS), TAS provide the scoping and technical
requirements for accessibility for Swimming Pool, wading pools and spas and
shall comply with 2012 TAS, Section 242. (TAS rules do not apply to pools
serving one- and two-family dwellings or townhouses).
   Exception: Elements regulated under Texas Department of Licensing and
Regulation (TDLR) and built in accordance with TDLR approved plans, including
any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   101.2.9 Property Maintenance. Any reference to the International Property
Maintenance Code shall mean the provisions of the Building Code, the Fire Code
and the Minimum Building Standards Code that apply to existing structures and
premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating,
sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators
and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
   101.4.7 Electrical. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Fort Worth
Electrical Code as adopted with amendments and shall regulate:
   1.   The design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems,
electrical conductors, electrical equipment, signaling and communications
conductors and equipment, and fiber optic cables and raceways.
   2.   The installation and alteration of electrical equipment, which shall
include electrical conductors, fittings, devices, signs, sign primaries,
fixtures, motors, generators, starters, controls, raceways and that part of
elevator installations consisting of signal systems, fans, electrical lighting
fixtures, illuminated thresholds, feeder conductor and raceways to motor and
generator disconnect switches and controllers and all electrical installations
in connection with interlocking devices, other than on automatic elevators,
located within or on public and private buildings and premises, except as
excluded by paragraph (b) below.
   3.   Registration and licensing of those persons who will install or
maintain such electrical equipment.
   4.   The Fort Worth Electrical Code shall be used as the electrical
provisions of the Residential Code.
   101.4.8 Property Maintenance. Any reference to the International Property
Maintenance Code shall mean the provisions of the Building Code, the Fire Code
and the Minimum Building Standards Code that apply to existing structures and
premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating,
sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators
and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
   The provisions of the Technical Codes shall also apply to usage of the
surrounding site and access to and from the building, structure or site, as
necessary to achieve code compliance.
   101.5 Intent. The purpose of this Code is to provide the administrative
rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of the technical
construction codes adopted by the City of Fort Worth.
   The purpose of the Technical Codes is to establish the minimum requirements
to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural
strength, means of egress, stability, sanitation, adequate light and
ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and
other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire
fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
SECTION 102 - APPLICABILITY
   102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a
specific requirement of the Technical Codes, the specific requirement shall be
applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Technical
Codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
   102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this Code and the Technical Codes shall
not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
   102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers,
or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapter, section or provision of this Code.
   102.4 Technical construction codes and standards. Other codes and standards
referenced within the Technical Codes shall be a part of the Technical Codes as
adopted by the City of Fort Worth.
      102.4.1 Amendments. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the
referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall
be considered to reference the amendments as well.
   102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this
Code or the Technical Codes is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have
the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
   102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on
the date of adoption of this Code shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in the Technical Codes, the
International Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire Code, or as
is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare
of the occupants and the public.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, plumbing, mechanical and
electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the
adoption of the Technical Codes may have their use, maintenance or repair
continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original
design, if no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such
systems and equipment, and if the electrical system and equipment are
maintained in good repair.
   102.6.1 Annexation. Upon annexation, all existing structures and buildings
are subject to inspection for compliance with the provisions of the Existing
Building Code, the Minimum Building Standards Code and the Fire Code, except as
specifically deleted by such annexation ordinance.
   102.7 Maintenance. Electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems, equipment,
materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be
maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design
and in a safe, sanitary, and hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards that
are required by the Technical Codes shall be maintained in compliance with the
code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent
shall be responsible for the maintenance of the installed systems and
equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall
have the authority to require that the installed systems and equipment be re-
inspected.
   102.8 Alteration and repairs of systems. Alterations, renovations and
repairs to electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems shall conform to the
requirements for new systems and equipment without requiring that the existing
unmodified systems or equipment comply with all of the requirements of the
Technical Codes., Alterations, renovations and repairs shall not cause existing
systems or equipment to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded.
   102.9 Historic buildings. Unless specifically required, the provisions of
the Technical Codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair,
enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall
not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified
by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or
structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public
interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction,
alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of
buildings.
   Exception: Buildings undergoing a change of occupancy shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the Technical Codes.
PART 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 103 - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Planning and
Development is hereby created as specified in the City Code and shall be
referred to as "the department." Any reference to the "Department of Building
Safety" shall mean the Department of Development Services.
   Primary enforcement of the provisions of this Code and the Technical Codes
shall rest with the Department of Development Services as specified under the
duties and powers of the Building Official.
   The provisions of this Code and the Technical Codes may be enforced by other
code enforcement divisions of this city but interpretation authority shall be
retained by the Building Official.
   103.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed as specified in
the City Code.
   103.3 Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building
Official shall have the authority to appoint Assistant Building Officials, the
related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees.
Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Building Official.
   103.3.1 Restriction of employees. An official or employee connected with the
building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical, permitting or inspection
enforcement of the Technical Codes shall not be engaged in or directly or
indirectly connected with the submitting of permits, furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a
building; and such officer or employee shall not be engaged in or be employed
to do any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the
department.
   Furthermore, no official or employee shall be permitted to work for, or be
connected with, any construction materials manufacturer or wholesale supply
company, or do any plumbing, mechanical or electrical work while employed as an
inspector or plans examiner by the city.
SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
   104.1 General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this Code and the Technical Codes. The Building
Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of all adopted
codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application
of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and the Technical Codes.
Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving any specific
code requirement.
   104.1.1 Other interpretations. Any provision or local amendment marked in
this Code or the Technical Codes as [F] shall be under the primary
interpretation authority of the Fire Chief. Any provisions marked in the Fire
Code or local amendment as [B], [E], [EB], [FG], [M] or [P] shall be under the
primary interpretation authority of the Building Official.
   104.2 Applications and permits. The Building Official shall receive
applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection,
and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the
premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with
the provisions of this Code and the Technical Codes.
   104.3 Notices and orders. The Building Official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Code and the Technical Codes.
   104.4 Inspections. The Building Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or the Building Official shall have the authority to accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Building Official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.
   104.5 Identification. The Building Official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this Code.
   104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of the Technical Codes, or where the Building Official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises
a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the Technical Codes which
makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building
Official or designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code or
the Technical Codes, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied
that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such
structure or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control
of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the
Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure
entry.
   An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from an
authorized representative to inspect the premises.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the Building
Official or his designees in the discharge of their duties under this Code.
   104.7 Department records. The department shall keep official records of
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports
of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained
in the official records for the period required for retention of public
records.
   104.8 Liability. The Building Official, member of the board of appeals or
employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this Code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for
any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason
of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
Code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code. Any judgment resulting
there-from shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.
      104.8.1 The liability exemption and defense protection provided in this
section are not extended to Third Party Companies, or their employees, agents
or assignees.
   104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices
approved by the Building Official shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with such approval.
      104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which
meet the requirements of this Code for new materials is permitted. Used
equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Building
Official.
   104.10 Modifications. Wherever there arc practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the Technical Codes, the Building Official shall
have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon
application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the Building
Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of the Technical Codes impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of the Technical Codes and that such modification
does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural
requirements. The details of any action granting modifications shall be
recorded and entered in the files of the Department.
   104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of the Technical Codes are not intended to prevent
the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the Technical Codes, provided that
any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or
method of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of the Technical Codes, and that the material, method or work
offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in the Technical Codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
      104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in
the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the
Technical Codes shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
      104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with the provisions of the Technical Codes, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of the Technical Codes, or in order
to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Building
Official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to
be made at no expense to this jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified
in the Technical Codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of
recognized and accepted test methods, the Building Official shall approve the
testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of
such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required
for retention of public records.
SECTION 105 - PERMITS
   105.1 Required. Any owner, individual, contractor or authorized agent who
intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the
occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter,
repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system, the installation of which is regulated by the Technical Codes, or to
cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Building
Official and obtain the required building permit.
   A separate permit shall be obtained for each building or structure unless
otherwise authorized by the Building Official.
      105.1.3 Glass replacement. Replacement of a window frame or sash shall
require a permit and comply with the applicable provisions of the Energy Code,
and the Technical Codes.
   105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this
Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of the Technical Codes or any other laws
or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
   Permits shall not be required for the following:
   Building:
   1.   Ground mounted flagpoles less than twenty (20) feet in height, and wall
mounted flag poles with an overall length of less than ten (10) feet.
   2.   Fences not over seven (7) feet (1829 mm) high and open wire fences
without slats up to eight (8) feet (2438 mm) high that are not barrier fences
required under the Electrified Fence provisions of the Electrical Code.
   3.   Oil derricks.
   4.   Retaining walls that are not over four (4) feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. (Retaining
walls placed in succession shall be considered one (1) wall if, upon drawing a
line from the bottom of the footing of the lower wall at a forty-five (45)
degree angle up and towards the higher wall, the line intersects the higher
wall or any material retained by the wall at any point.)
   5.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to
diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.
   6.   Platforms, walks and decks not more than six (6) inches above grade and
not over any basement or story below.
   7.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinet replacement, counter top
replacement, and similar finish work.
   8.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery
on private property.
   9.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a single Group R-3 occupancy
that do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18 925 L) and are installed
entirely above ground.
   10.   Concrete equipment pads for mechanical and electrical equipment
installed outside a building envelope.
   11.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family
dwellings.
   12.   Window awnings on Groups R-3 and U occupancies supported by an
exterior wall that do not project more than fifty-four (54) inches (1372 mm)
from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
   13.   Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions
not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1753 mm) in height.
   14.   Roof repairs on Group R-3 and their accessory structures. For the
purpose of this section, roof repairs shall include the repair and replacement
of the material above, but not including, the decking material, lathing boards
or sheathing boards.
   15.   Demolition of a structure by the State of Texas for highway widening
purposes.
   16.   Flammable liquid tanks when a Fire Department permit has been issued;
except that foundations for said tanks shall require a building permit.
   17.   Freestanding satellite dishes not exceeding one forty (40) inches in
diameter that do not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
   18.   Residential door replacements outside of designated historic districts
that do not require a change in framed opening size.
   19.   Temporary buildings (job trailers) used only by construction or
associated personnel for the duration of a commercial construction project;
including buildings used for office personnel, training, or conference rooms on
a site where a building permit has been issued. Recreational vehicles shall not
be used as job trailers.
   Electrical:
   1.   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a
cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved
receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by this Code.
   2.   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
thereof.
   3.   Replacement or repair of overcurrent devices of the required capacity
in the same location.
   4.   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size
and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
   5.   Taping joints.
   6.   Removal of electrical wiring.
   7.   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental
laboratories.
   8.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment, other
than signs, operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more
than 50 watts of energy.
   9.   Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III as
defined in this Code.
   10.   Electrical maintenance work to include the replacement of equipment
electrical cords and plug ends, switches, outlets, ballasts and lighting
fixtures where not in conflict with section 101.4.3 of the Fort Worth Energy
Code.
   Mechanical:
   1.   Portable heating appliances:
   2.   Portable ventilation appliances and equipment.
   3.   Portable cooling units;
   4.   Steam, hot water or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment or appliances regulated by this Code;
   5.   The replacement of any minor part that does not alter the approval of
equipment or an appliance or make such equipment or appliance unsafe;
   6.   Portable evaporative coolers;
   7.   Self-contained refrigeration systems that contain ten (10) pounds (4.5
kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are actuated by motors of one (1)
horsepower (0.75 kW) or less;
   8.   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid; and,
   9.   When an umbrella Building Permit is issued for new construction or
additions to one- and two-family dwellings and townhomes, under the Fort Worth
Residential Code, or as an R-3 under this Code, and which contain a fireplace
under that Building Permit, separate fireplace permits shall not be required.
   Plumbing:
   1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Code.
   2.   The clearing of stoppages in drains, soil, waste and vent piping or the
repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures.
   3.   Removal and reinstallation of exposed traps; replacement of valves,
nipples to sinks and lavatories; replacement of plumbing fixtures, water
closets, garbage disposals, dishwashers, clothes washers and similar
appliances, provided that in all cases such repairs do not involve or require
the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
      Exception: Replacement of water heaters, shower pans and bathtubs shall
require a permit.
   4.   Interceptor traps or house trailer site traps installed at the same
time as a building sewer on any lot within a manufactured home or recreational
vehicle park.
   5.   Any portable fuel gas heating, cooking or clothes drying appliance.
   6.   Replacement of any minor component of a fuel gas appliance or equipment
that does not alter approval of such appliance or equipment or make such
appliance or equipment unsafe.
   105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where repairs and equipment replacements must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next business day to the Building Official.
   105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not
required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
   105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the
installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or
metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of
public service agencies or government agency by established right and not
specifically regulated in the Technical Codes.
   105.3 Application for Permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application in a form furnished by the department for that purpose.
Such application shall:
   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the building permit for
which application is made.
   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and locate the proposed building or work.
   3.   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
   4.   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 107.
   5.   State the valuation of the proposed work.
   6.   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.
   7.   Give such other data and information as required by the building
official.
   When permits are restricted to licensed and/or registered individuals as
required by this or other codes and ordinances, permits shall only be issued to
those individuals as specified in this Code and the Technical Codes.
   105.3.1 Action on application. The Building Official shall examine or cause
to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents
do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official
shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the
Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of the Technical Code, laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the
Building Official shall issue a permit as soon as practicable.
   105.3.2 Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no permit is
issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application
shall expire by limitation, and construction documents and other data submitted
for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the
Building Official.
   If the applicant submits a request for extension before the expiration date,
showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented
action from being taken, the Building Official may extend the time, without an
additional permit fee, for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180)
days. No application shall be extended more than once.
   If the applicant submits a request for extension after but within ninety
(90) days of the expiration date, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a
new plan review deposit. The application shall be subject to any new adopted
laws, ordinances and regulations that became effective since the original
application date.
   105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be
construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the
provisions of the Technical Codes or of any other ordinance of the
jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of the Technical Codes or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall
not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and
other data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the
correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The Building
Official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in
violation of this Code, the Technical Codes or of any other ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
   105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid after 180 days
unless a required inspection for the project has been approved. Furthermore,
permits expire when more than 180 days has elapsed from the date of the last
approved required inspection.
   Where a permit has expired, the permit may be reactivated, and the
reactivation fee shall be one-half (1/2) the amount required for a new permit
for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that
expiration has not exceeded one (1) year. No permit may be reactivated more
than once.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Demolition permits and moving permits shall expire at sixty (60)
days.
      2.   Electrical ordinance inspections shall expire after thirty (30)
days.
   105.5.1 Permit Extension. The building official is authorized to grant a
one-time permit extension prior to permit, expiration not to exceed 180 days.
   105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Code wherever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any
of the provisions of this Code or the Technical Codes.
   105.7 Placement of Permit. The approved construction documents with City of
Fort Worth paperwork attached, collectively called the building permit or copy
shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project.
   105.8 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work
for the installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing systems, for which this Code is applicable, to comply
with this Code and the Technical Codes.
   105.9 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Building Official
is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and
sites for which an application has been filed.
   105.10 Building permit issuance restrictions. Mechanical, Electrical,
Plumbing and Sign permits shall only be issued to companies or persons who
possess the appropriate required Texas State Licenses.
   Exception: Building permits may be issued to a property owner who wishes to
do Building, Mechanical, Plumbing or Electrical work in a building owned and
occupied by them solely as their primary residence as demonstrated by either a
homestead exemption granted by the appraisal district or by proof of ownership
and a valid government issued identification in the same name and address. This
provision only permits the homeowner to work on that part of the electrical
system that occurs after, but does not include, the first main breaker behind
the electrical meter.
   105.10.1 Maintenance employee. Permits for the repair of electrical,
plumbing, and mechanical work may be obtained by anyone who is regularly
employed as or acting as a maintenance man or maintenance employee, incidental
to and in connection with the business in which he is employed or engaged or
who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public; or,
construction, installation and maintenance work done upon the premises or
equipment of a railroad by an employee thereof who does not engage in the
occupation of a plumber or mechanic for the general public.
   Electrical maintenance work shall mean the keeping in safe repair of any and
all electrical installations, apparatus, equipment and appliances and the
keeping in safe repair of electrical equipment within a building or in or on
the premises where the Maintenance Electrician, or Residential Maintenance
Electrician, is regularly employed on a permanent basis, except as described
below for service companies, but does not include the installation of new and
additional electrical work, electrical equipment, electrical apparatus or
appliances.
SECTION 106 - FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS
   106.1 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or
permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion
thereof, a load greater than is permitted by the Technical Codes.
SECTION 107 - SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
   107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents,
statement of special inspections, geo technical reports and other data shall be
submitted as required with each application for a permit. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required
by the State of Texas.
   Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary
to obtain compliance with the Technical Codes.
   The Building Official may require plans, computations and specifications to
be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the State of
Texas to practice as such even if not required by state law.
   Retaining walls for which a permit is required shall require the submittal
of plans that are prepared by an engineer licensed by the State of Texas.
   107.1.1 Lake Worth docks, piers or boathouses. The following provisions
apply for permit submittal for docks, piers or boathouses on Lake Worth.
      (a)   Persons seeking to construct a Dock, Pier, Boathouse or Walkway
must submit complete construction documents for the structure(s), which shall
include, but not be limited to, the anchoring system, and any Walkways or
Bridges that will attach to the proposed structure.
      (b)   When an existing structure will be used as part of the newly
proposed structure the project plans must include a complete description of the
existing structure.
      (c)   The project plans must include a description of the site that shows
the location of the primary lot, the extension of property lines out into the
water area and a key plan, either included on the site plan or on a separate
sheet, to show the location on or to the body of water.
      (d)   If the prescriptive methods described in Section 3606 of the
Building Code are not followed or an engineered design is required by the
Building Official, then the project plans must be signed and sealed by an
engineer registered in the State of Texas and contain a statement that the
proposed structure complies with the specifications set forth in the Technical
Codes.
      (e)   Each project plan set must also include a copy of the
manufacturer's certified plans for any components that will be part of the
structure, such as lifts, decking, railing, or awning systems.
      (f)   The project plans and manufacturer's certified plans must be based
upon the actual conditions at the site of the proposed structure.
   107.1.2 Residential Foundations. Buildings regulated under the Technical
Codes that contain a new or existing residential component must provide
engineered foundation plans or submit geotechnical reports that show non-
expansive soils and design foundations in accordance with Figure R403.1.1. as
follows:
   1.   All new construction, when containing a residential component;
   2.   All outward additions to post-tension slabs, and
   3.   Any new outward addition exceeding five hundred (500) square feet in
foundation area, when the existing or the new area contains a residential
component; and,
   4.   Any new upward additions, such as adding or expanding a 2nd floor, when
the existing or new area contains a residential component and the foundation is
to be, or is required to be, upgraded. If the existing foundation is adequate,
an engineer review is not required.
   Residential component will include living quarters, sleeping quarters, etc.
as might occur in a "mother-in-law" accessory building. A non-residential
addition, such as a garage, that ties into the residential dwelling would need
to comply if over five hundred (500) square feet. Such plans shall be designed
by a professional engineered registered in the State of Texas.
   107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in accordance
with Section 107.2.1 through 107.2.5.
      107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents
shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media
documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official.
The electronic submittal of plans shall be in a format as prescribed by the
Planning and Development Department. Construction documents shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the
Technical Codes and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as
determined by the Building Official. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to
scale.
      107.2.2 Site plans. The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the
size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site,
distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed
finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design
flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary
line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction
to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and
construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The Building Official is
authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the
application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.
         107.2.2.1 Design flood elevations. Where design flood elevations are
not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.1 of
the Building Code.
      107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in
sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all
portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the
Technical Codes. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the
construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be
accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.
      107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings
shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine
compliance with this Code and the technical codes. The construction documents
shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including
flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, comers, end details, control
joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-
resistive membrane and details around openings.
   The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation
instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed
penetration and opening details described in the construction documents
maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting
documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested,
where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
   107.2.5 Braced wall lines. Plans for the construction or addition of single
family dwellings and duplexes shall include details showing compliance with the
braced wall provisions of the Technical Codes.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Structures that are designed by an engineer licensed to practice in the
State of Texas where the plans include the framing (wall, floor and ceiling
joists, and roof rafters), as well as, wall bracing method.
   107.2.7 Electrical. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations,
diagrams, and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be
submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The plans
shall indicate all necessary information required, including but not limited to
the following:
   1.   Calculated loads.
   2.   Main and feeder sizes.
   3.   Maximum short circuit current available at each point of application of
each protective device used on the project.
   4.   Electrical panel locations and clearances.
   5.   Location and type of all electrical components and equipment.
   107.2.8 Plumbing. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams,
and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be submitted
in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The plans shall
indicate all necessary information to include the following:
   1.   Location and product information on plumbing fixtures.
   2.   Size and materials of all water, gas, drainage and vent piping.
   3.   Drainage and supply pipe sizing calculations
   4.   Other information necessary to determine compliance with the Fort Worth
Plumbing Code.
   107.2.9 Mechanical. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations,
diagrams, and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be
submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The plans
shall indicate all necessary information to include the following:
   1.   Location and product information on all mechanical equipment.
   2.   Size and materials of all gas lines and venting.
   3.   Other information necessary to determine compliance with the Fort Worth
Mechanical Code.
   107.2.10 Pool Entrapment. All permits for residential pools must submit an
entrapment compliance form as provided by the Building Official.
   107.2.11 Energy. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams,
and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be submitted
in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The plans shall
indicate all necessary information to include the following:
   1.   Insulation materials and their R-values.
   2.   Fenestration U-factors and solar heat gain coefficients (SHGCs).
   3.   Area-weighted U-factor and solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC)
calculations.
   4.   Mechanical system design criteria.
   5.   Mechanical and service water heating system and equipment types, sizes
and efficiencies.
   6.   Economizer description.
   7.   Equipment and system controls.
   8.   Fan motor horsepower (hp) and controls.
   9.   Duct sealing, duct and pipe insulation and location.
   10.   Lighting fixture schedules with wattage and control narrative.
   11.   Location of daylight zones on floor plans.
   12.   Air sealing details.
   107.2.13 Manufacturer's installation instruction. Manufacturer's
installation instructions, as required by this Code, shall be available on the
job site at the time of inspection.
   107.3 Examination of documents. The Building Official shall examine or cause
to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such
examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance
with the requirements of the Technical Codes and other pertinent laws or
ordinances.
   Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to
verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the
Building Official finds that the work described in an application for a permit
and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of the Technical Codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances,
and that the fees specified in Section 109 have been paid, the building
official shall issue a permit therefore to the applicant.
   Exception: When plan review is performed by a Third-Party Organization as
specified in Section 117, the Building Official, at his discretion, may only
review what he deems necessary to insure a quality control of the review
already performed.
      107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the Building Official
issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by
stamp, as "APPROVED." One (1) set of construction documents so reviewed shall
be retained by the Building Official. The other set shall be returned to the
applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by
the Building Official or a duly authorized representative.
      107.3.2 Previous approvals. This Code shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the Technical Codes
and has not been abandoned.
      107.3.3 Phased approval. The Building Official is authorized to issue a
permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the Technical Codes.
The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or
structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation
and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
   107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.
      107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a
registered design professional, the Building Official shall be authorized to
require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a
registered design professional who shall act as the registered design
professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner
shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design
professional in responsible charge. The Building Official shall be notified in
writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible
charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.
      The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be
responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by
others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with
the design of the building.
      107.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred
submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted
at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the Building
Official within a specified period.
      Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the
Building Official. The registered design professional in responsible charge
shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by
the Building Official.
      Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the
registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and
forward them to the Building Official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general
conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal item shall
not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by
the Building Official.
   107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
   107.5 Retention of construction documents. One (1) set of approved
construction documents shall be retained by the Building Official as prescribed
by local and state law.
   107.6 Residential master plans. All Master Plans on file with the department
expire with the adoption of newer code editions. Unexpired, active permits may
continue to utilize the master plans that were in effect at the time of permit
issuance.
   When Master Plans are registered with the Building Official for use with an
expedited permit issuance program, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable
registration fee per plan as specified in Section 119, Table No. 1-B.
   107.7 Expedited Plan Review. An applicant for one or more permits for a
construction/development project may request an expedited plan review (X-Team)
of plans required for issuance of the building permits. The expedited plan
review requires that the plat be recorded and that all necessary infrastructure
engineering and engineering studies be approved. The fee for an X-Team plan
review will be $1,000 per hour for in-person meetings, with a two hour minimum,
unless the applicant and the building official agree otherwise. This fee is in
addition to all other fees required under this code.
   107.7.1 Initial Review. Before a project is scheduled for an expedited plan
review meeting, Planning and Development Department staff shall conduct an
initial review of all documents submitted with the permit application to ensure
completeness and to verify that all necessary engineering is approved. A non-
refundable application fee of $200 for the initial review must be paid with the
application for the permits in addition to other fees required under this code.
   107.7.2 X-Team Review and Meeting. On a date scheduled by the Planning and
Development Department the X-Team staff will meet with the applicant and all
other parties with responsibilities relating to the construction/ development
project, such as the developer, property owner, tenant, engineer, architect and
construction contractor. The parties must be prepared to finalize all plans on
the date scheduled. Before the conclusion of the meeting, the team will review
the plans and, if all building and design issues are resolved, approve the
plans and issue the required construction permits.
   107.7.3 X-Team. X-Team plan reviews are conducted by a team consisting of a
coordinator, senior plans examiners and specialists from several development
review departments. A plans examiner/ specialist from each of the following
disciplines may assist the team:
   1.   Building Code
   2.   Fire Code
   3.   Electrical Code
   4.   Mechanical/ Plumbing Code
   5.   Zoning
   6.   Parks and Recreation
   7.   Water/ Sewer
   8.   Transportation
   9.   Health
Staff from other departments may be called upon as necessary to provide
expertise for specific projects.
   107.7.4 X-Team Review without a Meeting. An applicant for one or more
permits for a construction/ development project may request an expedited plan
review (X-Team) of plans required for issuance of the building permits. The
expedited plan review requires that the plat be recorded and that all necessary
infrastructure engineering and engineering studies be approved. The fee for an
X-Team plan review without a meeting will be $1,000 per hour, pro-rated for the
actual time the review takes with a one hour minimum, unless the applicant and
the building official agree otherwise. This fee is in addition to all other
fees required under this code.
   107.7.5 X-Team Revisions. Revisions to applications submitted for an X-Team
review will be reviewed at a fee of $1,000 per hour, prorated for the actual
time the revision review takes, with a minimum of I5-minute intervals.
SECTION 108 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
   108.1 General. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures, and temporary uses. Such permit shall be limited as to
time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days. The Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for up to
24 additional months.
      108.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the
structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light,
ventilation, energy and sanitary requirements of the Technical Codes, as deemed
appropriate by the Building Official and Fire Chief, as necessary to ensure the
public health, safety and general welfare.
      108.3 Temporary power. The Building Official is authorized to give
permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric
installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final
certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary
certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary
lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70.
      108.4 Termination of approval. The Building Official is authorized to
terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use or power and to order
the temporary structure or use or power to be discontinued.
SECTION 109 - FEES
   109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed
by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the
additional fee, if any, has been paid.
   109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the
provisions of this section or shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted
by the jurisdiction.
   109.2.1 Building Permit Fees. The fee for each permit shall be as follows:
   1.   For non-residential Remodel Work, and for new non-residential
construction of items that do not have a square footage (fences, swimming
pools, retaining walls, etc.), the fee shall be as set forth in Section 119,
Table No. 1 -A;
   2.   For New Construction or New Addition, the fee shall be as set forth in
Section 119, Tables No. 1 -C-l through l-C-4 dependent upon the Use Group
involved. Buildings with multiple use groups shall be divided and charged the
applicable fee per use group. Shell buildings shall be charged a fee based upon
the expected use group of the building with no reduction for being a shell.
   3.   When work involves both remodel and new construction/addition, the fee
for the non- residential remodel will be based upon the remodel value and the
fee for the new construction/addition shall be based upon square footage.
   4.   When the work involves a residential remodel, the fee for the remodel
will be based upon the number of trades required to complete the project as
specified in Table 1 -A-l.
   5.   Other fees shall be as specified in Section 119, Table No. 1-B. At the
time of application, along with any other fees required, a non-refundable
permit application fee as specified in Section 119, Table No. 1-B shall be
required.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Buildings or structures owned and occupied by a Federal, State, or
County entity on property owned by the Federal, State, or County entity shall
be exempt from the permit fees. This exception does not apply to public school
districts or county community colleges.
   2.   Work by non-City personnel on property under the control of the City of
Fort Worth shall be exempt from the permit fees only if the work is for action
under a contract that will be or has been approved by City Council with notes
in the contract packages stating the fee is waived
   3.   Work by City personnel on property under the control of the City of
Fort Worth shall be exempt from the permit fees only if the application is
accompanied by a copy of the work order for the project.
   4.   When the project is to be plan reviewed or inspected by an approved
Third Party organization as described in Section 117, the fee shall be reduced
as follows:
      a.   Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
         i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third
Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by thirty-five
(35) percent (0.35). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with
no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
         ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field
inspections performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by
multiplying the sum by seventy (70) percent (0.70). The resulting amount will
be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
         iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field
inspections performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by
multiplying the sum by fifty-five (55) percent (0.55). The resulting amount
will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny
figure.
      b.   Commercial projects (those not included in item a above):
         i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third
Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by twenty-five
(25) percent (0.25). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with
no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
         ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field
inspections performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by
multiplying the sum by seventy (70) percent (0.70). The resulting amount will
be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
         iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field
inspections performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by
multiplying the sum by fifty-five (55) percent (0.55). The resulting amount
will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny
figure.
      Exemption or reduction of the permit fees under this section shall not
waive the requirements to pay a full investigation fee for doing work without a
permit as required under Section 109.4.2.
   109.2.2 Demolition and moving permit fees. Movement and demolition of
buildings and structures shall comply with Chapter 7, Article VII of the City
Code and with the provisions of this Code.
   The fee for each Demolition or Moving permits shall be based upon the gross
square footage as set forth in Section 119, Table No. 1-B.
   Exceptions
      1.   The fees for demolition will not be required for buildings ordered
demolished by the City of Fort Worth.
      2.   The fees for moving will not be required for those applicants
meeting exceptions 2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
      3.   The fees for demolition will not be required for those applicants
meeting exceptions 1,2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   109.2.3 Change of occupancy. A building permit shall be required for a
Change of Occupancy or a Change of Use as defined in the IEBC. A change of
occupancy shall include any change of occupancy classification (e.g., B to M),
any change from one group to another group within an occupancy classification
(e.g., A-2 to A-3) or any change in use within a group for a specific occupancy
classification (e.g., B bank to B nail salon) for a building or a portion of a
building. The fee shall be as set forth in Section 119, Table No. 1-B and shall
cover all plan review deemed necessary by the building official.
      Exception: The permit fees will not be required for those applicants
meeting exceptions 1, 2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   109.2.4 Ordinance inspection. The fee for an Ordinance Inspection shall be
that as specified in Section 119, Table No. 1-B.
      Exception: The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting
exceptions 1, 2 or 3 of Section 109.24
   109.2.5 Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. This
section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time
a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the Technical
Codes, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the
job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
   Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not
posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the
approval of the Building Official.
   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall file an application therefor
in writing on a form furnished for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee
in accordance with Section 119, Table 1B or as set forth in the fee schedule
adopted by the jurisdiction.
   In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
      Exception. The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting
exception 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   109.2.6 Change of record. Any request for a record change, or any mistake
made by an applicant that requires a record change, including but not limited
to name or address changes, whether computer or paper record, must be requested
in writing with a fee as specified in Section 119, Table No 1-B.
   Exceptions:
      1.   For record changes that affect the permit fee, such as adding
equipment, fixtures or square footage, the Building Official may require a
separate permit for the extra items with the appropriate fee.
      2.   The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting exception
3 of Section 109.2.1.
   109.2.7 Plan review fees. When a plan or other data are submitted for
review, a non-refundable plan review deposit shall be paid at the time of
application. Said plan review deposit shall be as specified in Section 119,
Table No. 1-B.
   Exceptions:
   1.   The deposit will not be required for those applicants meeting
exceptions 1, 2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   2.   The deposit will not be required for additions and remodels to existing
Group R-3 Occupancies, and for additions, remodels or new construction of their
accessory structures. It shall be required for new construction of Group R-
3 Occupancies.
   3.   When the project is to be plan reviewed by an approved third party
organization as described in Section 117, the plan review deposit shall be
reduced as noted on Section 119, Table No. 1-B.
   The original plan review fee paid will be credited to the cost of the
building permit fee at the time the building permit is issued and the remaining
fee is paid. If the permit fee is less than the required deposit, the required
deposit shall be the minimum permit fee.
   Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in
Section 119, Table No. 1 -B. The fee, including the minimum, shall be charged
at each request for additional review.
   Exceptions:
   1.   The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting exceptions 1,
2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   2.   When the original plan review was performed under the third party
option, only a fifteen dollar ($15.00) filing fee shall be charged for each
separate submittal. This filing fee shall only be applicable to the Building,
Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing and Energy submittals. Changes in other plans,
e.g. site, landscaping, fire, civil, water service, etc. will be charged the
fee as shown in Section 119, Table No. 1 -B.
   When trade building permits are issued under an umbrella building permit,
the additional plan review fee shall apply to all plans including those for
other trades.
   109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide
an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall
include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the
permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment
and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the
valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied,
unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the
Building Official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Building
Official.
   Exception: When other than new construction or addition, individual building
permit fees shall be required per trade. The building permit fee will be based
upon the valuation as determined by the Building Official for that work only.
The fee for other trade permits will be subject to the appropriate codes.
   109.4 Investigation fees: Work without a permit.
      109.4.1 Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required
by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special
investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
         Exceptions: This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it
shall be proved to the satisfaction of the code official that such work was
urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefore
before the commencement of the work. In all cases, a permit must be obtained as
soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in
obtaining such permit, an investigation fee as herein provided shall be
charged.
      109.4.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall
be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by
this Code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person
from compliance with all other provisions of this Code or the Technical Codes,
nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
      Use of the third party plan review or inspection option, will not reduce
or lower the investigation fee required by this section.
   109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder
of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   109.6 Fee refunds. The Building Official is authorized to establish a refund
policy. Permit fees may be refunded upon request subject to the limits set
forth in Section 119, Table 1-G. Plan review fees, investigation fees,
application fees, paper processing fees, and technology fees are non-
refundable. Permit fees shall not be refunded for active permits where an
inspection has been performed, or for expired permits.
      Exceptions: The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid
hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
   109.7 Administrative Hold. Any administrative discrepancy including but not
limited to, delinquency in payments, returned checks, failure to pay for re-
inspection, investigation or registration fees, and failure to maintain and
comply with the registration, insurance or bond requirements of the City, may
result in a hold being placed on issuance of permits and performance of
inspections of existing permits until the administrative discrepancy is
corrected.
SECTION 110 - INSPECTIONS
   110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work
shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this Code, the Technical Codes or of other
ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of this Code, the Technical Codes or of other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the
permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes. Neither the Building Official nor the jurisdiction shall
be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material
required to allow inspection.
   Exception: When approved by the Building Official, the inspection process as
required by this Code may be performed by an approved Third Party Organization
as specified in Section 117.
   A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Official to verify that
the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans.
      110.1.1 Permit Documents. Permit documents including the permit card,
inspection card, approved plans and other information related to the issuance
of the permit shall be available for review on site at the time of an
inspection.
   110.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Building Official
is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and
sites for which an application has been filed.
   110.3 Required Inspections. The Building Official, upon notification, shall
make the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.5.3.
      110.3.1 Commercial Building Inspections. The minimum inspection
requirements for commercial structures are as listed:
         110.3.1.1 Footing, pier and foundation inspection. Footing, pier and
foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are
complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete
foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection.
         Pier inspections may be performed by the engineer of record with
sealed documentation provided to the inspector that states the piers were
constructed in compliance with the adopted Code and according to the engineers
design.
         110.3.1.2 Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and
under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing
steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other
ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or
floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
         110.3.1.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon
placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further
vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5
shall be submitted to the Building Official.
         110.3.1.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after
the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire-blocking and bracing are in place
and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough
electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved.
         110.3.1.5 Fire- and smoke-resistant assemblies. Fire and smoke rated
assemblies shall not be taped or concealed until inspected and approved.
         110.3.1.6 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with the provisions of the Energy Code and shall include,
but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values,
fenestration U-value, duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment
efficiency.
         110.3.1.7 Parkway Inspection. Parkway inspections shall be conducted
prior to any concrete pours and a parkway final will be required to be approved
prior to final inspections and issuance of certificates of occupancy.
         110.3.1.8 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after
all work required by the building permit is completed.
      110.3.2 Residential Inspections. The minimum inspection requirements for
single family residences and duplexes are as listed:
         110.3.2.1 Underground inspection. Underground inspection of
electrical, mechanical, plumbing and gas systems shall be made after trenches
or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill
is put in place.
         110.3.2.2 Footing, pier and foundation inspection. Inspection of the
footing, pier and foundation shall be made after poles or piers are set or
trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any
required reinforcing steel is in place and supported prior to the placing of
concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened
slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural
supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations.
         Pier inspections may be performed by the engineer of record with
sealed documentation provided to the inspector that states the piers were
constructed in compliance with the adopted Code and according to the engineers
design.
         110.3.2.3 Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and
under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing
steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other
ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or
floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
         110.3.2.4 Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection.
Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be
made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or
installed, and prior to framing inspection. When approved by the Building
Official, such inspections may be made at the same time as the framing
inspection.
         Exception: Back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested
in accordance with Section M2105.1 prior to inspection shall be permitted.
         110.3.2.5 Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and
construction shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire-
stopping, draft-stopping and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents
to be concealed are complete and after the rough plumbing, mechanical and
electrical rough inspections are approved. Inspection of masonry shall be made
after installation except that brick ties shall be made as part of the framing
inspection.
         110.3.2.6 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with Chapter 11 of the Residential Code or the provisions
of the Energy Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for:
envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value, duct system R-value,
HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency and blower door test as required in
the Energy Code.
         110.3.2.7 Parkway Inspection. Parkway inspections shall be conducted
prior to any concrete pours and a parkway final will be required to be approved
prior to final inspections.
         110.3.2.8 Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the
permitted work is complete and prior to occupancy.
      110.3.3 Mechanical Inspections. The minimum inspection requirements for
mechanical building permits are as listed:
         110.3.3.1 Underground. Inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is
put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen
chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause
corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site.
         Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance
with Section 1208.1.1 of the Mechanical Code shall be permitted to be
backfilled prior to inspection.
         110.3.3.2 Rough-in. Inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fire blocking, fire stopping, draft stopping and bracing are in place and all
ducting and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
         110.3.3.3 Final. Inspection shall be made after the building is
complete and the structure is ready for occupancy.
      110.3.4 Plumbing Inspections. The minimum inspection requirements for
plumbing building permits are as listed:
         110.3.4.1 Underground. Inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is
put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen
chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause
corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site.
         110.3.4.2 Rough-in. Inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fire blocking, fire stopping, draft stopping and bracing is in place and all
sanitary, storm and water distribution piping is roughed-in, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
         110.3.4.3 Final. Inspection shall be made after the building is
complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the
structure is ready for occupancy.
      110.3.5 Electrical. The minimum inspection requirements for electrical
building permits are as listed:
         110.3.5.1 Underground. Inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is
put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen
chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause
corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site.
         110.3.5.2 Rough-in. Inspections shall be made after the roof, framing,
fire blocking, fire stopping, draft stopping and bracing are in place and all
ducting and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
         110.3.5.3 Final. Inspection shall be made after the building is
complete, all electrical systems are in place and properly connected, and the
structure is ready for occupancy.
      110.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified
above, the Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections
of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the
Technical Codes and other laws that are enforced by the department.
      110.3.9 Building Ordinance inspections. Building, Plumbing, Mechanical
and Electrical Ordinance Inspections shall be performed to insure minimum
property standards and life safety requirements. Building Ordinance Inspections
are required as follows:
   1.   Four trade building ordinance inspections and Minimum Building Standard
inspections from the Code Compliance Department are required for changes in
ownership of Multi-Family properties.
   2.   Four trade building ordinance inspections are required for all tenant
or ownership changes in all H and I occupancies.
   3.   Four trade building ordinance inspections are required for changes in
tenant or ownership of all automotive uses, hair and nail salons.
   4.   Four trade building ordinance inspections are required for change in
tenant or ownership if the current certificate of occupancy was issued prior to
July 2001.
   5.   Four trade building ordinance inspections are required for all Changes
of Occupancies.
   6.   Building Ordinance Inspections may be used for any miscellaneous
inspection.
   110.4 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the
building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the Building Official
when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by
code. The person doing the work authorized by the permit shall make sure that
the work will stand tests prescribed elsewhere in this Code and the Technical
Codes, before giving the above notification.
   When the work is within a residence where access is dependent upon the
occupant being home, it shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make
arrangements for inspections.
   110.5 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated
in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
Building Official. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her
agent wherein the same fails to comply with the Technical Codes. Any portions
that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or
concealed until authorized by the Building Official.
      110.5.1 Covered work. Any work covered or concealed without inspection
shall be considered to constitute an unsafe structure and subject to the
corrective provisions of Section 116. Such consideration as an unsafe structure
shall exist every day until the work is inspected and approved as being in
compliance with the Technical Codes. Inspections will not be performed until a
valid active permit is obtained in accordance with this Code.
   110.6 Inspection agencies. The Building Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
SECTION 111 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
   111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied,
and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has
issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation
of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of
this Code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
   Exceptions:
   1.   One- and Two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the
Residential Code and their associated accessory buildings or structures.
   2.   Community Homes, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
   111.2 Certificate Issued. After the building official inspects the building
or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other
laws that are enforced by the department, and clearances have been obtained
from all other applicable city departments, agencies, the building official
shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:
   1.   The building permit number.
   2.   The address, legal description and zoning of the location.
   3.   The name and address of the business and the property owner.
   4.   A description of that portion of the structure or property for which
the certificate is issued.
   5.   A statement that the described portion of the structure or property has
been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this Code for the
occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed
occupancy is classified.
   6.   The name of the building official and the issuing individual.
   7.   The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3
of the Building Code.
   8.   The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the Building Code.
   9.   The design occupant load.
   10.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
   After approval of a final inspection, the applicant or tenant shall have
sixty (60) days in which to obtain a certificate of occupancy. Where no such
action is taken within sixty (60) days, an electrical Ordinance Inspection with
the appropriate fees will be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy.
   For existing uses required to obtain a certificate of occupancy, the
Building Official may issue a certificate where evidence is provided showing
the building complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of construction
or last occupancy. The Building Official, at his discretion, may accept
documents, including but not limited to: old permits, certificate of
occupancies dated after July 2001, affidavits, tax records and business records
as evidence. Where documentation is insufficient the Building Official may
require ordinance inspections in order to determine compliance.
      111.2.1 Validity. The issuance of a new certificate of occupancy
replaces, supersedes and voids all previously issued certificates of occupancy.
Only the most recently issued certificate of occupancy shall be considered
valid.
   111.3 Temporary occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue
temporary certificates of occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied
safely.
   111.4 Revocation. The Building Official is authorized to, in writing,
suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the
provisions of this Code, or other applicable provision, wherever the
certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information
supplied, or where it is determined that the building, structure or property or
portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the
provisions of this Code or the Technical Codes.
   The certificate of occupancy shall remain the property of the City of Fort
Worth and shall be surrendered upon request.
   111.5 Posting. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official.
   111.6 Special Certificates of Occupancy. A special Certificate of Occupancy
shall be required as specified in sections 111.6.1 through 111.6.4.
      111.6.1 Mobile vendors. Mobile vendors need not register or obtain a
license from the City of Fort Worth. However, a Vendor Certificate of Occupancy
as outlined in the Section 5-406 of the Zoning Ordinance is required and must
be renewed annually.
         111.6.1.1 Fees. The annual permit fee for Mobile Vendors is $93.00. A
separate permit and associated permit fee as specified in the appropriate code
for the installation of an electrical service or a water service shall be
obtained and paid by the applicant with any vendor application that includes
such service. The payment of these required fees is in addition to the Vendor
Certificate of Occupancy fee specified in Section 119, Table No. 1-B.
      111.6.2 Sidewalk Cafes. A Sidewalk Cafe need not register or obtain a
license from the City of Fort Worth. However, a specialized Certificate of
Occupancy must be obtained as outlined in Chapter 20, Article IX of the City of
Fort Worth Code. A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy must be renewed
annually.
      111.6.2.1 Fees. Fees are set forth in Sec.
20-358 of the Code of Ordinances and are listed under Table 1-B of this Code.
      111.6.3 Sexually Oriented Business. A Sexually Oriented Business need not
register or obtain a license from the City of Fort Worth. However, a
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained as outlined in Chapter 5,
Article 2 of the City of Fort Worth Zoning Ordinance. Specialized Certificates
of Occupancy must be renewed annually.
         111.6.3.1 Fees. Fees are set forth in Sec.
2-321 of the Code of Ordinances and are listed in Table 1-B of this Code.
      111.6.4 Temporary vendors. Temporary vendors required to obtain a Vendor
Certificate of Occupancy as determined by the Zoning Ordinance shall pay the
fee as specified in Section 119, Table 1-B.
SECTION 112 - SERVICE UTILITIES
   112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from
a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is
regulated by this Code for which a permit is required, until released by the
Building Official.
   112.2 Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority
to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility
source of energy, fuel or power.
   112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Building Official shall
have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by this Code and the Technical Codes
and standards set forth in Section 101.4 in case of emergency where necessary
to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility
connection has been made without the approval required by Section 112.1 or
112.2. The Building Official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever
possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of
the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior
to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service
system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
   Where any unsafe condition results from the use of any utilities in
noncompliance with the Technical Codes, the building official may order, in
writing, that such utilities be disconnected.
SECTION 113 - CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION BOARD OF APPEALS
   113.1 General. The City Council finds that there is a need to provide the
citizens of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, with safe, affordable, and well-
constructed housing, commercial buildings and other structures in which these
citizens can work, play and live. It is the specific intent of the City Council
that standards for construction and fire prevention be used for the welfare and
safety of the City's citizens. The City Council finds that construction and
fire prevention standards change from time to time and that these standards
should stay current with modern practices of construction and fire safety.
   In carrying out these purposes, it is the intent of the City Council that
such construction and fire prevention standards be adopted as outlined herein
and that a Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals be given
cognizance over matters pertaining thereto.
   It is the intent of the City Council that compliance with the construction
and fire prevention standards contained herein is the responsibility of the
citizens and business to which they apply; and that neither the Construction
and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals nor the City of Fort Worth, its officers,
agents and employees, shall be liable or responsible for any errors or
omissions arising out of the enforcement or failure to enforce these standards.
   113.2 Creation of board. The City Council hereby establishes a Construction
and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals (the Board) for the purpose of determining
the acceptability and adequacy of materials, equipment, and methods of
construction, hearing appeals of interpretations by designated officials,
consideration of variance requests, and other designated authority as listed
herein or elsewhere in the City Code
   113.3 Composition of board; Appointment of members. The Board shall consist
of nine (9) members, with two (2) alternate members, to be appointed in the
following manner:
   Members:
   Place 1. Architect - Nominated by the Fort Worth Chapter of the American
Institute of Architects
   Place 2. Engineer (with Mech/Elec/Plum, or structural background) -
Nominated by the Fort Worth Branch of the Texas Society of Professional
Engineers
   Place 3. Fire Protection Engineer or Fire Protection Professional -
Nominated by the City Manager
   Place 4. Building Owner or Manager - Nominated by the Building Owners and
Managers Association of Fort Worth
   Place 5. General Contractor - Nominated by the Fort Worth Chapter of the
Associated General Contractors
   Place 6. Master Electrician - Nominated by the City Manager1
   1 Before forwarding recommendation to City Council, the City Manager shall
allow for comments from the local chapters of National Electrical Contractors
Association and Independent Electrical Contractors Association concerning any
objections to the recommendation.
   Place 7. Master Plumber - Nominated by the City Manager2
   2 Before forwarding recommendation to City Council, the City Manager shall
allow for comments from the local chapter of Plumbing-Heating-Cooling
Contractors Association concerning any objections to the recommendation.
   Place 8. HVAC contractor - Nominated by the City Manager3
   3 Before forwarding recommendation to City Council, the City Manager shall
allow for comments from the local chapters of Air Conditioning Contractors of
America and Refrigeration Service Engineers Society concerning any objections
to the recommendation.
   Place 9. Home Builder - Nominated by the Fort Worth Home Builder's
Association
   At-large Alternates
   Place 10. Engineer (with Mech/Elec/Plum, or structural background) -
Nominated by the Fort Worth Branch of the Texas Society of Professional
Engineers
      If unable to fill with these qualifications, may also be a Fire
Protection Engineer or professional, preferably with Hazardous Materials
experience, nominated by the City Manager
   Place 11. Architect - Nominated by the Fort Worth Chapter of the American
Institute of Architects
   The City Manager shall appoint members, or alternate members, to the Board
from time to time subject to the consent of the City Council. If nominations
are not received from nominating organizations within 45 days of the date when
requested, the City Manager may entertain nominations from other sources.
   Whenever any reference to the Building Code Board of Appeals, the Electrical
Board, the Mechanical Board, or the Plumbing Board is made in any ordinance
adopted prior to this ordinance, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the
Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals as created herein.
   All members, upon being sworn in, shall become officers of the City of Fort
Worth. Members must be citizens of the City of Fort Worth.
   113.4 Terms of members. Members, and alternate members, shall serve two year
terms. Members, and alternate members, appointed to odd numbered places shall
serve terms which expire October 1 of odd numbered years. Members, and
alternate members, appointed to the even numbered places shall serve terms
which expire October 1 of even numbered years. No member, or alternate member,
shall serve more than a total of three consecutive two-year terms. After a
break in service of at least two years, a member or alternate member may again
be eligible to serve. Members, and alternate members, shall serve until their
successors are appointed.
   113.5 Successors; Removal from office. Should any member, or alternate
member, of the Board die, become unable to act for any reason, resign or be
removed for cause, as hereinafter provided, the City Manager shall appoint a
successor to fill the unexpired term or to serve until a new member, or
alternate member, can be duly appointed. An alternate member shall
automatically move to fill a vacant member position of the same category,
provided he has not exceeded the total number of years allowed to serve.
   The City Council may remove any member, or alternate member, of the Board
during the term of which he may be appointed. The action of the City Council in
such matters shall be final.
   113.6 Compensation of members. All members, and alternate members, shall
serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties.
   113.7 Ex-Officio members. The Building Official and the Fire Chief or their
designated representatives shall be ex-officio members of the Board. The
Building Official shall serve as the Secretary of the Board. The Secretary will
submit a report by October 31 of each year which shall contain an overview of
the past fiscal year's operation.
   113.8 Meetings; Quorum. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public as provided by law. The Board shall hold meetings as regularly
scheduled, unless canceled, and at such time and place as called by the
Chairman or one lawfully acting in that capacity.
   Six (6) members of said Board shall constitute a quorum to transact
business. Every matter before the Board for vote shall require for final
passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and voting;
except that variances shall require the affirmative vote of five (5) members to
grant a variance. Members present, including the Chair, shall vote unless
required to abstain due to conflict of interest.
   As At-large alternates, alternate members may fill in for any absent member
or vacant position. When only one alternate is needed, the Chair may determine
which alternate may substitute at any particular meeting, giving fair rotation
between alternate members. The chosen alternate shall serve for the entire
meeting.
   Alternate members may participate in discussions, but may not vote or be
counted as part of the quorum; except that when filling in for a vacant
position, in the absence of any other member or when any other member is
required to abstain, the designated alternate member may be counted and allowed
to vote in that members place.
   Ex-officio members may not vote and do not count toward a quorum.
   113.9 Hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an
appeal and shall give notice of said hearing in writing to the parties in
interest. Parties may appear before the Board in person, by agent or by
attorney. The Board may require additional data and tests necessary for
adequate decision of the appeal. The Board shall notify the appellant of its
decision.
   113.10 Bylaws. The Board shall hold an organizational meeting in October of
each year, or as soon as possible thereafter, at which time it shall elect a
Chairman and Vice-Chairman before proceeding to other matters of business.
Alternate members may not serve as Chairman or Vice- Chairman. The Board shall
establish its own rules of procedure and shall amend them from time to time as
it deems necessary.
   113.11 Agenda and records. The agenda for the Board shall be prepared by the
Secretary and shall be posted as required by law. All records and evidence
pertinent to any appeal shall be transmitted to the Board prior to the hearing
by delivery to the Secretary. Records of all appeals shall be kept in the
office of the Building Official. The Building Official shall transmit copies of
appeal records to the Fire Chief.
   113.12 Right of appeal. Any person, firm, company or corporation aggrieved
by a decision or order of the designated code official or Fire Chief may appeal
such decision or order to the Board if it falls within the Board's authority.
Every appeal must be filed in writing on the form provided by staff with the
Secretary within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision or order
appealed from. The Board shall not consider any appeal that is filed after the
thirty (30) day period. Such appeal shall contain appropriate reference to the
decision or order appealed from, as well as the grounds for the appeal. At the
time of filing an appeal, the appellant shall pay a non-refundable appeal fee
as set forth in Table No. 1-B.
      Exception: The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting
exceptions 1, 2 or 3 of Section 109.2.1.
   113.13 Authority and power. The Board shall have the authority and power to:
   1.   Hear appeals on interpretations by the Building Official on the
Building Codes (Building, Energy, Residential, Existing, Sign, Electrical,
Mechanical and Plumbing Codes). The Board may modify in whole or in part or may
affirm the interpretation of the designated official. No interpretation shall
be heard by the Board until the designated official has rendered a written
interpretation. It shall be incumbent upon the designated official to render a
written interpretation within thirty (30) days of receipt of written request.
   2.   Hear appeals on interpretations by the Fire Chief on the Fire Code. The
Board may modify in whole or in part or may affirm the interpretation of the
Fire Chief. No interpretation shall be heard by the Board until the Fire Chief
has rendered a written interpretation. It shall be incumbent upon the Fire
Chief to render a written interpretation within thirty (30) days of receipt of
written request.
   3.   Approve alternate methods of construction and fire prevention where it
is impractical to meet the adopted construction and fire prevention standards,
provided that the Board finds the same degree of suitability, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, sanitation and safety exists in the
alternate method as intended by the standards.
   4.   Approve new methods of construction and fire prevention not covered by
the construction and fire prevention standards, provided that the Board finds
the same degree of suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability, sanitation and safety exists in the new methods as intended by the
standards. The Board, in approving new materials and processes, shall rely upon
recognized standards or practices.
   5.   Determine the acceptability and adequacy of materials, equipment and
methods of construction of signs. Hear appeals on interpretations by the
Building Official on the Sign Code of the City of Fort Worth. The Board may
modify in whole or in part or may affirm the interpretation of the Building
Official. No interpretation shall be heard by the Board until the Building
Official has rendered a written interpretation. It shall be incumbent upon the
Building Official to render a written interpretation within thirty (30) days of
receipt of written request.
   6.   At the request of staff or the Board, review all technical amendments
to the Minimum Building Standards Code of the City of Fort Worth. Hear appeals
on interpretations by the designated official on sections of the Minimum
Building Standards Code that are designated as Building, Residential,
Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Code related. The Board may modify in
whole or in part or may affirm the interpretation of the designated official.
No interpretation shall be heard by the Board until the designated official has
rendered a written interpretation. It shall be incumbent upon the designated
official to render a written interpretation within thirty (30) days of receipt
of written request.
   7.   Grant variances to the non-administrative provisions of the Building
Codes (Building, Residential (except Chapter 11, "Energy Efficiency"),
Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes); sections of the Minimum Building
Standards Code that are designated as Building, Residential, Electrical,
Mechanical, Plumbing or Fire Code related; the Fire Code; and the Sign Code,
when in the opinion of the Board, and based upon the presentation of valid
data, the applicable provisions are unreasonable and/or unrealistic to a
particular site, building or structure.
   The Board may grant variances to non-administrative provisions of the Energy
Code and Chapter 11, "Energy Efficiency", of the Residential Code, when in the
opinion of the Board, and based upon the presentation of valid data, the
applicable provisions are unreasonable and/or unrealistic to a particular site,
building or structure, except that no variance can be granted that might
violate State Law. The Building Official shall be the deciding individual as to
whether a variance to the Energy Code would place the city in violation of
State Law.
   The Board shall use its good judgment in granting such variances, balancing
the code requirement to protect life, health, structural safety and the
reasonableness of the requirement. It shall take the affirmative vote of five
(5) members to grant a variance.
   9.   The Board may review from time to time the provisions of the respective
codes and recommend any necessary changes and/or improvements to the City
Council. This review shall include consideration of suggestions from industry
or the public at large which shall be obtained by means of open hearing as well
as through the regular channels. The Board may make recommendations to the City
Council for amendments to standards as needed throughout the year.
   10.   Hear appeals for revocation or denial of registrations.
   11.   Hears appeals to the Water Department provisions of Chapter 36, Docks,
Piers and Boathouses, designated as (WD) but only after a release is obtained
from the Director of the Water Department.
   113.14 Enforcement. The Building Official and Fire Chief shall enforce and
execute all legal decisions and orders of the Board for which they are
respectively responsible.
   113.15 Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the Board shall stay all
proceedings in connection with the decision or order appealed from, unless and
until the Building Official or Fire Chief shall have certified to the Board
after notice of appeal has been filed that a stay would cause hazard to life or
property. Any work done contrary to the order of the Building Official or Fire
Chief after filing an appeal hereunder, pending the determination of such
appeal, shall be subject to nullification should the order be affirmed and may
not be considered by the Board as mitigating or extenuating circumstance.
   113.16 Court review. A person, firm, company or corporation aggrieved by a
decision or order of the Board may present to a District Court a petition, duly
verified, setting fourth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the
Court within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision of the
board.
SECTION 114 -VIOLATIONS
   114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, Firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish
or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this Code, or cause
same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of
this Code.
      114.1.1 Unsafe buildings. Failure to correct an unsafe building as
provided for in Sections 110.6.1 or 116 shall constitute a violation of this
Code.
      114.1.2 Occupancy violations. Whenever any site, building, structure or
equipment therein regulated by this Code or any other code is being used
contrary to the provisions of this Code or any other code, the Building
Official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof,
vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued.
      Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the
Building Official after receipt of such notice to make the site, building,
structure, or portion thereof, or equipment comply with the requirements of
this Code and the Technical Codes.
      114.1.3 Failure to comply with notice. Failure to comply with a notice
shall be considered a violation of this Code.
   114.2 Notice of violation. The Building Official is authorized to serve a
notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
Code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
      Exception: Citations for violations of this Code may be issued without
requiring the issuance of a notice. When a notice is issued, it is not
necessary to reissue a notice prior to issuance of any further citations for
the same violation, at the same or at different locations.
   114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel
of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made
pursuant hereto.
   114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code
or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
   Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this ordinance
occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable as prescribed by law.
SECTION 115 - STOP WORK ORDER
   115.1 Authority. Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by
this Code and the Technical Codes being performed in a manner either contrary
to the provisions of the Technical Codes or is dangerous or unsafe, the
Building Official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
   115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order,
and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law.
SECTION 116 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
   116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter
become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress
facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire
hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or to the public welfare, or
that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed
or made safe, as the Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in
this section.
   A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
Materials used to secure a structure, which deteriorate or increase in
susceptibility to fire hazard over time, shall be replaced or treated to
eliminate the increase of the hazard.
      116.1.1 Unsafe buildings. Any use of buildings or structures constituting
a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls,
cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural
members that are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and that
are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads
that are specified in this Code are hereby designated as unsafe building
appendages.
      All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
Technical Codes or such alternate procedures as may have been or as may be
adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the Building Official, or
other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the governing
body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
      116.1.2 Covered work. Any work covered or concealed without inspection
shall be considered to constitute an unsafe structure. Such consideration as an
unsafe structure shall exist every day until the work is inspected and approved
as being in compliance with the Technical Codes. Inspections will not be
performed until a valid active permit is obtained in accordance with the
Technical Codes.
      116.1.3 Dangerous Demolition. The Building Official may order the
cessation of the wrecking or demolition of any building or structure within the
City when the same is being accomplished in a reckless or careless manner or in
such a manner so as to endanger life and property. When such work has been
ordered stopped by the Building Official, same shall not be resumed until said
official is satisfied that adequate precautions have been or will be taken for
protection for life and property. To continue such work without the expressed
approval of the Building Official shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance, and each day that such work continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   116.2 Record. The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an
unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the
nature of the unsafe condition.
   116.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall
serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written
notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specified the required
repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that
requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time.
   116.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if
delivered in accordance with the standard method accepted by the jurisdiction.
   116.5 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the
Building Official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the
extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy
occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations,
additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the applicable provisions of
the Technical Codes.
SECTION 117 - THIRD PARTY PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION
   117.1 Authorization. When approved by the Building Official, Third Party
Organizations may be permitted to perform the plan review and/or field
inspection provisions of this Code. When authorized to perform services, the
Third Party Organization shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   117.2 Plan review.
      117.2.1 Permit application. Performance of plan review by a Third Party
Organization shall not exempt or otherwise relieve the owner and/or other
parties from the submittal for a permit with the appropriate plans as
prescribed in this Code.
      117.2.2 Submittal requirements. Along with the submittal of plans,
documents as required by the Building Official shall also be submitted with the
following information:
   1.   Name of the Third Party Organization and all individuals involved in
the plan review.
   2.   Listing of the plan review results including but not limited to the
construction type, occupancy group, occupant load, area calculations, story
calculations, height measurements, and exiting calculations.
   3.   Other information as required by the Building Official.
   117.3 Field inspections.
      117.3.1 Application process. Whenever the owner, builder or authorized
agent wishes to use a Third Party Organization for field inspection, he shall
submit the appropriate forms to the building official for approval before
inspections commence. The Building Official shall review the application to
confirm that the chosen Third Party Organization is approved and has all
required insurance. No Third Party Organization may make plumbing inspections
unless they are registered as a Qualified Plumbing Inspection Company.
      117.3.2 Quality control. The Building Official shall have a right to make
periodic site visits, at his discretion, to review and inspect the work under
construction. Whenever possible, the Building Official may attempt to
coordinate such visits with the Third Party Organization.
      117.3.3 Code interpretations. The Building Official shall maintain full
interpretation authority of all affected codes as well as the authority to
require corrections, including, but not limited to, notices, stop work orders
and/or citations.
      117.3.4 Inspections. The project may proceed with construction only upon
approval of the Third Party Organization after performing the inspections as
required by this Code or as otherwise required by the Building Official. If,
upon review, the Building Official believes that compliance with all applicable
codes has not been achieved, the Building Official shall retain the right to
require corrections. If corrections are required, the owner/builder and Third
Party Organization may propose methods of correction that do not require
uncovering of completed work. However, the building official may require
uncovering of completed work after consideration of the extent of the work
involved versus the level of compliance needed and then only as a last resort
when the Building Official determines that the proposed methods of correction
will not result in adequate compliance.
      117.3.5 Reports. The Third Party Organization shall issue to the owner/
builder and the Building Official a formal inspection report for each
inspection completed, verifying either that the work inspected is in compliance
with the Technical Codes or specifically detailing corrections necessary to
bring such work into conformance with said codes and regulations.
      117.3.6 Failure to comply. The Third Party Organization shall notify the
Building Official if, at any time, the owner/builder fails to correct
construction deficiencies as noted or if the owner/builder covers work prior to
inspection or otherwise hinders the ability of the Third Party Organization to
perform required inspections.
   117.4 Insurance. The Third Party Organization shall obtain and maintain
insurance coverage as prescribed by the Building Official.
   117.5 Indemnification. The Third Party Organization, the builder and the
owner shall execute an indemnification agreement, when required, in a form
approved by the City Attorney.
   117.6 Conflict of interest. The licensed architect, registered engineer, or
other authorized person, entity or corporation who prepared or supervised
preparation of the project plans and/or specifications, along with, the owner,
builder, subcontractor, their agents, officers and employees shall not be
associated in any way with the Third Party Organization.
   117.7 Qualifications. The Third Party Organization shall submit documents,
as required by the Building Official, to show adequate training, knowledge and/
or certification in the fields upon which service is to be rendered. The
Building Official shall review the documents along with proof of required
insurance and all required executed agreements. If in compliance, the building
official shall approve the Third Party Organization.
   If not approved, or if approval is revoked for just cause by the Building
Official, the Third Party Organization may appeal to the Construction and Fire
Prevention Board of Appeals. Just cause may include but not be limited to
violation of any provision of this ordinance, loss or expiration of required
insurance, violation of the conflict of interest provision or any action that
may result in the questioning of qualifications.
   117.8 Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued,
when necessary, by the Building Official upon completion of all requirements
specified above and, upon completion of all requirements of any other affected
department of the City. Such completion shall be determined upon the submittal
of all inspection reports by the Third Party Organization noting that all
required construction inspections have been approved and after the Building
Official has perform and approve a final inspection when deemed necessary.
   117.9 Violations. A Third Party person or individual who violates, or
assists in the violation, of this Code or the Technical Codes shall be subject
to the penalties as prescribed in Section 114.
SECTION 118 - CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND CITY LICENSING
   118.1 General. Any firm, business, individual or organization obtaining a
building permit related to the building, mechanical, plumbing or electrical
provisions of the City of Fort Worth's Codes shall have on file in the
Department of Planning and Development a valid Contractor Registration signed
by an official of the business hereafter to be known as Registered Official.
      Exception: The property owners of single family residences when
performing the work on their homestead property.
      118.1.1 Plumbing Contractor Registration. Applicants for a Fort Worth
plumbing Contractor Registration shall hold a valid State of Texas Master
Plumber License or Texas Board of Irrigator License when required by the State
of Texas or the City of Fort Worth Plumbing Code.
      118.1.2 Mechanical Contractor Registration. Applicants for a Fort Worth
mechanical Contractor Registration shall hold a valid State of Texas air
conditioning and refrigeration license with proper endorsements.
      118.1.3 Electrical Contractor Registration. Applicants for a Fort Worth
electrical Contractor Registration shall hold a valid State of Texas Electrical
Contractor's license.
      118.1.4 Sign Contractor Registration. Applicants for a Fort Worth
Electrical Sign Contractor Registration shall hold a valid State of Texas
Electrical Sign Contractor's license.
   118.2 Application requirements. Contractors registering with the City of
Fort Worth shall meet the insurance requirements listed within this section,
provide a copy of any applicable State of Texas license, and complete an
application containing the following information:
   1.   Business Name
   2.   Name and contact information of the Registered Official
   3.   Address of business
   4.   Type of Contractor Registration
   5.   Insurance information
   Upon approval of the Contractor's Registration application, applicants shall
pay the appropriate registration fees.
   118.2.1 Fees. All individuals or businesses registering under this Code
shall pay fees as prescribed in this section.
   Annual Fee                      $168.75
   Change of Master or Registered Official         $60.00
   Renewal Fee                      $168.75
   Exception: State Licensed Plumbing, Electrical, or Mechanical Contractors or
their qualifying individuals are exempt from paying registration fees. State
licensed electricians are exempt from paying registration fees.
   118.3 Expiration and renewal of Contractor Registration. The Contractor
Registration, unless revoked or suspended, shall expire one year from the date
of issuance. Contractor Registrations which have expired shall be charged a
renewal fee. The term of the renewed Contractor Registration shall be one year
from the date of reissuance.
   118.4 Revocation of registration. A Contractor Registration may be
suspended, repealed or revoked by the Code Official by reason of the occurrence
of one or more of the following:
   1.   Adjudication of insanity;
   2.   Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining any City of Fort Worth license,
Contractor Registration, or permit;
   3.   Violation of a provision of the Administrative or Technical Codes of
the City of Fort Worth
   4.   A conviction or judicial judgment related to the defrauding of a person
for whom the contractor has rendered or contracted to render service;
   5.   Failure to obtain a permit or the attempted assignment of a permit;
   6.   Failure to pay fees or the voluntary or involuntary filing of
bankruptcy proceedings by or against the firm, partnership, association, or
corporation with a Contractor's Registration with the City;
   7.   The sending of six (6) notifications within a six (6) month period that
the registered contractor is in violation of this Code; and,
   8.   When a state license related to the Contractor Registration
qualification is expired or suspended for any reason.
      8.4.1 Registration appeal. The Construction and Fire Prevention Board of
Appeals shall hear all appeals for reinstatement of Contractor Registrations
suspended or revoked under section 118.4 (2) and (3). All other Contractor
Registrations suspended or revoked under section 118.4 shall not be appealable.
SECTION 119 - FEE TABLES
TABLE NO. 1-A
NON-RESIDENTIAL REMODEL AND ACCESSORY BUILDING PERMIT FEES
INCLUDES FEES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION WITH NO SQUARE FOOTAGE
TOTAL VALUATION Permit Fee1, 2
TOTAL VALUATION               Permit Fee1, 2
$0 to $2,000.00               $96.84        
                                           (a) for first $2,000
>$2,000.00 to $25,000.00      (a) $96.84   (b) for each additional $1,000.00,
                              (b) $19.36   or fraction thereof, to and
                                           including $25,000.00
                                           (a) for first $25,000
>$25,000.00 to $50,000.00     (a) $542.44  (b) for each additional $1,000.00,
                              (b) $13.98   or fraction thereof, to and
                                           including $50,000.00
                                           (a) for first $50,000
>$50,000.00 to $100,000.00    (a) $892.25  (b) for each additional $1,000.00 or
                              (b) $9.68    fraction thereof, to and including
                                           $100,000.00
                                           (a) for first $100,000
>$100,000.00 to $500,000.00   (a) $1376.58 (b) for each additional $1,000.00 or
                              (b) $7.52    fraction thereof, to and including
                                           $500,000.00
                                           (a) for the first $500,000.00
>$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 (a) $4390.25 (b) for each additional $1,000.00 or
                              (b) $6.45    fraction thereof, to and including
                                           $1,000,000.00
                              (a) $7619.23 (a) for the first $1,000,000.00
>$1,000,000.00                (b) $4.29    (b) for each additional $1,000.00 or
                                           fraction thereof
 
   1Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures]:
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% [0.35]. The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70J. The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
   2Commercial projects (those not included in item 1 above):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 25% (0.25). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
TABLE 1A-1
RESIDENTIAL REMODEL FEES
(Based upon the number of trades required for the project)
 
Number of Trades Minimum Permit Fee1
1                $112.50
2                $225.00
3                $337.50
4                $450.00
5                $562.50
 
   1 Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.5 5). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with
no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
TABLE No. 1-B
Building Permit Fee Schedule
Building Permit Fee Schedule
1. Permit Application Fee, Applicable to All Permit Types, Excluding  $31.50
Signs:
2. Paper Filing Fee:                                                  $31.50
3. Technology Fee applicable to all applications/permits:             $16.87
4. Simultaneous Plat and Early Plan Review Fee, per permit:           $1,260.00
5. Expedited Plan Review:                                              
   Application Fee:                                                $225.00
   Plan Review with Meeting, per hour, two hours minimum           $1,125.00
   Plan Review without Meeting, per hour, one hour minimum         $1,125.00
   Revisions, per hour, pro-rated, 15-minute time periods          $1,125.00
6. Change of Occupancy Permit Fee:                                    $90.00
7. Ordinance Inspection Fee (per inspector):                          $56.25
8. Inspection Card Replacement:                                       $31.50
9. Record Change Fee per record or permit, applicable to all permit   $31.50
types:
10. Plan Review Deposit*                                               
   Those requiring circulation:                                    $276.75
   Those without circulation:                                      $106.87
   Third party requiring circulation:                              $49.50
   Third Party without circulation:                                $24.75
* Deposit is not required for additions and remodels to existing Group R-
3 Occupancies and additions, remodels or new construction of their accessory
structures.
11. Annual Contractor Registration Fee- Building and Sign:            $168.75
12. Annual Contractor Registration Fee- Parkway and Utility           $562.50
Contractor
13. Vendor Certificate of Occupancy for Temporary Vendors:            $104.67
14. Application for Specialized Certificate of Occupancy related to    
Sexually Oriented Businesses:
   a. New:                                                         $1,125.00
   b. Amended, modified, renewal or transfer                       $1,125.00
15. CFPBOA Application Fee                                             
   1st item per address                                            $225.00
   Each additional item per address:                               $112.50
16. Demolition and Moving Fees cost per square foot:                   
   Demolition of structure 45 years or older                       $56.25
   0 to 1000:                                                      $84.37
   1001 through 2000:                                              $171.00
   2001 through 3000:                                              $319.50
   3001 through 5000:                                              $479.25
   5001 through 10000:                                             $642.37
   10001 through 20000:                                            $858.37
   20001 and Above:                                                $1,717.87
17. Sidewalk Café , annually                                         $189.00
18. Temporary or Limited Certificate of Occupancy                     $378.00
Inspection and Plan Review Fees Applicable to All Permit Types:
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum of 4 hours): $112.50
2. Reinspection fee:                                                  $63.00
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour,  $63.00
half hour minimum:
4. Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions  
to plans, per revision, per hour, half hour minimum:
   first revision                                                  $63.00
   second revision                                                 $112.50
   third and fourth revision                                       $225.00
   fifth revision and up                                           $337.50
Third Party plan revisions for Building, Mechanical, Electrical,      $39.37
Plumbing, Energy, per revision, per hour, half hour minimum:
5. Inspections outside of city limits, per hour, 4 hours minimum:     $94.50
 
TABLE 1-C-1
A, B, E, H, I, & M USE GROUPS
NEW CONSTRUCTION OR ADDITION
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
0 to 30            $96.84         
                   (a) $96.84    (a) for first 30 square feet
>30 to 400         (b) $1.19     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 400
                   (a) $542.44   (a) for first 400 square feet
>400 to 790        (b) $0.89     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 790
                   (a) $892.25   (a) for first 790 square feet
>790 to 1365       (b) $0.84     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 1365
                   (a) $1,376.58 (a) for first 1365 square feet
>1365 to 5850      (b) $0.67     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 5850
                   (a) $4,390.25 (a) for the first 5850 square feet
>5850 to 18,000    (b) $0.26     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 18,000
>18,000            (a) $7,619.23 (a) for the first 18,000 square feet
                   (b) $0.24     (b) for each additional square foot
 
   1 Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third
Party', the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35).
The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the
tenth of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
   2 Commercial projects (those not included in item 1 above):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 25% (0.25). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55) The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
TABLE 1-C-2
F & S USE GROUPS
NEW CONSTRUCTION OR ADDITION
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
0 to 75            $96.84         
                   (a) $96.84    (a) for first 75 square feet
>75 to 1080        (b) $0.43     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 1080
                   (a) $542.44   (a) for first 1080 square feet
>1080 to 1980      (b) $0.39     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 1980
                   (a) $892.25   (a) for first 1980 square feet
>1980 to 3365      (b) $0.34     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 3365
                   (a) $1,376.58 (a) for first 3365 square feet
>3365 to 24,675    (b) $0.14     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 24,675
                   (a) $4,390.25 (a) for the first 24,675 square feet
>24,675 to 50,050  (b) $0.12     (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                 including 50,050
>50,050            (a) $7,619.23 (a) for the first 50,050 square feet
                   (b) $0.12     (b) for each additional square foot
 
   1 Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
   2 Commercial projects (those not included in item 1 above):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 25% (0.25). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
TABLE 1-C-3
R USE GROUPS
NEW CONSTRUCTION OR ADDITION
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
0 to 65            $96.84 ($58.10)*      
                   (a) $96.84 ($58.10)* (a) for first 65 square feet
>65 to 700         (b) $0.70 (0.42)*    (b) for each additional square foot, to
                                        and including 700
                   (a) $542.44          (a) for first 700 square feet
>700 to 1400       (b) $0.50            (b) for each additional square foot, to
                                        and including 1400
                   (a) $892.25          (a) for first 1400 square feet
>1400 to 2700      (b) $0.37            (b) for each additional square foot, to
                                        and including 2700
                   (a) $1,376.58        (a) for first 2700 square feet
>2700 to 11,800    (b) $0.33            (b) for each additional square foot, to
                                        and including 11,800
                   (a) $4,390.25        (a) for the first 11,800 square feet
>11,800 to 24,500  (b) $0.25            (b) for each additional square foot, to
                                        and including 24,500
>24,500            (a) $7,619.23        (a) for the first 24,500 square feet
                   (b) $0.19            (b) for each additional square foot
 
   *New square footage for Group R-3, up to and including 500 sq.ft., shall be
charged the fee in ( ).
   1 Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
   2 Commercial projects (those not included in item 1 above):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 25% (0.25). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
TABLE 1-C-4
U USE GROUP
NEW CONSTRUCTION OR ADDITION
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
NEW SQUARE FOOTAGE Permit Fee1,2
0 to 175           $96.84 ($58.10)*  
                   (a) $96.84       (a) for first 175 square feet
>175 to 2500       (b) $0.19        (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                    including 2500
                   (a) $542.44      (a) for first 2500 square feet
>2500 to 5200      (b) $0.12        (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                    including 5200
                   (a) $892.25      (a) for first 5200 square feet
>5200 to 10,200    (b) $0.10        (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                    including 10,200
                   (a) $1,376.58    (a) for first 10,200 square feet
>10,200 to 46,500  (b) $0.08        (b) for each additional square foot, to and
                                    including 46,500
                   (a) $4,390.25    (a) for the first 46,500 square feet
>46,500 to 96,500  (b) $0.06        (c) for each additional square foot, to and
                                    including 96,500
>96,500            (a) $7,619.23    (a) for the first 96,500 square feet
                   (b) $0.05        (b) for each additional square foot
 
   *New square footage for accessory Group U uses associated with existing R-
3's shall be charged the fee in ( ).
   1 Residential projects (one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses
regulated by the IRC, and their accessory structures):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
   2 Commercial projects (those not included in item 1 above):
      i.   When plan review and field inspections are performed by Third Party,
the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum by 25% (0.25). The
resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth
of a penny figure.
      ii.   When plan review is performed by Third Party with field inspections
performed by City Staff, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the sum
by 70% (0.70) The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
      iii.   When plan review is performed by City Staff with field inspections
performed by Third Party, the permit fee shall be reduced by multiplying the
sum by 55% (0.55). The resulting amount will be calculated to the penny with no
rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
Table 1-D
Contractor Registration Fee (including Plumbing Irrigator)
 
First year or portion thereof                                $168.75
Yearly renewal                                               $168.75
Qualified Plumbing Inspection Company Registration, annually $1,125.00
 
Table 1-E
Temporary Encroachment Fees
 
Time             Fee
3 or less days   If the time does not exceed three (3) days, the fee will be
                 $48.15 per day up to and including the third day.
                 If the time exceeds three (3) days, the fee per day will be
More than 3 days two cents ($.02) per square foot of sidewalk or alley space
                 and three cents ($.03) per square foot of street space used
                 with a minimum fee of $144.45 per permit.
 
Table 1-F
Permanent Encroachments
 
                                          Fee
Applications, Amendments, Assignments and $1,012.50
Terminations
Annual Fee                                $2.25 per linear or square foot of
                                          encroachment, as applicable
 
Table 1-G
Minimum amount retained by City for permit fee refunds
 
The Building Official shall retain the application fee plus the largest of the
following:
   (a)   5% of the permit fee; or,
   (b)   the plan review deposit; or,
   (c)   56.25 dollars ($56.25).
 
Table 1-H
Schedule of Mechanical Fees*
Forced Air Heating-Furnaces Including                                      
   Ducts and/or Vents Attached Thereto:                                 
   Capacity to and including 100,000 BTU input or 20 KW:               $5.81
   Over 100,000 BTU input or 20 KW and Including 400,000 BTU or 40 KW: $9.85
                                                                          
Heating Appliances Non-Ducted Air                                          
   Gas Unit or Room Heater, including vent:                            $5.81
   Gas Wall Heater, including vent:                                    $5.81
   Gas Floor Furnace, including vent:                                  $5.81
   Gas Infra-red Heating Unit:                                         $5.81
   Electric Heater, Wall, Space, Unit, etc..                           $5.81
                                                                          
Energy-Using Heat Appliance Other Than Above                               
   Per 1,000 BTU Input:                                                $0.11
      Minimum:                                                      $6.26
   Per 1 KW:                                                           $0.29
      Minimum:                                                      $6.26
                                                                          
Each Low or High Pressure Steam or Hot Water Boiler Rated in either BTU's  
Input Boiler Horsepower Output or KW
   Per 1,000 BTU's Input:                                              $0.11
      Minimum:                                                      $6.26
   Per Boiler HP Output:                                               $2.58
      Minimum:                                                      $6.26
   Per KW:                                                             $0.29
      Minimum:                                                      $6.26
 
Each Absorber Unit, Electrical Reciprocating, Centrifugal, or Rotary
Compressor, Condensing Unit, or Chiller Unit, Each on its Normal Capacity
Rating
Each Absorber Unit, Electrical Reciprocating, Centrifugal, or Rotary
Compressor, Condensing Unit, or Chiller Unit, Each on its Normal
Capacity Rating
   Up to and including 2 tons:                                    $5.81
   Over 2 and including 3 tons:                                   $9.85
   Over 3 and including 5 tons:                                   $15.68
   Over 5 and including 7-1/2 tons:                               $21.51
   Over 7-1/2 and including 10 tons:                              $27.78
   Over 10 and including 30 tons, per ton:                        $2.49
   Over 30 and including 100 tons, per ton:                       $2.29
   Over 100 and including 320 tons, per ton                       $1.96
   Over 320 and including 520 tons, per ton:                      $1.49
   Over 520 tons                                                  $1.13
                                                                     
Mechanical Hydronic Piping                                            
   First 120 feet                                                 $9.85
   Each additional 100 feet or portion thereof                    $9.38
                                                                     
Each Roof-Top or Combination Including Ducts and Drains               
 
 
                                  Cooling Only Heating and Cooling
Up to and including 3 tons        $9.85        $19.72
Over 3 and including 5 tons:      $15.68       $27.78
Over 5 and including 7-1/2 tons:  $21.51       $36.75
Over 7-1/2 and including 10 tons: $27.78       $43.93
Over 10 tons per ton:             $4.02        $4.91
 
Roof-Top Heating Only
   Unit per 1,000 BTU:                                            $0.11
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
Through-the-Wall A/C Units
   All Sizes, Each:                                               $8.06
Cooling Tower, Evaporative or Air-Cooled Condenser, Tonnage Based on  
Local Design Conditions
   All size units per ton refrigeration capacity:                 $0.96
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
                                                                     
Cooling-Heating Coils                                                 
   D.E. or Chill Water per ton:                                   $0.96
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
   Steam or Hot Water, per 1,000 BTU:                             $0.11
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
                                                                     
Fan and Coil Units including Drains and Ducts                         
   Cool and Heat, per ton:                                        $1.96
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
   Cool only, per ton:                                            $0.96
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
   Heating Unit only, per 1,000 BTU                               $0.11
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
                                                                     
Electrical Heat Strips for Units or Duct Installations                
   Per KW:                                                        $0.29
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
   Mixing Box - Conditioned Air:                                  $1.96
   Mixing Box - Forced Air:                                       $4.02
   Duct Addition or System not included elsewhere                  
   Per outlet:                                                    $0.96
      Minimum:                                                 $6.26
                                                                     
 
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous
Commercial food preparation hood - Grease Type I:            $15.68
Commercial food preparation hood - Heat or Moisture Type II: $11.65
Commercial hood exhaust fan - Grease:                        $9.85
Commercial hood exhaust fan - Heat or Moisture:              $8.08
Commercial hood exhaust duct - Grease:                       $9.85
Commercial hood exhaust duct - Heat or Moisture:             $8.08
Commercial kitchen make-up air unit:                         $9.85
Commercial hood automatic electronic smoke extractor:        $31.37
Automatic fire-extinguishing equipment system:               $31.37
Range hood exhaust duct, for R Occupancy:                    $1.96
Toilet exhaust fan and/or duct (per inlet):                  $1.96
Ventilation fan and duct system:                             $8.08
Industrial hood:                                             $11.65
Mechanical ventilator:                                       $8.08
Flue replacement - U.L. labeled:                             $8.08
Flue or stack for commercial and industrial appliances:      $9.85
Humidifier:                                                  $4.02
Vented decorative appliance:                                 $8.08
Commercial clothes dryer exhaust duct:                       $9.85
Domestic clothes dryer exhaust duct:                         $1.96
Incinerator, per 1,000 BTU:                                  $0.11
Minimum:                                                     $6.26
Incinerator modification:                                    $98.62
Condensate drain-French sump:                                $6.26
Fire or smoke damper:                                        $1.96
Circulating water pump:                                      $1.96
Evaporative cooler:                                          $8.08
 
Miscellaneous (cont’)
Miscellaneous (cont’)
Automatic shutoff - products of combustion:                             $9.85
Solar energy system:                                                    $59.18
Heat recovery devices per 1,000 BTU:                                    $0.11
Minimum:                                                                $19.04
Gas Extension - Test:                                                   $9.85
For each appliance or piece of equipment by this ordinance for which no $9.85
other fee is listed:
   *When inspections are performed by third party the permit fee shall be
reduced by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The resulting amount will be
calculated to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
 
Table 1-I
Schedule of Plumbing Fees*
First Fixture or Appliance:                        $9.85
Additional Fixtures or Appliances (each):          $4.02
Sewer - First 120 feet:                            $9.85
Each additional 100 feet or portion thereof:       $9.38
Gas Service:                                       $9.85
Each Lawn Sprinkler System:                        $113.40
Water Service - First 120 feet:                    $9.85
Each additional 100 feet or portion thereof:       $9.38
Water Submeter:                                    $4.02
Grease Trap or Interceptor:                        $9.85
Sand Trap:                                         $18.81
Each Roof Drain:                                   $9.38
Temporary Gas Service:                             $9.85
Backflow Preventer:                                $9.85
Floor Drain:                                       $4.02
Mobile Homes/Mobile Units: Each mobile unit/space: $35.86
Each sewer vent:                                   $21.51
Manhole:                                           $31.37
Test Well:                                         $9.85
Medical gasses and vacuum system:                  $41.58
* For the purpose of this table a sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a
plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or attached or any plumbing fixture
or appliance to which a water connection may be made shall be construed to be
a fixture. Fees for reconnection and retesting of existing plumbing systems in
relocated buildings shall be based on the number of plumbing fixtures, gas
systems, water heaters, etc. involved.
When inspections are performed by third party the permit fee shall be reduced
by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The resulting amount will be calculated
to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
 
Table 1-J
Schedule of Electrical Fees*
Temporary Power Letters, per bank of six meters              $41.58
                                                             
Light Fixtures, Outlets, Switches, and Receptacles -per item  
   Up to 100, each:                                       $0.51
   Over 100, each:                                        $0.42
                                                             
Fixed Appliances                                              
   Ceiling Fan:                                           $1.42
   Vent Fan:                                              $1.42
   Smoke Detectors:                                       $1.42
   Bath Heater:                                           $1.42
   Disposal:                                              $1.42
   Compactor:                                             $1.42
   Dishwasher:                                            $1.42
   Washing Machine:                                       $1.42
   Water Heater:                                          $2.85
   Dryer:                                                 $2.85
   Range:                                                 $2.85
   Air Conditioner - 3 to 5 ton:                          $5.81
   Air Conditioner - over 5 ton to 7 1/2 ton:             $9.38
   Air Conditioner - over 7 1/2 ton:                      $18.81
   Heating Unit, Gas:                                     $2.85
   Heating Unit, Electric, per KW:                        $0.96
                                                             
Motors                                                        
   1 to 3 hp:                                             $2.85
   Over 3 to 5 hp:                                        $5.81
   Over 5 to 7 1/2 hp:                                    $9.38
   Over 7 1/2 hp:                                         $18.81
                                                             
Transformers, Generators and Welders                          
   0 to 10 KW:                                            $5.81
   Over 10 KW to 20 KW:                                   $9.38
   Over 20 KW:                                            $18.81
   Welders:                                               $5.81
                                                             
Services and Subpanels                                        
   60 amps to 100 amps:                                   $18.81
   Over 100 amps to 150 amps:                             $27.78
   Over 150 amps:                                         $37.65
                                                             
Miscellaneous                                                 
   Swimming pools:                                        $53.79
   Construction pole:                                     $27.78
   Sign connections:                                      $8.94
   New mobile home hookups** :                            $41.51
   Submeters-buildings, leases, apartments, etc.:         $19.72
                                                             
*When inspections are performed by third party the permit fee shall be reduced
by multiplying the sum by 35% (0.35). The resulting amount will be calculated
to the penny with no rounding for the tenth of a penny figure.
**A Building Code Ordinance Inspection shall be required to inspect and
approve power to existing mobile homes in mobile home parks where the name
changes on the electric utility account except when the account is being
transferred from an individual to the park's name.
 
Table 1-K
Schedule of Sign Fees
Application fee:                                                               $37.12
Permit Fee for New signs =                                                      
   Application Fee + Display Area Fee + Height Above Grade Fee + Electrical  
Amperage Fee
                                                                               
                                                                               $26.88 or
                                                                               $0.24 per
                                                                               square
                                                                               foot for
Display Area Fee:                                                              each
                                                                               display
                                                                               surface,
                                                                               whichever
                                                                               is
                                                                               greater
                                                                               
Height Above Grade Fee, in Feet:                                                
   1-20:                                                                    $26.88
   21-30:                                                                   $53.78
   31-40:                                                                   $80.71
   41-50:                                                                   $107.60
   51-60:                                                                   $134.52
   Over 60:                                                                 $188.32
Electrical Amps Fee:                                                            
   1-40:                                                                    $37.67
   41-60:                                                                   $53.78
   61-80:                                                                   $80.71
   81-100:                                                                  $107.60
   Over 100:                                                                $161.42
                                                                               
Banners and Temporary Signs =                                                   
   Application Fee + Display Area + Height Above Grade                       
                                                                               
   Display Area:                                                            $26.88
                                                                               
   Height above grade at:                                                   $26.88
                                                                               
*When permits are required for allowable repairs or sign removal the non-refundable
application fee shall cover the required permit fee.
 
(Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 8, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-
2017, § 9, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 23046-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff.
12-23-2017; Ord. 23445-10-2018, § 2, passed 10-16-2018; Ord. 23477-12-2018, §
1, passed 12-4-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; Ord. 23603-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019;
Ord. 23686-06-2019, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-4-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed
2-4-2020; Ord. 24340-08-2020; § 1, passed 8-25-2020, eff. 9-1-2020; Ord. 24404-
09-2020, § 1, passed 9-15-2020, eff. 10-1-2020; Ord. 24448-09-2020, § 1, passed
9-22-2020, eff. 4-1-2021; Ord. 24585-12-2020, §§ 1-4, passed 12-15-2020, eff.
1-1-2021; Ord. 25387-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022; Ord. 25772-
09-2022, § 1, passed 9-27-2022, eff. 10-1-2022; Ord. 25816-11-2022, § 2, passed
11-8-2022; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
§§ 7-2—7-40 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 11388, adopted August 24, 1993, repealed §§ 7-16 through
7-32, in effect repealing Art. II. Formerly, these sections pertained to
construction and fire prevention standards and derived from §§ 1 through 15, 17
and 18 of Ord. 9282, adopted January 3, 1985, and § 1 of Ord. 9962, adopted
September 22, 1987. Subsequently, Ord. 14883, §§ 1 through 4, adopted December
11, 2001, added provisions designated as §§
7-41 through
7-44.
    These provisions have been designated as Art. II at the discretion of the
editor. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 7-41 THE 2015 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The energy code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2015
International Energy Conservation Code of the International Code Council (ICC),
and the same as amended is hereby adopted as the city's energy code. One copy
of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, marked as Exhibit "A" is
incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of the city
secretary for permanent record and inspection.
   (b)   The provisions of the building code, residential code, electrical
code, mechanical code, and plumbing code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used
as part of this code for any provision, requirement or method that does not
exist in this code.
   (c)   Any errata corrections, as they are discovered, are considered as part
of this code since the same would have been adopted had they been known at the
time of adoption.
(Ord. 14883, § 1, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 15952, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19605-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22520-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
§ 7-42 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended as
provided in this section:
COMMERCIAL CODE
CHAPTER 1 [CE] - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
IECC SECTION C101
   *IECC Section C01.1; changed to read as follows:
   C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Fort Worth Energy Code, and
shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."
   *IECC Section C101.3; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Amendments made to this code, that are determined to be appropriate to
support safety, health, or environmental requirements will be identified with
the notation "(life safety)."
IECC SECTION C102
   *IECC Section C102.1.2; added to read as follows:
   C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state,
or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy
Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements
of this section may, at the option of the code official, be considered in
compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star
Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in
compliance.
   IECC SECTION C103
   *IECC Sections C103.1, C103.2, C103.3, C103.3.1, C103.3.2, C103.3.3, C103.4,
and C103.5; delete and replace as follows:
   C103.1 General. Construction documents and other supporting data shall be
submitted as required by the code under which the permit is issued (Building,
Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, or Plumbing Codes) and as noted below.
   C103.2 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall
be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Construction documents shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed, and show in sufficient detail pertinent data and features of the
building, systems, and equipment as herein governed. Details shall include, but
are not limited to:
      - Insulation materials and their R-values;
      - Fenestration U-factors and SHGCs;
      -Area-weighted U-factor and SHGC calculations;
      - Mechanical system design criteria;
      - Mechanical and service water heating system and equipment types, sizes
and efficiencies;
      - Economizer description;
      - Equipment and systems controls;
      - Fan motor horsepower (hp) and controls;
      - Duct sealing, duct and pipe insulation and location;
      - Lighting fixture schedule with wattage and control narrative;
      - Location of daylight zones on lighting floor plans;
      - Air sealing details.
   C103.3 Examination of documents. Document examination shall be performed
under the See the applicable code under which the permit is issued. (Building,
Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, or Plumbing Codes).
      C103.3.1 Approval of construction documents. See the applicable code
under which the permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical,
Mechanical or Plumbing Codes).
      C103.3.2 Previous approvals.  See the applicable code under which the
permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing
Codes).
      C103.3.3 Phased approval. See the applicable code under which the permit
is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing Codes).
   C103.4 Amended construction documents. Changes made during construction that
are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be
resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.
   C103.5 Retention of construction documents. See the applicable code under
which the permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, or
Plumbing Codes).
   IECC SECTION C104
   IECC Section C104.1, C104.2, C104.2.1, C104.2.2, C104.2.3, C104.2.4,
C104.2.5, C104.2.6, C104.3, C104.4, C104.5, C104.6, C104.7, and C104.7.1;
deleted and replace as follows:
   C104.1 General. All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and all such
construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved by the Building Official.
   Inspections shall be performed in the manner as specified by the code under
which the permit was obtained. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical,
or Plumbing Codes).
   C104.2 Required Inspections. Along with the mandatory inspections required
under the code which the permit was obtained, inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with this code and shall include, but not be limited to,
inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value,
duct system R-value, HVAC, and water-heating equipment efficiency. (See IECC
Energy Inspection Check List as provided by the department.)
   C104.3 Other Inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified
above, the Building Official may make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and
other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency.
IECC SECTION C106
   *IECC Section C106.1; changed to read as follows:
   C106.1 General.  The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those listed in Chapter 6, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and
standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
extent of such reference.
   Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards,
each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the
amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical Code as
adopted.
   The provisions of the Building Code, Residential Code, Electrical Code,
Mechanical Code, and Plumbing Code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used as part
of this code for any provision, requirement or method that does not exist in
this code.
   IECC SECTION C107
   *IECC Section C107.1, C107.2, C107.3, C107.4 and C107.5; deleted and
replaced to read as follows:
   C107.1 Fees. For Permits, Fees, Inspections, Certificates of Occupancy and
Third Party, see the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code, adopted
elsewhere.
   IECC SECTION C108
   *IECC Section C108.4; changed to read as follows:
   C108.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
considered in violation of this code and liable to a fine as specified in
Section 111.
   IECC SECTION C109
   *IECC Section C109; deleted and replaced to read as follows:
SECTION C109 - CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION BOARD OF APPEALS
   C109.1 Applications for appeals shall be made to the Construction and Fire
Prevention Board of Appeals as authorized and provided for in the Fort Worth
Building Administrative Code. All references to the "Board" shall be deemed to
refer to the Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals.
   The Board shall have no authority to waive provisions required by State Law.
The code official shall be the deciding individual as to whether a variance to
the Energy Code would place the city in violation of State Law.
IECC SECTION C110
   *IECC Section C110; added to read as follows:
SECTION C110 - ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   C110.1 Creation of enforcement agency.  The Department of Planning and
Development is hereby created as specified in the City Code and shall be
referred to as "the department."
   C110.2 Powers and Duties of Code Official.
   C110.2.1 General. Whenever the term "code official" is used in this code, it
shall be construed to mean the Building Code Administrator or his authorized
representative(s). The code official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this code. The code official shall have the authority
to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving
requirements specifically provided for in this code.
   C110.2.2 Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the
approval of the appointing authority, the code official may appoint such number
of technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized
from time to time. The code official may deputize such inspectors or employees
as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the code enforcement agency.
   For the purpose of this code, the regularly authorized deputy officials
shall be per work as follows:
   Provisions involving Mechanical - Mechanical Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Fuel Gas - Plumbing Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Plumbing - Plumbing Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Electrical - Electrical Inspection Specialist
   For all other parts, the Inspection Supervisors(s) shall be the deputy
official.
   C110.2.3 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this code, or where the code official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a
condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the code official or
designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such
structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant
and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the code
official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies
provided by law to secure entry.
   An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from an
authorized representative to inspect the premises.
   When the code official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant
or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, occupant, or person
having charge, care of control of any building or premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit
entry therein by the code official for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the code
official, deputy or any of the inspectors in the discharge of their duties
under this code.
   C110.2.4 Occupancy violations. Whenever any site, building, structure or
equipment therein regulated by this code or any other code is being used
contrary to the provisions of this code or any other code, the code official
may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated
by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued.
   Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the code
official after receipt of such notice to make the site, building, structure, or
portion thereof, or equipment comply with the requirements of this code.
   C110.2.5 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for
any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason
of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. Any judgment resulting
therefrom shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.
      C110.2.5.1 The liability exemption and defense protection provided in
this section are not extended to Third Party Companies, or their employees.
      C110.2.5.2 This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any
such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any
permits or certificates issued under this code.
   C110.2.6 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved
in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the
owner or owner's representative, provided the code official shall first find
that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical
and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code
and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire
safety, or structural requirements. The details of any action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department.
   C110.2.7 Alternate materials, alternate design and methods of construction.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved
where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
   C110.2.8 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code,
shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
   C110.2.9 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to this jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the code official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be
performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the
code official for the period required for retention of public records.
   C110.2.10 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices
shall not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested,
placed in good and proper working condition, and approved.
   C110.2.11 Cooperation of other officials and officers. The code official may
request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials
of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance.
IECC SECTION C111
   *IECC Section C111; added to read as follows:
   C111 Violations.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or
permit the same to be done in violation of this code.
   Any violation cited under the Building Code, Residential Code, Electrical
Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code, as adopted elsewhere, that is also
associated with energy-efficient provisions of this code, may also be cited as
a violation of this code.
   Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
   Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this ordinance
occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable as prescribed by law.
CHAPTER 2 [CE] - DEFINITIONS
IECC SECTION C202
DEFINITIONS
   *IECC Section C202; the following definitions are changed or are added to
read as follows:
   BUILDING CODE.  Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.  A change in the purpose or level of activity within a
building that involves a change in application of the requirements of this
code. The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   ELECTRICAL CODE.  Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
   FUEL GAS CODE.  Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   HISTORIC BUILDING.  Buildings that are listed in or eligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places, or designated or eligible for
designation as historic under an appropriate state or local law.
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   PLUMBING. For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, or the
Plumbing Section of the International Residential Code, as adopted, shall mean:
      The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing
appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to any structure, in
connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting
systems, and public or private water supply systems.
   For the purpose of complying with the Texas State Plumbing License Law,
shall mean:
      All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances, including disposal
systems, drain or waste pipes, or any combination of these that:
         supply, recirculate, drain, or eliminate water, gas, medical gasses
and vacuum, liquids, and sewage for all personal or domestic purposes in and
about buildings where persons live, work, or assemble; connect the building on
its outside with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or
combinations of these, on the premises, or the water main on public property;
and carry waste water or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service
lateral on public property or the disposal or septic terminal that holds
private or domestic sewage.
         The installation, repair, service, maintenance, alteration, or
renovation of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances on premises
where persons live, work, or assemble that supply gas, medical gasses and
vacuum, water, liquids, or any combination of these, or dispose of waste water
or sewage.
   PLUMBING CODE.  Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM.  For the purpose of using this code, as adopted, shall
mean:
   Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and
traps, supports and appurtenances; water-treating or water-using equipment;
soil, waste and vent pipes; sanitary drains, storm sewers and building sewers
to an approved point of disposal, in addition to their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
   PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave
or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured
vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the
overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. (See IECC Equation 4-5).
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. For this code, includes detached one- and two- family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) as well as R-2, R-
3 and R-4 buildings three stories or less in height above grade. Residential
buildings on a Podium building, not exceeding three stories in height above the
podium level, may also be considered as Residential Buildings if constructed
the same as they would be if on grade with no elevator shafts, interior stair
shafts, etc. that would connect conditioned residential space above with the
podium level below.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE.  Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 3 [CE] - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
IECC SECTION C303
MATERIALS, SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
   *IECC Section C303.2.1; deleted and replaced to read as follows:
   303.2.1 Protection of exposed foundation insulation.  Because of "very
heavy" termite classification, designs employing exterior insulation of
basements or slabs shall not be utilized.
CHAPTER 4 [CE] - COMMERCIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY
IECC SECTION C402
BUILDING ENVELOPE REQUIREMENTS
   *IECC Section C402.1.1; add an item 4 to read as follows:
   4.   (life safety) In order to provide a tenable work environment in
unheated warehouses, heaters that exceed the energy limitations of item 1 or 2
above may be installed in the dock area without requiring the entire warehouse
to comply with the envelope provisions, with the following stipulations:
   a.   This exemption shall not apply if heaters are installed throughout the
entire warehouse, even if just to prevent pipe freezing.
   b.   This provision shall not apply to other conditioned spaces inside the
warehouse, e.g. offices, restrooms, break rooms, etc. which must individually
be separated from the warehouse with a compliant envelope.
   c.   Loading Dock weather seals of Section C402.5.6 must be installed.
   *IECC Section C402.2.2.1; added to read as follows:
   C402.2.2.1 Attic equipment. Where equipment installed in the attic is
required a working area and access pathway in accordance with this or other
codes, as applicable, the insulation under such walkway or platform shall not
be reduced unless compensated for through an approved method such as the usage
of a performance (computer) energy review compliance report.
   *IECC Section C402.2.7; added to read as follows:
   C402.2.7 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in
place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides
consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel
sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building
official.
   *IECC Section C402.4.1; an exception is added to read as follows:
   C402.4.1 Maximum Area. The vertical fenestration area (not including opaque
doors and opaque spandrel panels) shall not be greater than 30 percent of the
gross above-grade wall area. The skylight area shall not be greater than 3
percent of the gross roof area.
   Exception:  (life safety) When installing the minimum smoke and heat vents
required under Fire Code Section 910, the area of such vents (skylights) may
exceed 3%, but only by the amount needed to meet the requirement of that
section.
   *IECC Section C402.4.1.1added to read as follows:
   C402.4.1.1 Roll up or roll away wall sections. Roll up or roll away walls,
doors or windows, or folding doors and windows providing access for the
interior atmosphere, conditioned air and/or noise to flow to the outside,
usually associated with interior assemblies connecting to outside dining, patio
or sidewalk area, will not be accepted.
      Exception: Such openings may be accepted when all of the following
conditions are met:
         1.   A kill switch is associated with each opening such that the air
conditioning and/or heat is deactivated when the door/window is open. Fresh air
and fans are allowed to be operational. This deactivation does not apply to the
kitchen area.
         2.   In the following zonings (H, NS, TU, MU-1, MU-2, and any new form
based zoning adopted by Council), as defined in the Zoning Code, such openings
may be used for any size tenant space.
         3.   In other zonings, such openings are only permitted in tenant
spaces less than 3,000 sq.ft. or in a portion of the tenant space that has been
subdivided with a partition and doors to be less than 3,000 sq.ft.
   *IECC Section C402.5.7; an exception is added to read as follows:
   C402.5.7 Vestibules.  Building entrance shall be protected with an enclosed
vestibule, with all doors opening into and out of the vestibule equipped with
self-closing devices. Vestibules shall be designed so that in passing through
the vestibule it is not necessary for the interior and exterior doors to open
at the same time. The installation of one or more revolving doors in the
building entrance shall not eliminate the requirement that a vestibule be
provided any doors adjacent to revolving doors.
      Exception: Vestibules are not required for the following:
         1.   Buildings in Climate Zones 1 and 2.
         2.   Doors not intended to be used by the public, such as doors to
mechanical or electrical equipment rooms, or intended solely for employee use.
         3.   Doors opening directly from a sleeping unit or dwelling unit.
         4.   Door that open directly form a space less than 3,000 square feet
(298 m2) in area.
         5.   Revolving doors.
         6.   Doors that have an air curtain with a velocity of not less than
6.56 feet per second (2 m/s) at the floor that have been tested in accordance
with ASNI/AMCA 220 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. Manual or automatic controls shall be provided that will operate
the air curtain with the opening and closing of the door. Air Curtains and
their controls shall comply with Section C408.2.3.
         7.   (life safety) Doors provided for and only used as Fire Access
openings in accordance with Fire Code Section 903.2.11.1 or 2306.6.1.
IECC SECTION C405
ELECTRICAL POWER AND LIGHTING SYSTEMS
   *IECC Section C405.2; changed to read as follows:
   C405.2 Lighting controls (Mandatory). Lighting systems shall be provided
with controls as specified in Sections C405.2.1, C405.2.2, C405.2.3, C405.2.4
and C405.2.5
   Exceptions:  Lighting controls are not required for the following:
      1.   Areas designated as security or emergency areas that must be
continuously lighted, inclusive of areas of incarceration.
      2.   Interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps, and exit passageways.
      3.   Emergency egress lighting that is normally off.
   *IECC Section C405.5.1; changed to read as follows:
   C405.5.1 Exterior building lighting power. The total exterior lighting power
allowance for all exterior building applications is the sum of the base site
allowance plus the individual allowances for areas that are to be illuminated
and are permitted in Table C405.5.1(2) for the applicable lighting zone.
Tradeoffs area allowed only among exterior lighting applications listed in
Table C405.5.1(2), Tradable Surfaces section. The lighting zone for the
building exterior is determined from Table C405.5.1(1), and as further detailed
in Tables C405.5.1(3) and C405.5.1(4).
   {'{'}Exceptions unchanged.{'}'}
   *IECC Table C405.5.1(1); changed and Table C405.5.1 (3) and (4) added to
read as follows:
Table 405.5.1(1)1
Exterior Lighting Zones
 
Lighting Zone Description
1             Developed areas of national parks, state parks, forest land, and
              rural areas
              Areas predominantly consisting of residential zoning,
2             neighborhood business districts, light industrial with limited
              nighttime use and residential mixed use areas.
3             All other areas
4             High-activity commercial districts in major metropolitan areas as
              designated by the local land use planning authority.
 
   1.   Enforcement of this table shall be accomplished through the use of
Table 505.6.2(3) and (4).
Table 405.5.1(3)1, 2, 3, 4
Exterior Lighting Zones
 
Lighting Zones Description                       Equivalent Fort Worth Zoning
                                                 Classification
               Developed areas of national
1              parks, state parks, forest land,  Developed areas of city parks.
               and rural areas.
               Areas predominantly consisting of
               residential zoning, neighborhood
2              business districts, light         All uses in MU-1, MU-2
               industrial with limited nighttime
               use and residential mixed use
               areas.
3              All other areas.                   
               High-activity commercial
4              districts in major metropolitan   All uses in H
               areas as designated by the local
               land use planning authority.
 
   1.   All PD's shall be as the main use or zoning identified in the PD
   2.   When more than one use on the property vertically, the use of the
lowest floor shall determine the zone.
   3.   When more than one use across the property horizontally, the highest
zone classification shall be permitted.
   4.   Except for H or MU zonings and any unlisted zoning districts, all other
categories shall be designated by use as specified in Table 505.6.2(4).
Table 405.5.1(4)1
USES - As   A, AR, B, R-
classified  1, R-2, CR,  ER , E FR, F, G I J, K AG CF TU NS/T4 R NS /T4 NS/ T5
by the      C, D, UR, MH
Zoning Code
Table 405.5.1(4)1
                                                                              A,
                                                                              AR,
                                                                              B,
                                                                              R-
                                                                              1,  ER FR,               NS/ NS
USES - As classified by the Zoning Code                                       R-  ,  F,  I J, AG CF TU T4  /  NS/
                                                                              2,  E  G     K           R   T4 T5
                                                                              CR,
                                                                              C,
                                                                              D,
                                                                              UR,
                                                                              MH
Household      All dwellings, inclusive of: One-family and two-family
Living         dwellings, townhouse, rowhouse, multifamily apartment,         2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               manufactured housing, mobile home, cluster housing, etc.
               Boarding or lodging house, community home, fraternity or       2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
Group Living   sorority house, Group Homes I, Halfway House, Shelter, etc.
               Group Home II                                                  2   2  3   3 3  1  3  3  3   3  3
               College or University, Day care center (child or
Education      adult)Kindergarten, School, elementary or secondary (public or 2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               private), etc.
               Animal Shelter, governmental office facility, probation or     2   2  2   2 2  2  2  2  2   2  2
               parole office
               Correctional Facility                                          3   3  3   4 4  3  3  3  3   3  3
Government     Government maintenance facility, governmental vehicle storage/ 2   2  2   3 3  2  2  3  3   3  3
               junkyard
               Museum, library or fine art center (govt. operated or          2   2  2   2 2  2  2  2  2   2  2
               controlled)
               Assisted living facility, blood bank, care facility, hospice,
Health Care    massage therapy and spa, health services facility (including   2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
Facilities     doctor's office or medical clinic)
               Ambulance dispatch station, hospital, nursing home with full   2   2  3   3 3  1  3  3  3   3  3
               medical services
               Center (community recreation or welfare), country club,        2   2  3   3 3  2  2  3  3   3  3
Recreation     neighborhood recreation center
               Golf course, park or playground                                1   1  1   1 1  1  1  1  1   1  1
               Golf driving range                                             2   2  3   3 3  2  2  3  3   3  3
Religious      Place of worship and auxiliary use                             2   2  2   2 2  2  2  2  2   2  2
               Electric power substation, power plant or central station
               light, wastewater (sewage) treatment facility, water supply,   3   3  4   4 4  3  4  4  4   4  4
Utilities      treatment or storage facility
               Gas lift compressor, gas line compressor stations,
               telecommunications towers and antennas, utility trans-mission  2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               or distribution line
               Amusement (indoor and outdoor), baseball/softball facility
               (commercial), bowling alley, bar, tavern, cocktail lounge,
               club (private or teen), circus, drive-in restaurant or
               business, Gambling facility (including bingo), indoor          2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
Entertainment  recreation, racing (horse, dog or automotive), shooting or
and Eating     weapons firing range, stable (commercial), riding, boarding or
               rodeo arena, sexually oriented business, swimming pool
               (commercial), theater (drive-in, movie theater or auditorium)
               Health or recreation club, lodge or civic club, massage        2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               parlor, museum/cultural facility, restaurant, café, cafeteria
Lodging        Bed and breakfast home and inn, hotel, motel or inn,           2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               Recreational vehicle park
Office         Bank, financial institution, offices                           2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               Business college or commercial school, Home improvement store, 2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               Large retail store, Mini-warehouses
Retail sales   All other "Retail sales and service" uses as listed in the     2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
and service    Zoning Code
               All other "Vehicle sales & service" as listed in the Zoning    2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               Code
               Assaying, Blacksmithing or wagon shop, carpet and rug
Light          cleaning, furniture sales, with outside storage/display (new/  2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
Industrial     used), outdoor sales and storage, pattern shop, rubber
Services       stamping, shearing/punching, rubber stamp manufacture
               All other "Light Industrial Services" as listed in the Zoning  2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               Code
Heavy          All "Heavy Industrial Manufacturing" as listed in the Zoning
Industrial     Code                                                           2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
Manufacturing
               Airport, aviation field, helistop or landing area, passenger
Transportation station, railroad freight or classification yard, railroad     2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               roundhouse or RR car repair shop, railroad tracks: team, spur,
               loading or storage, terminal: truck, freight, rail or water
               Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste
Waste Related  tire facility, recycling collection facility, salvage yard     2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               (other than automotive)
               Pet cemetery                                                   2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
Wholesale      Wholesale: bakery, produce market or wholesale house,          2   2  3   3 3  2  3  3  3   3  3
               wholesale office or sample room
Agriculture    Agriculture, stockyards or feeding pens (commercial), green    2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               house or plant nursery
Gas wells      Fresh Water Fracture Ponds & Production, gas drilling &        2   2  2   2 2  1  2  2  2   2  2
               production, oil drilling & production
 
   1.   This table was created using the following parameters:
      a.   All parks are protected with Zone 1.
      b.   All nocturnal areas, golf courses and AG zoning are reduced in
lighting zone from the other zonings for each use.
      c.   All H zoning is Zone 4.
      d.   All MU zoning is Zone 2.
      e.   All estimated 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. businesses that might occur next to
residential are assigned Zone 2.
      f.   A zone increase was permitted for uses that might require extra
security, e.g. correctional facilities, power plants, etc.
CHAPTER 5 [CE] - EXISTING BUILDINGS
IECC SECTION C501
GENERAL
   *IECC Section C501.6; changed to read as follows:
   C501.6 Historic buildings. Any building or structure that is listed in the
State or National Register of Historic Places; designated as a historic
property, or identified by the Historic Officer as eligible for designation,
under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a contributing
resource with a National Register listed or locally designated historic
district; or with an opinion or certification that the property is eligible to
be listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places either
individually or as a contributing building to a historic district by the State
Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places, are exempt from the following items, unless judged by the
Building Official as a life safety hazard.
   Exempted provisions are as follows:
      1.   Exterior envelope inclusive of vestibules in the exterior envelope.
      2.   Interior envelope, separating interior conditioned space from
interior non-conditioned space, when considered historically significant.
      3.   Placement, design or installation of light fixtures considered to
contribute to the historical significance or ambiance. However, non-historical
fixtures shall comply.
      4.   Any other item determined to be historically significant.
IECC SECTION C503
ALTERATIONS
   *IECC Section C503.1; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as
follows:
   Compliance methods permitted by this code or former codes may include a
variety of above code options. Such above code options may have been used to
allow another design parameter to be reduced. In order to insure that such
above code upgrades are not later remodeled away, unless it can be shown that
the total building after remodel complies with code, all replacement material,
equipment and/or systems shall meet the most restrictive requirement of:
   1.   having an equivalent reduction of energy usage as the replaced
material, equipment and/or system; or,
   2.   comply with the prescriptive provisions of this code.
   *IECC Section C503.3.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   (life safety)  When the insulation is on top of the roof deck and the
insulation is removed, repaired or replaced, new insulation is required to be
installed. If the new insulation is to be installed on top of the roof deck,
the new insulation shall attempt to meet the R-value as required by this code
unless doing so endangers the building by interfering with the roof drainage
system. If compliance with this code does so endanger the building, at a
minimum the insulation R-value shall be not less than what was removed.
RESIDENTIAL CODE
CHAPTER 1 [RE] - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
IECC SECTION R102
   *IECC Section R102; add R102.1.2 to read as follows:
   R102.1.2 Alternative compliance.  A building certified by a national, state,
or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy
Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements
of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in
compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star
Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in
compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each one- and
two-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in
Section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively.
IECC SECTION R103
   *IECC Sections R103.1, R103.2, R103.3, R103.3.1, R103.3.2, R103.3.3, R103.4
and R103.5; delete and replace as follows:
   R103.1 General.  Construction documents and other supporting data shall be
submitted as required by the code under which the permit is issued (Building,
Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, or Plumbing Codes) and as noted below.
   R103.2 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall
be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Construction documents shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed, and show in sufficient detail pertinent data and features of the
building, systems and equipment as herein governed. Details shall include, but
are not limited to:
      - Insulation materials and their R-values;
      - Fenestration U-factors and SHGCs;
      - Area-weighted U-factor and SHGC calculations;
      - Mechanical system design criteria;
      - Mechanical and service water heating system and equipment types, sizes
and efficiencies;
      - Equipment and systems controls;
      - Duct sealing, duct and pipe insulation and location;
      - Air sealing details.
   For Residential plans, either as an insert on the plans or as a separate
attachment, a representation of the Energy Certificate required by Section
R401.3 shall be depicted with the information inserted as follows:
 
(Builder Name if desired)
Residential Energy Efficiency Certificate
This energy certificate shall be posted as required by City ordinance. This
residential unit was built in accordance with the 2015 Fort Worth Energy Code
with the following energy compliance materials.
Insulation:
Wall: ________ ________ ________
Roof/Attic/Ceiling: ________ ________
Floor: _______ _______ _______
Ducts: ________ ________
Windows:
     U-factor _______ ________ _______
SHGC _______ ________ _______
Doors: U-factor _______ _______ _______
Duct Leakage Rate ____________________
Envelope Leakage Rate ________________
Heating: ____________________________
Cooling: ____________________________
Water Heater: ________________________
Other: ______________________________
 
 
   Where necessary, the certificate may be expanded to include other items. In
order to allow mass production of labels for Master Home plans, no address is
required to be specified. However, a builder may desire to add an address line
or a house model number. Posting of the certificate shall be as specified in
Section R401.3.
   R103.3 Examination of documents.  See the applicable code under which the
permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing
Codes).
      R103.3.1 Approval of construction documents. See the applicable code
under which the permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical,
Mechanical or Plumbing Codes).
      R103.3.2 Previous approvals. See the applicable code under which the
permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing
Codes).
      R103.3.3 Phased approval. See the applicable code under which the permit
is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing Codes).
   R103.4 Amended construction documents. Changes made during construction that
are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be
resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.
   R103.5 Retention of construction documents. See the applicable code under
which the permit is issued. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical or
Plumbing Codes).
   IECC SECTION R104
   *IECC Section R104.1, R104.2, R104.2.1, R104.2.2, R104.2.3, R104.2.4,
R104.2.5, R104.3, R104.4, R104.5, R104.6, R104.7 and R104.7.1; deleted and
replace as follows:
   R104.1 General. All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and all such
construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved by the Building Official.
   Inspections shall be performed in the manner as specified by the code under
which the permit was obtained. (Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical
or Plumbing Codes)
   R104.2 Required Inspections. Along with the mandatory inspections required
under the code which the permit was obtained, inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with this code and shall include, but not be limited to,
inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value,
duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. (See IECC
Energy Inspection Check List as provided by the department.)
   R104.3 Other Inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified
above, the Building Official may make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and
other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency.
   IECC SECTION R106
   *IECC Section C106.1; changed to read as follows:
   R106.1 General. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those listed in Chapter 6, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and
standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
extent of such reference.
   Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards,
each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the
amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical Code as
adopted.
   The provisions of the Building Code, Residential Code, Electrical Code,
Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used as part
of this code for any provision, requirement or method that does not exist in
this code.
IECC SECTION R107
   *IECC Section R107.1, R107.2, R107.3, R107.4 and R107.5; deleted and
replaced to read as follows:
   R107.1 Fees.  For Permits, Fees, Inspections, Certificates of Occupancy and
Third Party, see the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code, adopted
elsewhere.
   IECC SECTION R108
   *IECC Section R108.4; changed to read as follows:
   R108.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
considered in violation of this code and liable to a fine as specified in
Section R111.
IECC SECTION R109
   *IECC Section R109; deleted and replaced to read as follows:
SECTION R109
CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION BOARD OF APPEALS
   R109.1 Applications for appeals shall be made to the Construction and Fire
Prevention Board of Appeals as authorized and provided for in the Fort Worth
Building Administrative Code. All references to the "Board" shall be deemed to
refer to the Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals.
   The Board shall have no authority to waive provisions required by State Law.
The code official shall be the deciding individual as to whether a variance to
the Energy Code would place the city in violation of State Law.
IECC SECTION R110
   *IECC Section R110; added to read as follows:
SECTION R110
ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   R110.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Planning and
Development is hereby created as specified in the City Code and shall be
referred to as "the department."
   R110.2 Powers and Duties of Code Official.
   R110.2.1 General. Whenever the term "code official" is used in this code, it
shall be construed to mean the Building Code Administrator or his authorized
representative(s). The code official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this code. The code official shall have the authority
to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving
requirements specifically provided for in this code.
   R110.2.2 Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the
approval of the appointing authority, the code official may appoint such number
of technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized
from time to time. The code official may deputize such inspectors or employees
as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the code enforcement agency.
   For the purpose of this code, the regularly authorized deputy officials
shall be per work as follows:
   Provisions involving Mechanical - Mechanical Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Fuel Gas - Plumbing Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Plumbing - Plumbing Inspection Specialist
   Provisions involving Electrical - Electrical Inspection Specialist
   For all other parts, the Inspection Supervisors(s) shall be the deputy
official.
   R110.2.3 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce the provisions of this code, or where the code official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a
condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the code official or
designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such
structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant
and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the code
official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies
provided by law to secure entry.
   An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from an
authorized representative to inspect the premises.
   When the code official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant
or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, occupant, or person
having charge, care of control of any building or premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit
entry therein by the code official for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the code
official, deputy or any of the inspectors in the discharge of their duties
under this code.
   R110.2.4 Occupancy violations. Whenever any site, building, structure or
equipment therein regulated by this code or any other code is being used
contrary to the provisions of this code or any other code, the code official
may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated
by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued.
   Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the code
official after receipt of such notice to make the site, building, structure, or
portion thereof, or equipment comply with the requirements of this code.
   R110.2.5 Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals or
employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for
any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason
of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted
against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this
code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the
final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. Any judgment resulting
therefrom shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.
      R110.2.5.1 The liability exemption and defense protection provided in
this section are not extended to Third Party Companies, or their employees.
      R110.2.5.2 This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming any
such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any
permits or certificates issued under this code.
   R110.2.6 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved
in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the
owner or owner's representative, provided the code official shall first find
that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical
and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code
and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire
safety, or structural requirements. The details of any action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department.
   R110.2.7 Alternate materials, alternate design and methods of construction.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved
where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
   R110.2.8 Research reports.  Supporting data, where necessary to assist in
the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this
code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
   R110.2.9 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to this jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the code official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be
performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the
code official for the period required for retention of public records.
   R110.2.10 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices
shall not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested,
placed in good and proper working condition, and approved.
   R110.2.11 Cooperation of other officials and officers. The code official may
request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials
of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties
required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance.
   IECC SECTION R111
   *IECC Section R111; added to read as follows:
   R111 Violations.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or
permit the same to be done in violation of this code.
   Any violation cited under the Building Code, Residential Code, Electrical
Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code, as adopted elsewhere, that is also
associated with energy-efficient provisions of this code, may also be cited as
a violation of this code.
   Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
   Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this ordinance
occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable as prescribed by law.
CHAPTER 2 [RE] - DEFINITIONS
IECC SECTION R202
DEFINITIONS
   *IECC Section R202; the following definitions are added to read as follows:
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. A change in the purpose or level of activity within a
building that involves a change in application of the requirements of this
code. The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized
representative. For the purpose of this code, the code official shall be the
Building Code Administrator, and his regularly authorized deputy shall be as
listed in R110.2.2.
   DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible
ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat
gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT).
   ELECTRICAL CODE.  Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE).  Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FUEL GAS CODE.  Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   HISTORIC BUILDING.  Buildings that are listed in or eligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places, or designated or eligible for
designation as historic under an appropriate state or local law.
   MECHANICAL CODE.  Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   PLUMBING. For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, or the
Plumbing Section of the International Residential Code, as adopted, shall mean:
      The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing
appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to any structure, in
connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting
systems, and public or private water supply systems.
   For the purpose of complying with the Texas State Plumbing License Law,
shall mean:
      All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances, including disposal
systems, drain or waste pipes, or any combination of these that:
      supply, recirculate, drain, or eliminate water, gas, medical gasses and
vacuum, liquids, and sewage for all personal or domestic purposes in and about
buildings where persons live, work, or assemble; connect the building on its
outside with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or combinations
of these, on the premises, or the water main on public property; and carry
waste water or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service lateral on
public property or the disposal or septic terminal that holds private or
domestic sewage.
      The installation, repair, service, maintenance, alteration, or renovation
of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances on premises where
persons live, work, or assemble that supply gas, medical gasses and vacuum,
water, liquids, or any combination of these, or dispose of waste water or
sewage.
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. For the purpose of using this code, as adopted, shall mean:
   Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and
traps, supports and appurtenances; water-treating or water-using equipment;
soil, waste and vent pipes; sanitary drains, storm sewers and building sewers
to an approved point of disposal, in addition to their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
   PROJECTION FACTOR.  The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave
or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured
vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the
overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. For this code, includes detached one- and two- family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) as well as R-2, R-
3 and R-4 buildings three stories or less in height above grade. Residential
buildings on a Podium building, not exceeding three stories in height above the
podium level, may also be considered as Residential Buildings if constructed
the same as they would be if on grade with no elevator shafts, interior stair
shafts, etc. that would connect conditioned residential space above with the
podium level below.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 3 [RE] - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
IECC SECTION R303
MATERIALS, SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
   *IECC Section R303.2.1; deleted and replaced to read as follows:
   R303.2.1 Protection of exposed foundation insulation. Because of "very
heavy" termite classification, designs employing exterior insulation of
basements or slabs shall not be utilized.
CHAPTER 4 [RE] - RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY
IECC SECTION R402
BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE
   *IECC Section R402.2.2.1; added to read as follows:
   R402.2.2.1 Attic equipment.  Where equipment installed in the attic is
required a working area and access pathway in accordance with this or other
codes, as applicable, the insulation under such walkway or platform shall not
be reduced unless compensated for through an approved method such as the usage
of a performance (computer) energy review compliance report.
   *IECC Section R402.2.14; added to read as follows:
   R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains
in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides
consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel
sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building
official.
   *IECC Section R402.3.2; add paragraph and table following the exception to
read as follows:
   Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently
attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced
by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent
Projections.
TABLE R402.3.2
SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a
Projection SHGC Multiplier         SHGC Multiplier
Factor     (all Other Orientation) (North Oriented)
Projection   SHGC Multiplier         SHGC Multiplier
Factor       (all Other Orientation) (North Oriented)
0 - 0.10     1.00                    1.00
>0.10 - 0.20 0.91                    0.95
>0.20 - 0.30 0.82                    0.91
>0.30 - 0.40 0.74                    0.87
>0.40 - 0.50 0.67                    0.84
>0.50 - 0.60 0.61                    0.81
>0.60 - 0.70 0.56                    0.78
>0.70 - 0.80 0.51                    0.76
>0.80 - 0.90 0.47                    0.75
>0.90 - 1.00 0.44                    0.73
 
   a   North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north.
   *IECC Section R402.4.1.2; add a second paragraph and exception to read as
follows:
   Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified
to perform air infiltration testing by national or state organizations as
approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an
independent third-party entity, and may not be employed by; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
      Exception: One- and two-family dwellings less than 6000 square feet (557
m2) with not less than 2 nor more than 6 bedrooms are permitted an air leakage
rate not exceeding four air changes per hour when complying with table
402.4.1.2.
   *IECC Table R402.4.1.2; added to read as follows:
TABLE R402.4.1.2
ESL 4ACH50 PRESCRIPTIVE TRADEOFF CODE EQUIVALENCY COMPLIANCEa
Component                Option #1 Option #2
Walls and roof framing   Conventional wood framing
Ductwork location        Unconditioned attic
HVAC systemb             All electric w/heat pump for heating or electric
                         cooling and natural gas heating
Wall insulation R-value  R13 + R3c
Fenestration U-value     < 0.32
Fenestration SHGC        < 0.25
Ceiling R-value          > R49
Duct insulation R-value  R8     R6
Radiant barrier required No        Yes
 
   a   Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code
provisions are applicable.
   b   Electric resistance strip heating does not qualify for this tradeoff.
   c   The first value listed is the R-value of cavity insulation, the second
value is the R-value of the continuous insulation or insulated siding.
IECC SECTION R403
SYSTEMS
   *IECC Section R403.3.3; add a final paragraph to read as follows:
   Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified
to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state
organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals
must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
IECC SECTION R405
SIMULATED PERFORMANCE ALTERNATIVE (PERFORMANCE)
   *IECC Section R405.6.2; changed to read as follows:
   R405.6.2 Specific approval.  Performance analysis tools meeting the
applicable provision of Section R405 shall be permitted to be approved. Tools
are permitted to be approved based on meeting a specified threshold for a
jurisdiction. The code official shall be permitted to approve tools for a
specified application or limited scope. Acceptable performance software
simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM RateTM, Energy Gauge
and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and
having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be
deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the
building official.
   *IECC Table R406.4; changed to read as follows:
TABLE R406.41
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3            65
 
   1   This table is effective until August 31, 2019.
TABLE R406.42
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3            63
   2   The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022.
TABLE R406.43
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3            59
   3   This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022.
CHAPTER 5 [RE] - EXISTING BUILDINGS
IECC SECTION R501
GENERAL
   *IECC Section R501.6; changed to read as follows:
   R501.6 Historic buildings. No provision of this chapter relating to the
construction, repair, alteration, restoration and movement of structures, and
change of occupancy shall be mandatory for historic buildings provided a report
has been approved by the code official and signed by the owner, a registered
design professional, or a representative of the State Historic Preservation
Office, or the historic preservation authority having jurisdiction,
demonstrating that compliance with that provision would threaten, degrade, or
destroy the historic form, fabric, or function of the building.
IECC SECTION R503
ALTERATIONS
   *IECC Section R503.1; add a final paragraph to read as follows:
   Compliance methods permitted by this code or former codes may include a
variety of above code options. Such above code options may have been used to
allow another design parameter to be reduced. In order to insure that such
above code upgrades are not later remodeled away, unless it can be shown that
the total building after remodel complies with code, all replacement material,
equipment and/or systems shall meet the most restrictive requirement of:
   1.   having an equivalent reduction of energy usage as the replaced
material, equipment and/or system; or,
   2.   comply with the prescriptive provisions of this code.
   *IECC Section R503.1.1.2; added to read as follows:
   R503.1.1.2 Roof insulation above deck.  (life safety)  When the insulation
is on top of the roof deck and the insulation is removed, repaired or replaced,
new insulation is required to be installed. If the new insulation is to be
installed on top of the roof deck, the new insulation shall attempt to meet the
R-value as required by this code unless doing so endangers the building by
interfering with the roof drainage system. If compliance with this code does so
endanger the building, at a minimum the insulation R-value shall be not less
than what was removed.
(Ord. 14883, § 2, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 15952, § 2, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19605-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22520-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
§ 7-43 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting Energy Code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 14883, § 3, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 15952, § 3, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19605-03-2011, § 3, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22520-12-2016, § 3, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
§ 7-44 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c) for all violations involving fire safety, or public health and
sanitation and shall be fined not more than $500 for all other violations of
this article. Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of
this ordinance occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 14883, § 4, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 15952, § 4, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19605-03-2011, § 4, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22520-12-2016, § 4, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 7-45 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
Cross-reference:
   International Fire Code adopted, see §
13-1
   International Mechanical Code, see §§
7-166 et seq.
   International Plumbing Code adopted, see §
26-1
   Minimum building standards code, see §§
7-66 et seq.
   Moving of buildings and structures governed by building code and minimum
building standards code, see §§
7-241 et seq.
   Moving of buildings and structures not governed by building code and minimum
building standards code, see §§
7-261 et seq.
   National electrical code adopted, see §
11-1
§ 7-46 THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The Building Code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2021
edition of the International Building Code of the International Code Council
(ICC), and the same as amended is hereby adopted as the City's Building Code.
   (b)   The following provisions of the Appendix to the 2021 International
Building Code is hereby specifically adopted as amended as part of the Building
Code of the City of Fort Worth: Appendix Chapter L, Sound Insulation
Requirements for Noise Sensitive Uses near Airports (local amendment)
   (c)   The provisions of the Residential Code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be
used for buildings and structures applicable to that code except as provided
for in that code.
   (d)   One copy of the 2021 edition of the International Building Code,
marked Exhibit "A", is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in
the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection.
   (e)   Any Errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Building Code, as they are discovered, are considered as
part of this code.
(Ord. 9280, § 1, passed 3-3-1985; Ord. 9832, § 1, passed 2-2-1987; Ord. 10115,
§ 1, passed 5-17-1988; Ord. 10327, § 1, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 11388, § 2,
passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13625, § 1, passed 10-27-1998; Ord. 14646, § 1, passed
6-5-2001; Ord. 15948, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-
22-2011; Ord. 22517-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1- 2017; Ord. 25382-
03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-47 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2021 edition of the International Building Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   *IMC Chapter 1; "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby deleted and the
Administrative and Enforcement provision of this Code shall be governed by the
Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IBC SECTION 201
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 201.3; changed, to read as follows:
   201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in other codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them as in those codes. Where the terms occur in multiple codes and are defined
differently, each definition shall apply as appropriate in the context being
used.
IBC SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
   *IBC Section 202; definitions are changed and new definitions are added to
read as follows:
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a
24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in
a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The
occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical
assistance from staff.
   ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters. The installation of decking, other than the minimum decking required
for equipment access and maintenance, shall be considered another story.
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Any of the following shall be considered as a change of
occupancy where the current International Building Code requires a greater
degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of
egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
   1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.
   2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of activity
within, a building or structure.
   3.   A change of use.
   The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF USE. A change in the use of a building or a portion of a building,
within the same group classification, or from one zoning use category to
another, for which there is a change in application of the code requirements.
   CODE OFFICIAL. Whereever the term code official is used in this code it
shall mean building official.
   COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. That portion of exit access travel distance
measured from the most remote point of each room, area or space to that point
were the occupants have separate access to two exits or exit access doorways.
Common paths of egress shall be measured in the same manner as the travel
distance.
   CORRIDOR. An enclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path
of egress travel to an exit. The term also includes Open-Ended Corridor and
Breezeways.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 and the ICC Electrical Code shall be assumed to mean the Electrical
Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Code as adopted
by this jurisdiction.
   EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. A stairway that is open on at least one side, except
for required structural columns, beams, handrails and guards in accordance with
Section 1027.3. The adjoining open areas shall be in direct contact with either
yards, courts or public ways. The other sides of the exterior stairway need not
be open.
   Any stairway at the end of an open ended corridor that is pulled into the
building shall be considered an exterior stair if in compliance with both of
the following provisions:
   1.   The bottom riser is no more than one foot (1') inside the exterior
wall, and
   2.   No riser is located more than twenty feet (20') inside the exterior
wall.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
   FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code.
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   OCCUPIABLE SPACE. A room or enclosed space designed for human occupancy in
which individuals congregate for amusement, educational or similar purposes or
in which occupants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means of
egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the requirements of this
code. Any space that could be assumed to be occupiable shall not be exempt to
the requirements of this code by designing the space without means of egress,
light or ventilation.
   OCCUPIED ROOF. Uncovered roof or roof deck, designed to be occupied for uses
other than mechanical equipment or building services, including but not limited
to swimming pools, dining, amusement, gardens and parking.
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code,
as adopted, shall mean:
   Includes the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and
traps; water-treating or water-using equipment; soil, waste and vent pipes; and
sanitary and storm sewers and building drains; in addition to their respective
connections, devices and appurtenances within a structure or premises.
   PUBLIC WAY. A street, alley or other parcel of land open to the outside air
leading to a street, that has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently
appropriated to the public for public use and which has a clear width and
height of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).
   An active railway line, that is owned and operated by a railway corporation,
in which the land is unplatted, extending through the jurisdiction without
interruption by property lines, shall be considered as a Public Way. Railway
easements, utility easements or any other type of easement on a neighboring
property shall not be considered as Public Way.
   REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing
or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall not include motor fuel-
dispensing facilities, but shall include any auto repair bays. This occupancy
shall also include facilities involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections,
windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such
minor repair.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved
agency who shall prove to the satisfaction of the registered design
professional in responsible charge and the Building Official as having the
competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring
special inspection.
   STORY, FIRST. The lowest story qualifying as a Story Above Grade Plane shall
be considered as the first story.
   SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a
structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.
   SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
   TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes which regulate the
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or
more attached units individually separated by property lines in which each unit
extends from the foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least
two sides. When not divided with a property line, such units shall be
considered as Townhouse Apartments and shall comply with the provisions for
apartments, except where separate provisions are provided.
   TOWNHOUSE APARTMENT. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of
three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to
roof and with open space on at least two sides.
   TREATED WOOD. Wood and wood-based materials that use vacuum-pressure
impregnation processes to enhance fire retardant or preservative properties.
      Fire-retardant-treated wood. Pressure-treated lumber and plywood in
accordance with Sections 2303.2, 2303.2.1, 2303.2.2, 2303.2.3 and 2303.2.4 that
exhibit reduced surface-burning characteristics and resist propagation of fire.
      Preservative-treated wood. Pressure-treated wood products that exhibit
reduced susceptibility to damage by fungi, insects or marine borers.
   ZONING CODE. Zoning Code shall mean the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance as
adopted.
CHAPTER 3 - USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
IBC SECTION 302
CLASSIFICATION
   *IBC Section 302.1; add a sentence at the end of the first paragraph to read
as follows:
   For application of this code to uses under the Residential Code, they shall
be considered to be Group R-3 residential uses with Group U accessory uses,
unless a more appropriate occupancy group is assigned by the building official.
IBC SECTION 303
ASSEMBLY GROUP A
   *IBC Sections 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows:
   303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for
assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered
a separate occupancy. Except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapter
10 and 11.
   *IBC Section 303.4, Group A-3; add a new use to read as follows:
   Dining halls associated with Group E occupancies.
IBC SECTION 304
BUSINESS GROUP B
   *IBC Section 304.1; change and add uses to read as follows:
   Educational occupancies above the 12th grade with less than 50 occupants per
room
   Fire stations
   Police stations (includes an area to confine or restrain up to five
individuals)
   Training and skill development not within a school or academic program (this
shall include, but not be limited to, tutoring centers, martial arts studios,
gymnastics and similar uses regardless of the ages served, and where not
classified as a Group A occupancy with an occupant load less than 50.
IBC SECTION 307
HIGH-HAZARD GROUP H
   *Section 307.1.1; add the following sentence to Exception 4:
   4.   Cleaning establishments... {'{'}Text unchanged{'}'} ...with Section 707
or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 or
both. See also IFC Chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions.
   *IBC Section 307.4; add a new use as follows:
   Aircraft paint hangars, when required by Section 412.5.1.
IBC SECTION 308
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I
   *IBC Section 308.2, add new uses under I-1 as follows:
   Orphanage for children over 2-1/2 years of age
   Foster home with more than 16 care recipients, exclusive of the primary
family
   *IBC Section 308.3; add two new uses under 1-2 as follows:
   Orphanage for children under 2-1/2 years of age
   Foster home for more than five children 2- 1/2 years of age or less,
exclusive of the primary family
   All I-1 and Group R uses, not regulated by the IRC, in which the occupants
are not capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical
assistance from staff.
IBC SECTION 310
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R
   *IBC Section 310.2; add new use to read as follows:
   Bed and Breakfast Inn as defined in the Zoning Code
   *IBC Section 310.3; add new use to read as follows:
   Townhouse Apartments
   *IBC Section 310.3.1; added to read as follows:
   310.3.1. Townhouse apartments. Townhouse apartments shall comply with all
provisions applicable to Group R-2 apartments.
   When townhouse apartments are constructed in accordance with the provisions
of the Residential Code, as listed in Sections 310.3.1 and 310.3.2, such
apartments are permitted reductions in code compliance as specified in Sections
310.3.1.3, 310.3.1.4 and 310.3.1.5.
   310.3.1.1 Height. For the purpose of code reductions, townhouse apartments
shall not exceed 3 stories in height.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Such structures are permitted to have a private, individual fourth
level roof deck in compliance with the following:
         a.   Except for required guards, and the minimum required penthouse
necessary to enclose the access stair, the deck shall be unenclosed and
unroofed.
         b.   The minimum required penthouse necessary to enclose the access
stair shall not include any other occupiable space.
         c.   The open deck shall not exceed 400 square feet.
         d.   The guard shall be constructed of metal. The decking shall be
constructed of water resistant construction, and the structural design plans of
the building and deck shall be stamped by an engineer.
      2.   When each unit of the townhouse apartment building is provided with
an automatic sprinkler system, the fourth level roof deck may be as provided in
exception 1 and the following:
      a.   with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 with 903.3.1.2.1:
         -   the 400 square foot area may be covered but open on the sides;
and,
         -   part of the 400 square feet area may be an enclosed storage room
not to exceed 20 square feet.
      b.   with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 903.3.1.2
(without 903.3.1.2.1), 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Residential Code, the
provisions of exception 2a above apply except that the canopy must be entirely
noncombustible.
   310.3.1.2 Separation. For the purpose of code reductions, townhouse
apartments shall be separated as required by Section R302.2, R302.2.1,
R302.2.2, R302.2.3 and R302.2.4 of the Residential Code.
   310.3.1.3 Automatic sprinkler reduction. When in compliance with Section
310.3.1 and 310.3.2 and required to install an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.2.8, individual systems per townhouse apartment may
be installed in compliance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the
Residential Code.
   310.3.1.4 Manual fire alarm systems. When in compliance with Sections
310.3.1 and 310.3.2, manual fire alarm systems in accordance with Section
907.2.9.1 are not required.
   310.3.1.5 Means of egress. When in compliance with Sections 310.3.1 and
310.3.2, means of egress may be in compliance with Section R311 of the
Residential Code.
   *IBC Section 310.4; add a second paragraph and use to read as follows:
   This use shall include not more than two dwelling units that are an attached
part of another use, e.g. caretaker unit for self-storage facility, residence
over a commercial business, etc. Unless in separate detached one- or two-family
structures, structures with three or more dwelling units on a single property
shall constitute a Group R-2 apartment or Townhouse Apartment regardless of
whether divided by fire walls or party walls.
   Bed and Breakfast Home as defined in the Zoning Code
   *IBC Section 310.5; add new use to read as follows:
   Community Home as defined in the Zoning Code.
   Group Home I as defined in the Zoning Code
CHAPTER 4 - SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY
IBC SECTION 403
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
   *IBC Section 403.1, exception #3; changed to read as follows:
   3.   The open air portion of a buildings containing a Group A-5 occupancy in
accordance with Section 303.6.
   *IBC Section 403.3, exception; change to read as follows:
   Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required as identified
in Section 903.3.1.1.1 when approved by the fire code official. (Delete rest of
exception.)
   *IBC Section 403.3.2; change to read as follows:
   [F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In all buildings that are
more than 120 feet (36 576 mm) in building height, required fire pumps shall be
supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different
streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to
the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the
connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure
required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: (No change to exception.)
   *IBC Section 403.4.7; delete
IBC SECTION 406
MOTOR-VEHICLE-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
   *IBC Section 406.3.3.1. changed to read as follows:
   406.3.3.1 Carport separation. A separation is not required between a Group
R-3 and U carport, provided that the carport is entirely open on two or more
sides and there are not enclosed areas above.
   A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided
that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between
the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm).
   *IBC Section 406.5.2.2. added to read as follows:
   406.5.2.2 Openings above grade. Where openings above grade provide required
natural ventilation, the outside horizontal clear space shall be equal to one
half the height of the highest required opening. The width of the horizontal
clear space need not exceed 60' (18 288 mm) and shall be maintained from grade
to the top of the highest required opening.
   *IBC Section 406.8. changed to read as follows:
   406.8. Repair Garages. Repair garages shall be constructed in accordance
with the International Fire Code and Sections 406.2 through 406.8. This
occupancy shall not include motor fuel-dispensing facilities, as regulated in
Section 406.7, but shall include any auto repair bays.
   This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair,
modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes,
inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement
and other such minor repair.
IBC SECTION 408
GROUP I-3
   *IBC Section 408.3.9; added to read as follows:
   408.3.9 Corridors. Open-barred cells forming corridor walls shall not be
required to be fire-resistive. When cell walls are also the corridor walls,
cell doors are permitted to have openings necessary to observe, communicate,
feed or otherwise interact with the inmate.
IBC SECTION 411
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
   *IBC Section 411.6.1; changed to read as follows:
   411.6.1 Photo luminescent exit signs. Photo luminescent exit signs shall not
be installed.
IBC SECTION 412
   *IBC Section 412.3.6; delete exception and replace as follows:
   [F] 412.3.6 Fire Suppression. Aircraft hangars shall be provided with a fire
suppression system designed in accordance with NFPA 409, based on the
classification for the hangar given in Table 412.3.6.
   Exception: Group II hangars used for storage of aircraft and only routine
maintenance shall have a fire suppression system, but the system shall be
exempt from foam requirements. Hazardous operations equipment (torch cutting,
welding and spray equipment) is prohibited in Group II hangars without a foam
fire suppression system.
   *IBC Section 412.3.6.1; Delete and replace as follows:
   [F] 412.3.6.1 Hazardous operations. Any Group II, III or IV aircraft hangar
according to Table 412.3.6 that contains hazardous operations equipment or
performs hazardous operations including, but not limited to, the following
shall be provided with a foam fire suppression system in accordance with NFPA
409 as applicable:
   1.   Doping.
   2.   Hot work including, but not limited to, welding, torch cutting and
torch soldering.
   3.   Fuel transfer as prohibited in Section 1104.1.1 of the Fire Code.
   4.   Fuel tank repair or maintenance not including defueled tanks in
accordance with NFPA 409, inerted tanks or tanks that have never been fueled.
   5.   Spray finishing operations.
   Exception: Group I, II, and III hangars as defined in NFPA 409 for storing
or servicing aircraft that strictly contain only unfueled aircraft at all times
with appropriate de-fueling operations outside of the hangar shall be exempt
from foam suppression requirements only.
   *IBC Section 412.3.6.1.1; added to read as follows:
   [F] 412.3.3.1.1 Prohibited equipment. Torch cutting, welding or spray
equipment is prohibited in new and existing Group III hangars in any of the
following situations:
   1.   Group III hangars having fueled aircraft, but not provided with a foam
fire suppression system, or
   2.   Unsprinklered Group III hangars.
IBC SECTION 423
STORM SHELTERS
   *IBC Section 423.3; changed to read as follows:
   423.4 Critical emergency operations. In areas where the shelter design wind
speed for tornados, in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500 is 250 MPH,
new buildings for 911 call stations, emergency operation centers and fire,
rescue, ambulance^ and police stations shall be a storm shelter construction in
accordance with ICC 500.
   Exception: (unchanged)
   *IBC Section 423.4; changed to read as follows:
   423.5 Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for
tornados, in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500 is 250 MPH, all new
buildings and gymnasium or cafeteria additions to existing buildings for Group
E occupancies with an aggregate occupant load ... (remainder unchanged).
IBC SECTION 424
PLAY STRUCTURES
   *IBC Section 424.5 and 424.5.1; delete.
CHAPTER 5 - GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS
IBC SECTION 503
GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS
   *IBC Section 503.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   An occupancy shall not be located above the story or height set forth in
Tables 504.3 and 504.4 except as modified hereafter. For non-separated mixed
uses, in accordance with Section 508.3, no occupancy shall be located above the
story or height of the most restrictive nonseparated occupancy. Where a
building contains more than one distinct type of construction, the building
shall comply with the most restrictive area, height, and stories, for the
lesser type of construction or be separated by fire walls, except as allowed in
Section 510.
   *IBC Section 503.1.4; delete exceptions:
   *IBC Section 503.1.5; added to read as follows:
   503.1.5 Fire protection systems. Any existing fire extinguishing system or
fire alarm system, whether installed voluntarily or as a requirement of any
previous code, shall be maintained and kept operational as required in the Fire
Code. Such systems shall not be removed unless permitted to be removed or
reduced by this code and the Fire Code.
IBC SECTION 506
BUILDING AREA
   *IBC Section 506.3.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   In order to be considered having access from the street or approved fire
lane, if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10 foot
wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire
lane must be provided.
IBC SECTION 509
INCIDENTAL USES
   *IBC Section 509.4.1; add to read as follows:
   ...Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with 711,
or both so as to completely separate adjacent occupancies.
   *IBC Section 509.4.2; add two sentences to read as follows:
   In order to qualify with this reduction, at least one sprinkler head must be
installed in the incidental use area. Areas that are exempt to sprinkler head
installation under a sprinkler standard will not qualify for the reduction
permitted herein unless at least one sprinkler head is installed in the
incidental use area.
CHAPTER 6 - TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION
IBC SECTION 602
CONSTRUCTION CLASSIFICATION
   *IBC Section 602.1.1; add sentence to read as follows:
   602.1.1 Minimum requirements. A building or portion thereof shall not be
required to conform to the details of a type of construction higher than that
type which meets the minimum requirements based on occupancy even though
certain features of such a building actually conform to a higher type of
construction. Where a building contains more than one distinct type of
construction, the building shall comply with the most restrictive area, height,
and stories, for the lesser type of construction or be separated by fire walls.
IBC SECTION 603
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL IN TYPE I AND II CONSTRUCTION
   *Section 603.1; change item 14 to read as follows:
   14.   Fire-retardant-treated wood used as blocking such as for handrails,
millwork, cabinets and window and door frames.
CHAPTER 7 - FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES
IBC SECTION 705
EXTERIOR WALLS
   *IBC Table 705.5; amend footnote "d" to read as follows:
   d.   The fire-resistance rating of an exterior wall is determined based upon
the fire separation distance of the exterior wall and the story in which the
wall is located. When an upper floor projects closer to the property line than
the floors below, and if Table 705.8 requires any percentage of protected
openings for the exterior wall of that upper floor, then the underside of the
projecting floor shall be a minimum of one-hour fire resistance ratings.
IBC SECTION 706
FIRE WALLS
   *IBC Section 706.1.1; delete exception 2 to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
      1.   Openings in a party wall separating an anchor building and a mall
shall be in accordance with Section 402.4.2.2.1.
   *IBC Section 706.2; add exceptions to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
      1.   In Seismic Design Categories D through F, where double fire walls
are used in accordance with NFPA 221, floor and roof sheathing not exceeding 3/
4 inch (19.05 mm) thickness shall be permitted to be continuous through the
wall assemblies of light frame construction.
      2.   When necessary to install a two- or three-hour fire wall of not more
than two stories in height in an existing building, a fire-resistant wall of
the same rating, as specified in Table 706.4, that encapsulates a structural
column line shall be accepted.
      3.   When necessary to install a two- or three-hour fire wall of not more
than two stories in height between an existing building and a new addition, a
double fire wall, one on the existing building and one on the new building,
both of the required fire rating, as specified in Table 706.4, shall be
acceptable. Fire doors may be installed in one of the walls with a water
curtain installed at the opening of the other wall.
IBC SECTION 712
VERTICAL OPENINGS
   *IBC Section 712.1.9; change item 4 to read as follows:
   712.1.9 Two-Story openings. In other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a vertical
opening that is not used as one of the applications specified in this section
shall be permitted if the opening complies with all of the items below:
   1.   Does not connect more than two adjacent stories.
   2.   Does not penetrate a horizontal assembly that separates fire area or
smoke barriers that separate smoke compartments.
   3.   Is not concealed within the construction of a wall or a floor/ceiling
assembly.
   4.   Is not open to a corridor in Groups H and I occupancies.
   5.   Is separated from floor openings and air transfer openings serving
other floors by construction conforming to required shaft enclosures.
IBC SECTION 717
DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS
   *IBC Section 717.5.3.1; added to read as follows:
   717.5.3.2 Installation requirements. Exhaust systems for Group B and R
kitchen, clothes dryer, bathroom and toilet room exhausts shall comply with the
following:
   1.   Kitchen systems, clothes dryer systems, and bathroom and toilet room
systems may share the same shaft but not the same duct. When multiple ducts are
in the same shaft, each system shall have its own fan providing continuous
upward flow.
   2.   Dryer ducts shall have a cleanout located near the shaft penetration to
permit cleaning of the 22" subduct. The subduct shall be considered in the
calculation of allowable duct length reduction.
   3.   Kitchen ducts shall be provided with some method for preventing grease
buildup and cleaning of the duct.
   4.   A secondary power source is required for the fan under both Section
909.11 and Mechanical Code Section 504.8.
   5.   See also Mechanical Code Section 504.8.
CHAPTER 9 - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
SECTION 901
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 901.1 - Add sentence to read as follows:
   Fire protection equipment required by this code shall be listed or approved
for the intended use by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, unless
otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 901.2.1 - Added to read as follows:
   [F] 901.2.1 Nonrequired fire alarm devices. Nonrequired fire alarm devices
or devices for a nonrequired fire alarm system shall be clearly identified on
the submitted fire alarm construction documents associated with the fire alarm
permit, as required by NFPA 72.
   *IBC Section 901.8 -Change to read as follows:
   [F] 901.8 Occupancy. It shall be unlawful to occupy any portion of a
building or structure until the required fire protection and life safety
systems have been tested and approved, unless otherwise approved by the
building and fire code officials contingent on fire watch or other mitigating
factors/requirements.
IBC SECTION 903
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   *IBC Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing
systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to required
automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard or
as approved by the fire code official.
   1.   IBC Section 903.1.2; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.1.2 Residential systems. Reductions to provisions of this code,
commonly referred to as "building code tradeoffs," shall not apply to systems
installed in accordance with NFPA 13R or 13D unless authorized as specified in
Sections 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3. When "tradeoffs" are used in the building
design that are not authorized for NFPA 13R or 13D systems, the sprinkler
installation shall be in accordance with NFPA 13.
   For clarification of the appropriate system, the sprinkler designer/
installer should consult the building designer and the appropriate plan
reviewer or third party plan reviewer.
   Residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R shall
include attic sprinkler protection in buildings of three or more stories.
   *IBC Section 903.2; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new
buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. In order to prohibit elevator shunt trip,
automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator
machine spaces, and elevator hoistways (except for hydraulic elevator pits
where such does not initiate the shunt trip requirement in the State Elevator
Code), or as approved by the fire code official. Storage shall not be allowed
within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors
to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE
ALLOWED." Such signage shall comply with Section 509 of the Fire Code.
   Exception: {'{'}deleted{'}'}
   *IBC Section 903.2.1.2; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   *IBC Section 903.2.1.3; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   *IBC Section 903.2.1.6- Delete the exception.
   *IBC Section 903.2.4.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   For dust collection requirements, see Mechanical Code Section 510.2.1.1. and
reference IFC Section 2803.2.2 .
   *IBC Section 903.2.7: add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   *IBC Section 903.2.8 and 903.2.8.1; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R
fire area, other than one- and two-family dwellings, and townhomes in
compliance with the Residential Code.
   [F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-l and R-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout buildings with a Group R-l, or R-2 fire area, other than
one- and two-family dwellings, and townhomes in compliance with the Residential
Code.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Where no portion of the R-l or R-2 fire area is located higher than
the second story, nor in a basement, and such R-l or R-2 use complies with any
of the following conditions:
         a.   For other than Group R-2 apartments, the occupant load is less
than ten (10).
         b.   The building when used as Group R-2 apartments contains less than
five (5) dwelling units.
      2.   A residential sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in buildings, or portions thereof, of Group R-
l and R-2 in accordance with the limitations of Section 903.1.2.
   *IBC Section 903.2.4.2 -Change to read as follows:
   903.2.4.2 Group F-1 distilled spirits. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout a Group F-1 fire area used for the manufacture of
distilled spirits involving more than 120 gallons of distilled spirits (>16%
alcohol) in the fire area at any one time.
   *IBC Section 903.2.8.4; Deleted.
   *IBC Section 903.2.9.3; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.9.3 Group S-l distilled spirits or wine. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout a Group S-1 fire area used for the bulk
storage of distilled spirits or wine involving more than 120 gallons of
distilled spirits or wine (>16% alcohol) in the fire area at any one time.
   *Section 903.2.9.4; delete the Exception.
   *IBC Section 903.2.9.5; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.9.5 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities The minimum
sprinkler system design shall be based on an Ordinary Group II classification,
in accordance with NFPA 13 requirements. Physical construction in compliance
with open-grid ceilings as per NFPA 13, such as an open metal grid ceiling or
chicken wire that does not obstruct the overhead sprinkler protection, shall be
installed to prevent storage from exceeding the lower of either 12 feet above
finished floor or 18 inches beneath standard sprinkler head deflectors. At
least one sprinkler head shall be provided in each storage unit/room
(additional sprinklers may be necessary for compliance with NFPA 13 spacing
requirements), regardless of wall height or construction type separating such
units.
   Exception: One story self-service storage facilities that have no interior
corridors and are provided with a one-hour fire barrier wall installed between
every storage compartment up to a maximum aggregate building area of 12,000 sq.
ft. The above required overhead physical obstructions are still required at 2
ft. below the ceiling or roof deck for a nonsprinklered building.
   *IBC Section 903.2.10 - Change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.10 Group S-2 parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings classified as parking garages where any of the
following conditions exist:
   1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage, in accordance with
Section 406.6 of the International Building Code, exceeds 12,000 square feet
(1115 m2).
   2.   Where the enclosed parking garage, in accordance with Section 406.6 of
the International Building Code, is located beneath other groups.
      Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-
3 occupancies,
   3.   Where the open parking garage is open, in accordance with Section 406.5
of the International Building Code, and:
      a.   Fire area exceeds 48.000 square feet (4460 m2) and building exceeds
three stories or parking levels, or
      b.   Where fire apparatus access is not provided along at least two sides
of the structure in question (1/2 of the perimeter of the building) having
required openings, or
      c.   Where other occupancies are provided above the open parking garage.
   *IBC Section 903.2.10.2 - Change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.10.2 Mechanical-access parking garages. An approved automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for the storage of
motor vehicles in a mechanical-access parking garage. The portion of the
building that contains the mechanical-access parking garage shall be protected
with a specially engineered automatic sprinkler system. At least one exit stair
shall be provided to the roof of the structure to allow installation of
standpipe for firefighting, as per Section 905.
   *IBC Section 903.2.11.3; exception #2 deleted and exception #1 changed to
read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories or
occupiable roofs, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1511 of the
International Building Code, located 55 feet (16 764 mm) or more above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor.
   Exception: {'{'}Delete Exception{'}'}
   *IBC Section 903.2.11.7; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.2.11.7 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and
spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing
system.
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.1.1; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official,
automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas
where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire
detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible
or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any
room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or
contains electrical equipment.
   1.   A room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes
a serious life or fire hazard, including but not limited to molten metal
exposures.
   2.   {'{'}Delete.{'}'}
   3.   Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public
utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/
ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than 2 hours.
   4.   Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces. (Shunt
trip prohibited.)
   5.   Elevator hoistways (other than hydraulic pits) and elevator machine
rooms enclosed by fire barriers as required by the International Building Code.
Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room
indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." (Shunt trip prohibited.)
   6.   Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces
associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with
Section 3008 of the International Building Code (shut trip prohibited).
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.2; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in
Group R occupancies up to and including four stories in height above grade
plane and where the floor level of the highest story is 36 feet (10668 mm) or
less above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, shall be
permitted to be installed throughout-in accordance with NFPA 13R. However, when
"building code tradeoffs" that are not authorized for NFPA 13R systems are used
in the building design, the sprinkler installation shall be in accordance with
NFPA 13. (See Section 903.1.2)
   Residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R shall
include attic sprinkler protection in buildings of three or more stories. (See
903.3.1.2.3).
   The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
International Building Code shall be measured from grade plane.
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.2.2 - Change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.2.2 Corridors and balconies. Sprinkler protection shall be
provided in all corridors/breezeways and for all balconies, including any
associated storage rooms, closets, etc. accessed from such corridor/breezeway.
{'{'}Delete the rest of this section.{'}'}
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.2.3 - Change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages and Attics. Sprinkler protection is
required in attached garages, and in the following attic spaces:
   1.   Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall
be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
   2.   Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in a nonsprinklered attic, not
fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be
installed above the equipment.
   3.   Attic spaces of buildings that are three or more stories in height
above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      Exception: Where the attic would be exempt from sprinkler protection by
NFPA 13.
   4.   Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to
have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following:
      4.1.   Provide automatic sprinkler system protection.
      4.2.   Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is
arranged to activate the building fire alarm system.
      4.3.   Construct the attic using noncombustible materials.
      4.4.   Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood complying
with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code.
      4.5.   Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation where there is a
flat roof of no more than 48 inches height of interstitial space between
ceiling and roof.
      {'{'}Delete rest of this section.{'}'}
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.4, 903.3.1.4.1; 903.3.1.4.2 and 903.3.1.4.3; added to
read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic
fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
   [F] 903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze
automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official .
      Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect
non-ventilated attic spaces where the attic space is a part of the building's
thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck,
rather than at the ceiling level.
   [F] 903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be
allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large
diameter water-filled pipe.
   [F] 903.3.1.4.3 Dry pipe sprinkler systems. All dry pipe sprinkler systems
shall be required to meet the 60 second water delivery time, per Section
8.2.3.2 of NFPA 13 (2019 edition), to the system test connection regardless of
the system size, unless more stringent criteria is applicable in NFPA 13, and
all dry pipe sprinkler systems shall be trip tested to flow/discharge water to
verify compliance with this requirement, unless otherwise approved by the fire
code official.
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.5; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.5 Multiple or detached buildings. Multiple or detached buildings
shall not be allowed to be supplied by a single fire sprinkler riser, unless
specifically approved by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 903.3.1.6 added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.1.6 Exterior projections/canopies. For NFPA 13 or 13R sprinkler
systems, all exterior projections/canopies exceeding 4 ft. in width/depth from
the building, whether attached or not, shall be sprinklered.
   Exception:
      0.   Canopies meeting NFPA 13 requirements for noncombustible or limited
combustible construction or fire retardant treated wood for pedestrian use
only.
      1.   Canopies that are detached/separated from the sprinklered building
as required by the Building Code to be considered a separate building and
meeting the allowable area requirements of the Building Code as a non-
sprinklered building.
   *IBC Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Every fire protection system shall be designed with a 5 psi safety factor,
in addition to water fluctuation adjustments required by Section 507.4 of the
Fire Code.
   *IBC Section 903.3.7.1; added to read as follows:
   [F] 903.3.7.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) Caps. New FDC
installations shall be equipped with locking FDC caps as approved by the fire
code official. Existing FDC installations will require approved locking FDC
caps to be installed when directed by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 903.4: add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for
each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection
of water flow for more than forty- five (45) seconds. All control valves in the
sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be electrically supervised.
   *IBC Section 903.4: add exception #9 to read as follows:
   9.   Control valves associated with a backflow prevention device that is
installed outside of a building. Such valves must be chained and locked in the
open position even if located in a locked vault or enclosure.
   *IBC Section 903.4.2; change to read as follows:
   [F] 903.4.2 Alarms. An approved sprinkler waterflow alarm device, located on
the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to
each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler waterflow alarm devices shall
be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is
installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the
building fire alarm system.
   The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a
weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela
strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department
connections. Adjacent to the alarm shall be a sign which states:
   "WHEN ALARM SOUNDS, CALL FORT WORTH FIRE DEPARTMENT, 9-1-1, {'{'}insert
address{'}'}"
   and which contains the address of the property as indicated on the
Certificate of Occupancy. The sign shall consist of red letters of 1 inch
minimum height on a white reflective background.
   *IBC Section 903.4.3; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control
valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor
in buildings requiring a standpipe system, as per Section 905. Floor control
assemblies shall be located in protected stairwells, or as otherwise approved
by the fire code official.
IBC SECTION 905
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
   *IBC 905.1.1; added to read as follows:
   [F] 905.1.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) Caps. New standpipe
systems shall be equipped with approved locking caps on all FDC's. Existing
standpipe systems shall have approved locking fire department connection caps
installed when required by the code official.
   *IBC Section 905.3.3; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 905.3.3 Covered and open mall buildings. A covered mall or open mall
building shall be equipped throughout with a Class I automatic wet standpipe
system where the mall exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area per
story. Standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's
interior area is more than two hundred (200) feet of travel, vertically and
horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. Mall
buildings not required to be equipped with a standpipe system by this section
shall be equipped with Class I hose connections connected to the automatic
sprinkler system sized to deliver water...{'{'}remainder of section unchanged
{'}'}.
   *IBC Section 905.4; Change #1 and #3 to read as follows:
   1.   In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided
for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located
at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the
fire code official.
   2.   {'{'}No change.{'}'}
   3.   In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to
other areas of a building.
      Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable
from an exit stairway hose connection by a ...{'{'}remainder of section
unchanged{'}'}.
   *IBC 905.8.1; added to read as follows:
   [F] 905.8.1 Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum
of ten (10) psig and a maximum of forty (40) psig air pressure with a high/low
alarm.
   *IBC Section 905.12; Added to read as follows:
   905.12 Manual standpipe design. All manual standpipes shall be designed
based on a water supply of 160 psi static and 145 psi residual flowing 1,000
gpm at the Fire Department Connection, or as otherwise approved by the fire
code official.
IBC SECTION 906
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
   *IBC Section 906.1; changed to read as follows and delete exception #3:
   [F] 906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed and
tagged by a state licensed fire extinguisher company, unless otherwise approved
by the fire code official, in the following locations. {'{'}remainder of
section unchanged{'}'}
IBC SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
   *IBC Section 907.1.4; Added to read as follows:
   907.1.4 Documentation cabinet. A documentation cabinet in compliance with
all requirements of NFPA 72 shall be provided for any new or upgraded fire
alarm system, or any fire alarm system where the main fire alarm control panel
requires replacement, for proper storage of system documentation.
   *IBC Section 907.2; change last sentence to read as follows:
   Where other sections of this code allow elimination of manual fire alarm
boxes/manual pull stations due to sprinklers, at least one manual pull station
shall be installed at the exit from the sprinkler riser room where applicable,
as well as at the fire alarm control panel (FACP), unless the FACP is also
located in the sprinkler riser room. If not sprinklered, the required single
manual pull station shall be located at the FACP or in a commonly occupied
location, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 907.2.1 - Changed to read as follows:
   [F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant
notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in
Group A occupancies having an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more, or
where the Group A Occupancy is more than one hundred (100) persons above or
below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated
from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 shall be considered as a
single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E
occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm
system as required for the Group E occupancy. Unless otherwise approved by the
fire code official, activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
   1.   Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1
footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and
   2.   Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
      2.   Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section
303, when used for open air seating and having a public address system;
however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not
limited to sky boxes, restaurants and other enclosed areas.
   *IBC Section 907.2.2.2; added to read as follows:
   [F] 907.2.2.2 Corridor smoke detection alternative. When a fire alarm system
is used as a reduction to fire-resistance rated corridors, as provided for in
Section 1020, the occupant load exceptions of 907.2.2 shall not be used to
exempt the required installation.
   *IBC Section 907.2.3; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant
notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm compunctions system
meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with
Section 906 shall be installed in Group E occupancies. When automatic sprinkler
systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be
connected to the building fire alarm system. The Fire Alarm Control Unit or
Remote Annunciator with silence and reset capability shall be located in the
main reception office.
   Exceptions:
      1.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
      2.   Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements
of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall not
be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided
that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates an approved occupant
notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5. Emergency voice/alarm
communication systems are not required in additions to Group E occupancies with
existing horn-type audible devices where the addition itself does not exceed an
occupant load of 100 and where the addition is separated from the existing
building by appropriately rated fire separation, per the Building Code.
      3.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
      4.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   *IBC Section 907.2.3.1 and 907.2.3.2; added to read as follows:
   [F] 907.2.3.1 Group E daycares with an occupant load of more than twelve
(12) children. A manual fire alarm system and an automatic fire detection
system shall be installed in Group E daycares with an occupant load of more
than twelve (12) children. Smoke detectors shall be installed in corridors,
sleeping rooms and common areas. Heat detectors shall be installed in kitchens.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Smoke detectors are not required in kitchens and restrooms.
      2.   Smoke detectors and heat detectors shall not be required in Group E
daycares where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, except that interconnected single or multiple station smoke
alarms are required in sleeping rooms, as per NFPA 72.
   [F] 907.2.3.2 Group E daycares with an occupant load of not more than twelve
(12) children. Interconnected Single or multiple station smoke alarms shall be
installed in corridors, sleeping rooms and common areas in Group E daycares
with an occupant load of not more than twelve (12) children.
      Exception: Smoke detectors are not required in kitchens and rest rooms.
   *IBC Section 907.2.9.1; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that
activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5
shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies where any of the following
conditions apply:
   1.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   2.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   3.   The building contains five (5) or more dwelling units or sleeping
units.
      Exceptions: {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   *IBC Section 907.2.10; Changed to read as follows:
   907.2.10 Group S public- and self-storage occupancies. A manual fire alarm
system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group S public- and self-storage
occupancies for interior corridors and interior common areas. Notification
appliances are not required within individual storage units.
   Exception: {'{'}No change.{'}'}
   *IBC Section 907.2.10.1; added to read as follows:
   907.2.10.1 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. A manual fire alarm system
that activates audio/visual occupant notification throughout the building, as
per Section 907.5.2, shall be required for Group S-2 enclosed parking garages.
   Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1, and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
   *IBC Section 907.2.13, exception 3; changed to read as follows:
   3.   Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section
303.1 when used for open air seating: however, this exception does not apply to
accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and other
enclosed areas.
   *IBC Section 907.3.2; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 907.3.2 Special locking systems. Where special locking systems are
installed on means of egress doors in accordance with Section 1010.2.13 or
1010.2.14, an automatic smoke detection system or monitored automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed as required by that section.
   *IBC Section 907.4.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   907.4.1.1 Number of fire alarm panels per building. Each building shall be
provided with no more than one main fire alarm control panel that monitors any
other required panels, such as an extinguishing releasing panel, elevator
recall system, sprinkler monitoring system, etc., rather than allowing multiple
dedicated panels, per NFPA 72, unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official.
   *IBC Section 907.4.2.7; added to read as follows:
   [F] 907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved
double action type.
   *IBC Section 907.5.2.3; change exception #1 to read as follows:
   1.   Visible alarm notification appliances are not required in alterations,
upgrades or replacement of a fire alarm system, unless the originally installed
system required visual notification.
   2.   {'{'}no change{'}'}
   3.   {'{'}no change{'}'}
   *IBC Section 907.5.2; add exception to read as follows:
   [F] 907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances. Alarm notification appliances
shall be provided and shall be listed for their purpose.
   Exception: In Group E and I occupancies, private mode signaling shall be
allowed for rooms that are specifically designated for the supervision of
light- or soundsensitive students/occupants, such as those on the autism
spectrum, for the protection of those students/occupants from such signals.
Occupant notification systems are not required to be activated in those rooms
where private mode signaling installed in accordance with NFPA 72 is approved
by the fire code official and staff evacuation responsibilities are included in
the fire safety and evacuation plan required by Section 404 of the
International Fire Code.
   *IBC Section 907.5.2.3.1; change exceptions to read as follows:
   Exception:
      1.   Group F or S occupancies shall only require audible alarm coverage,
unless hearing impaired employee(s) are present.
      2.   The notification appliance circuits...{'{'}remainder of exception
unchanged.{'}'}
   *IBC Sections 907.6.1.1 and 917.6.1.2; added to read as follows:
   [F] 907.6.1.1 Wiring circuits. Signaling Line Circuit (SLC) style shall be
Class A, per NFPA 72.
   Exceptions. One initiating device on the circuit.
   |F] 907.6.1.2 Pathway survivability. Circuits installed vertically in
conduit in a sprinklered one hour rated enclosure and circuits installed
horizontally in a sprinklered building are acceptable alternates as meeting
Pathway Survivability Level 2, per NFPA 72.
   *IBC Section 907.9; added to read as follows:
   [F] 907.9 Rented or leased residential occupancies. This section shall apply
to all one- and two-family, multi-family, and manufactured home dwellings where
one or more rooms are rented for use as a permanent residence.
   907.10.1 Smoke detectors. All dwelling units which are rented or leased
shall be provided with smoke detectors in accordance with this code. The smoke
detector purchase, installation and initial testing shall be the responsibility
of the landlord prior to occupancy by any tenant.
   907.10.1.1 Notice of malfunction. The landlord shall have a duty to replace
a smoke detector if the tenant has given notice to the landlord of a
malfunction. The landlord shall comply with the tenant's request within 24
hours. The landlord has the option of asking the tenant, in writing, to replace
the malfunctioning detector at no cost to the tenant.
   907.10.1.2 Cause of malfunction. A landlord shall not have a duty to replace
a smoke detector if the damage is caused by the tenant.
   907.10.1.3 Battery replacement. It is the tenant's duty to provide a
replacement battery for a smoke detector which was in good working order at the
time of commencement of possession of the dwelling unit by the tenant.
IBC SECTION 909
SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEMS
   *IBC Section 909.18.8; change to read as follows:
   [F] 909.18.8 Special inspections for smoke control. All smoke control
systems in Section 909, which also include stairway and ramp pressurization and
elevator hoistway pressurization systems (909.20 and 909.21), shall be tested
by a special inspector in accordance with Section 1705.19 in accordance with
this section and as directed by the fire code official.
IBC SECTION 910
SMOKE AND HEAT REMOVAL
   *IBC 910.2.3; added to read as follows:
   [F] 910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H
occupancy as follows:
   1.   In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more
than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
   2.   In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3 and 4
liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic
peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-
reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification.
   Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only
noncombustible materials.
   *IBC Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows:
   910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet
(1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be
automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet
per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust.
IBC SECTION 912
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
   *IBC Section 912.2; add a paragraph to read as follows:
   Fire Department Connection (FDC) shall be located within fifty (50) ft. of a
dedicated street or fire apparatus access road and shall be within one hundred
fifty (150) ft. (45,720 mm) hose lay distance of the nearest fire hydrant. For
standpipe systems, fire department connections shall be within one hundred
fifty (150) ft. (45,720 mm) of the fire hydrant. Each building shall be
equipped with its own FDC.
IBC SECTION 913
FIRE PUMPS
   *IBC Section 913.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
   The fire pump room shall be located on the ground level at an exterior wall
and provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than
3 feet in width and 6 feet 8 inches in height, regardless of any interior doors
that are provided. An approved key box with access keys shall be provided at
this door, as required by Section 506.1.
   Exception: Existing installations undergoing remodel or change of occupancy
when approved by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 914.3.1; delete the exception.
IBC SECTION 915
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION
   *IBC Section 915.2.3; Change to read as follows:
   915.2.3 Group E occupancies. Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in
classrooms in Group E occupancies. Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location that is staffed by school
personnel during school hours.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall not be required to be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location that is staffed by school
personnel in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 30 or less.
      2.   Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall not be required to be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location for portable classroom
structures.
   *IBC Section 915.6; Change to read as follows:
   915.6 Maintenance. Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection
systems shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 720. Carbon monoxide alarms
and carbon monoxide detectors that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-
life signals shall be replaced by the owner of the occupancy.
CHAPTER 10 - MEANS OF EGRESS
IBC SECTION 1003
GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS
   *IBC Section 1003.1.1; added to read as follows:
   1003.1.1 Additional means of egress components. When additional elements,
including but not limited to extra stairs or doors, are provided, they shall
comply with the provisions of Sections 1003 through 1015, except as follows:
   a.   Area of refuge of Section 1009:
   b.   Exit signs, Section 1013, are not required for additional doors.
   Any additional means of egress element, including but not limited to, doors,
open stairs, enclosed stairs or exterior stairs, provided to comply with any
means of egress provision shall be considered as a required element.
IBC SECTION 1004
OCCUPANT LOAD
   *IBC Section 1004.5; delete the exception.
IBC TABLE 1004.5
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT
   *IBC Table 1004.5; amend and add the following categories:
 
Function of Space
   Note: "Functions" listed are not to be considered as an occupancy Group
classification. Example: "Assembly" provisions will apply to Group A           
assemblies as well as Group B assemblies, or any other use that functions as
an assembly.
Assembly without fixed seats                                                   
   Concentrated (chairs only-not fixed)                                    7 net
   Dance floors                                                            7 net
   Standing space                                                          5 net
   Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)                                      15 net
                                                                              150 net
                                                                              Same as
Business areas                                                                Assembly
Group B used for Assembly uses with an occupant load less than 50             As assigned
Other Group B occupancies                                                     based upon
                                                                              the actual
                                                                              use
Day Care                                                                      35 net
Adult Day Care                                                                30 net
Educational                                                                    
   Classroom area - Group E occupancies through the 12th grade             20 net
   Classroom area - other than listed above                                Same as
   Shops, labs with tables and other vocational room areas                 Assembly
                                                                              50 net
                                                                               
Gymnasiums/Sport Area                                                         Total number
When dedicated for sporting event only                                        of sport
When usable for other events, e.g. graduation ceremonies, assembly meetings,  participants,
parties, etc. (includes school gyms)                                          coaches, and
Note: All high school gyms will be considered as used for events. Other       other
schools will be individually evaluated.                                       accessory
                                                                              personnel
                                                                              15 net
                                                                               
Waiting areas                                                                 15 net
   When associated with professional services                              Same as
   When associated with pick up/drop off locations                         primary
                                                                              function
 
IBC SECTION 1010
DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES
   *IBC Section 1010.1; add a sentence to the first paragraph and exception to
read as follows:
   Electric devices controlling means of ingress or egress shall be permitted
through the Fire Department and subject to the approval of the fire code
official, as per Fire Code Section 105.7.20.
   Exception: Stand-alone battery operated or mechanical code controlled
devices that provide unrestricted mechanical egress.
   *IBC Section 1010.1.6; amend exception 1 add an exception 2 to read as
follows:
   Exceptions:
      1.   In occupancy Group R-2 or R-3, threshold heights on the exterior
side of sliding and side-hinged exterior doors shall be ... {'{'}remainder
unchanged{'}'}...
   *IBC Section 1010.2.4; add an item 3.4 and 3.5 to read as follows:
   3.4   When doors or sets of doors at one egress location occur in a series,
the key- operated locking devices shall only be installed on one door or set of
doors. Key-operated locking devices shall not be installed on both the outer
and inner door(s).
   3.5   In lieu of a key-operated locking device (double keyed dead bolt) a
thumb turn dead bolt may be used provided it is a 1/4 turn dead bolt. All other
provisions, including readily distinguishable as locked, are still applicable.
   *IBC section 1010.2.4; add an item 4.1 to read as follows:
   4.1   Where egress doors are used in pairs and positive latching is
required, approved automatic flush bolts shall be permitted to be used,
provided that both leaves achieve positive latching regardless of the closing
sequence and the door leaf having the automatic flush bolts has no doorknobs or
surface mounted hardware.
   *IBC 1010.2.5; change exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
   3.   Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons
in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted
bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no
doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware.
   When the doors are indistinguishable as to which door to use for exiting,
such as matching glass doors with matching push bars, both doors shall be
operational and a sign shall be posted adjacent to the doors stating: THESE
DOORS TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN BUILDING IS OCCUPIED.
   4.   Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy,
manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive
leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress with requirements
and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no
doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware.
   When the doors are indistinguishable as to which door to use for exiting,
such as matching glass doors with matching push bars, both doors shall be
operational and a sign shall be posted adjacent to the doors stating: THESE
DOORS TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN BUILDING IS OCCUPIED.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.7; Change to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.7 Stairway doors. Stairway doors shall comply with the following
sections.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.7.1; Add to read as follows:
   1010.2.7.1 Stairway doors serving other than high rise buildings. Interior
stairway means of egress doors shall be openable from both sides without the
use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Stairway discharge doors shall be openable from the egress side and
shall only be locked from the opposite side.
      2.   This section shall not apply to doors arranged in accordance with
Section 403.5.3 of the building code.
      3.   Stairway exit doors are permitted to be locked from the side
opposite the egress side, provided they are openable from the egress side and
capable of being unlocked from the ingress side with a master key. Four master
keys shall be located in the required key box and shall be labeled "Stairwell
Master Key".
   *IBC Section 1010.2.7.2; Add to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.7.2 Stairway doors serving high-rise buildings. Stairway doors
shall be installed and operated as specified in Section 403.5.3.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.7.3; Add to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.7.3 Exit Stairway door electric locking devices. Only electrified
latching panic bars or electrified latching mortise handsets are allowed to be
installed on exit stairwell doors, unless otherwise approved in writing by the
fire code official.
   *IBC Section 1010.2,12; Change to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.12 Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. The
electric locks on sensor released doors are permitted where installed and
operated in accordance with all of the following criteria unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Code Official:
   1.   Loss of power to the lock or locking system shall automatically unlock
the electric locks.
   2.   The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device
located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor
and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be
provided to the manual unlocking device by a red or green actuator at least a 1
5/8 inch diameter and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that
reads "PUSH TO EXIT." When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result
in direct interruption of power to the lock - independent of other electronics-
and the doors shall remain unlocked for not less than 15 seconds.
      Exception: Electronic touch release panic bars.
   3.   The doors shall additionally be arranged to unlock from an infrared
sensor (motion detector) upon approach of the door(s).
   4.   Activation of the building fire alarm system, where provided, shall
automatically unlock the electric locks, and the electric locks shall remain
unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset.
   5.   Activation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection
system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the electric locks. The
electric locks shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been
reset.
   6.   The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL
294.
   Exception: Electric locks that provide mechanical egress are only required
to comply with Item 6. above.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.12.1 and 2 - Add to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.12.1 Emergency release of electrically locked egress doors. When
required by the fire code official, an approved positive latching emergency
release device that directly interrupts lock power must be located 40 to 48
inches above the floor within 2 feet of the door. An approved sign must be
installed that reads "Emergency Door Release". Any alternate means of release
must be approved in writing by the fire code official.
   [F] 1010.2.12.2 Access to exits. Access to exits shall not be restricted
unless approved in writing by the fire code official or otherwise allowed by
Section 1010.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.13; Change to read as follows:
   [F] 1010.2.13 Delayed egress. Delayed egress locks shall not be installed
unless approved by variance via the Construction and Fire Prevention Board of
Appeals. Where approved as such, delayed egress locking systems shall be
permitted to be installed on doors serving any occupancy except Group A, E and
H in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or a fire alarm system installed as
required by the occupancy classification specified in Section 907 with
additional automatic smoke detection installed in corridors, areas open to the
corridors and common areas in accordance with Section 907.
   {'{'}Delete numerical list 1 through 3.{'}'}
   *IBC Section 1010.2.13.1; change to read as follows:.
   [F] 1010.2.13.1 Delayed egress locking system. Where approved for use by the
Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals, the delayed egress locking
system shall be installed ... {'{'}remainder unchanged{'}'}
   *IBC Section 1010.2.13.1; Delete Exception to Item 4.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.14; Change Items 3 and 4 to read as follows:
   3.   The door locking system shall be installed to have the capability of
being unlocked at the fire command center, a nursing station or other approved
location and shall have an approved means of unlocking at the controlled door.
   4.   A building occupant shall not be required to pass through more than one
door equipped with a controlled egress locking system before entering an exit,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   *IBC Section 1010.2.14: Change Exception 2 to read as follows:
   2.   Items 2 through 4 shall not apply to doors to areas where a listed
egress control system is utilized to reduce the risk of child abduction from
nursery and obstetric areas of a Group 1-2 hospital.
IBC SECTION 1012
RAMPS
   *IBC Section 1012.1: add a sentence to exception #3 to read as follows:
   This exception applies to parking spaces installed along the vehicle ramp.
Accessible parking shall not be installed on the ramp. The portion of the
vehicle ramp from the parking space to the next landing can only be used as a
exit access for those spaces along the ramp between landings unless in
compliance with Section 406.2.5.
IBC SECTION 1013
EXIT SIGNS
   *IBC Section 1013.5; changed to read as follows:
   1013.5 Internally illuminated exit signs. Electrically powered, and self-
luminous shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 924 and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, Sections
1013.5.1, 1013.5.3 and Chapter 27. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all
times. If photoluminescent exit signs are approved by Board variance, a
charging light shall be installed nearby in accordance with UL 924 that cannot
be manually turned off except with the overcurrent protection device.
IBC SECTION 1015
GUARDS
   *IBC Section 1015.8; add exception #5 to read as follows:
   5.   In the original portion of a historical contributing structure, when
creating or installing new windows, or when adjusting the window dimensions of
an existing window, the window sill may be as approved by the Historical
Cultural and Landmark Commission during their approval process when determined
to be appropriate to maintain the historical significance.
IBC SECTION 1017
EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE
   *IBC Table 1017.2; amend footnote "c" and add a footnote "f" to read as
follows:
 
F-2, S-2, U 300f 400 c, f
 
   c.   Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. For Group B occupancies, this sprinkler
increase may be applied on each floor that is fully sprinklered throughout,
without requiring the entire building to be sprinklered.
   f.   Single use open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.4.1,
may have the following travel distances:
      -   Non-sprinklered open parking garages may have 450' travel distance.
      -   Sprinklered open-parking garages may have 600' travel distance.
IBC SECTION 1020
CORRIDORS
   *IBC Section 1020.1; add an exception #6 to read as follows:
   6.   In existing Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need
not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant when in compliance
with the following:
   a.   the occupant load of the tenant space does not exceed 100; or,
   b.   the building is equipped with an approved fire alarm system in
accordance with Section 907.2.2 and smoke detectors are installed within the
corridor.
   *IBC Table 1020.1; add a footnote "e" in to read as follows:
 
A, B, E, F, M, S, U Greater than 30 1 0e
 
   e.   Corridors of existing Group B office buildings need not be of fire-
resistive construction when the entire story in which the space is located is
equipped with an automatic sprinkler system throughout.
   *IBC Section 1020.7; add exception #3 and changed to read as follows:
   1020.7 Corridor continuity. Corridors shall be continuous from the point of
entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms.
   Exceptions:
      3.   When the corridor within an individual tenant space is not required
to be fire-resistance-rated, it is permitted to pass through open office/
business spaces provided the exit path is clearly marked through the office/
business area to the point of exit.
IBC SECTION 1027
EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS
   *IBC Section 1027.4; changed to read as follows:
   1027.4 Side yards. The open areas adjoining exterior exit ramps or stairways
shall be in direct contact with either yards, courts or public ways; the
remaining sides are permitted to be enclosed by the exterior walls of the
building.
   Exception: Any stairway at the end of an open ended corridor that is pulled
into the building shall be considered an exterior stair if in compliance with
both of the following provisions:
      1.   The bottom riser is no more than 1 foot inside the exterior wall,
and
      2.   No riser is located more than 20 feet inside the exterior walls.
   *IBC Section 1027.6 changed to read as follows:
   1027.6 Exterior ramps and stairway protection. Exterior exit stairways and
ramps shall be separated from the interior of the building as required in
Section 1023.2 Openings shall be limited to those necessary for egress from
normally occupied spaces. Where a vertical plane projecting from the edge of an
exterior exit stairway or ramp and landings is exposed by other parts of the
building at an angle of less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad), the exterior wall
shall be rated in accordance with Section 1023.7.
   {'{'}Exceptions 1, 2 and 4 remain unchanged. Exception 3 changed as follows:
{'}'}
   3.   Separation from the interior open-ended corridors of the building is
not required for exterior exit stairway or ramps, provided that Items 3.1
through 3.6 are met:
   3.1   The building, including corridors and ramps and stairs, shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
   3.2   The open-ended corridors comply with Section 1020.
   3.3   The open-ended corridors are connected on each end to an exterior exit
stairway or ramp complying with Section 1027.
   3.4   The exterior walls and openings adjacent to the exterior exit stairway
or ramp comply with Section 1023.7
   3.5   At any location in an open-ended corridor where a change of direction
exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad) occurs, a clear opening of not less than 35
square feet (3.3 m2) or an exterior stairway or ramp shall be provided. Where
clear openings are provided, they shall be located so as to minimize the
accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.
   3.6   When in compliance with this exception, the travel distance of Section
1006 may be measured from the most remote point to the first tread of the
stair.
IBC SECTION 1030
ASSEMBLY
   *IBC Section 1030.1; changed to read as follows:
   1030.1 General. A room or spaces used for assembly purposes shall comply
with this section.
   *IBC Section 1030.1.1.1; changed to read as follows:
   1030.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers. Enclosed spaces under
grandstands or bleachers shall be separated by fire barriers ... {'{'}remainder
unchanged{'}'}...
IBC SECTION 1032
MAINTENANCE OF THE MEANS OF EGRESS
   *IBC Section 1032; copied from the Fire Code to read as follows:
[F] SECTION 1032
MAINTENANCE OF THE MEANS OF EGRESS
   [F] 1032.1 General. The means of egress for buildings or portions thereof
shall be maintained in accordance with this section and Fire Code Chapter 11.
   [F] 1032.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits or exit discharges
shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full
instant use in the case of fire or other emergency at all times. An exit or
exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means
of egress.
   [F] 1032.2.1 Lift-out bars. In other than I and R occupancies and high-rise
buildings, and when approved by the fire code official, lift-out bars may be
utilized under the following provisions:
   1.   Bar shall be removable with a single effort not to exceed 15 pounds.
   2.   Installation of such devices shall not reduce the required minimum
egress width of the subject door when fully open. Projections into the means of
egress shall not exceed that allowed by Sections 1003.3, 1005 and 1008 and
shall not result in an obstruction or impediment to egress.
   3.   Bar shall be marked with "Lift to Remove" in 2 inch letters with
contrasting background.
   4.   Each door shall be marked with "This Door to be Unlocked when building
is occupied" in 2 inch letters with contrasting background.
   5.   Bars shall be stored in an area not accessible to the public when
occupied.
   6.   Bars shall not be capable of being locked in place.
   [F] 1032.3 Obstructions. A means of egress shall be free from obstructions
that would prevent its use, including the accumulation of snow and ice.
   [F] 1032.3.1 Group I-2. In Group I-2, the required clear width for aisles,
corridors and ramps that are part of the required means of egress shall comply
with Section 407.4.3 and Section 1020.3 of the International Fire Code. The
facility shall have a plan to maintain the required clear width during
emergency situations.
   Exceptions: In areas required for bed movement, equipment shall be permitted
in the required width where all of the following provision are met:
      1.   The equipment is low hazard and wheeled
      2.   The equipment does not reduce the effective clear width for the
means of egress to less than 5 feet (1525 mm)
      3.   The equipment is limited to:
         3.1.   Equipment and carts in use
         3.2.   Medical emergency equipment
         3.3.   Infection control carts
         3.4.   Patient lift and transportation equipment
      4.   Medical emergency equipment and patient lift and transportation
equipment, when not in use, are required to be located on one side of the
corridor.
      5.   The equipment is limited in number to not more than one per patient
sleeping room or patient care room within each smoke compartment
   [F] 1032.4 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with Section 1104 of the International Fire Code. Decorations,
furnishings, equipment or adjacent signage that impairs the visibility of exit
signs, creates confusion or prevents identification of the exit shall not be
allowed.
   [F] 1032.5 Nonexit identification. Where a door is adjacent to, constructed
similar to and can be confused with a means of egress door, that door shall be
identified with an approved sign that identifies the room name or use of the
room.
   [F] 1032.6 Furnishings and decorations. Means of egress doors shall be
maintained in such a manner as to be distinguishable from the adjacent
construction and finishes such that the doors are easily recognizable as doors.
Furnishings, decorations or other objects shall not be placed so as to obstruct
exits, access thereto, egress therefrom, or visibility thereof. Hangings and
draperies shall not be placed over exit doors or otherwise be located to
conceal or obstruct an exit. Mirrors shall not be placed on exit doors. Mirrors
shall not be placed in or adjacent to any exit in such a manner as to confuse
the direction of exit.
   [F] 1032.7 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings
shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
construction or, when applicable, the provisions of Fire Code Chapter 11, or
the Minimum Building Standards Code and the following:
   1.   Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from
the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.
   2.   Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are allowed to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear openings
size is maintained and the unit is equipped with smoke alarms installed in
accordance with Section 907.11 of the International Fire Code. Such devices
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool
or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening. Bars, grills, grates and similar devices require a building
permit as specified in the Building Code and Residential Code.
   [F] 1032.8 Inspection, testing and maintenance. Two-way communications
systems shall be inspected and tested on a yearly basis to verify that all
components are operational. When required, the tests shall be conducted in the
presence of the fire code official. Records of inspection, testing and
maintenance shall be maintained.
CHAPTER 11 - ACCESSIBILITY
IBC SECTION 1101
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 1101.1; add exception to read as follows:
   Exceptions: Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with
State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the
State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this
section.
IBC SECTION 1106 PARKING AND PASSENGER LOADING FACILITIES
   *IBC Section 1106.1.1; added to read as follows:
   11.1.1.1 Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. The required number of accessible
spaces and van accessible spaces as specified in the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, including any variances thereto, shall take precedent over this
section.
IBC SECTION 1110
OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES
   *IBC Section 1110.2.4; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   For existing toilet rooms with multiple non-accessible compartments, it is
permissible to remove no more than one fixture per toilet room in order to make
a neighboring fixture wheelchair-accessible, even if it reduces the number of
remaining fixtures to less than the number required.
CHAPTER 12 - INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT
IBC SECTION 1202
VENTILATION
   *IBC Section 1202.1; change to read as follows:
   1202.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in
accordance with Section 1202.5, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with
the International Mechanical Code.
   Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per
hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in
accordance with Section R402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation
Code-Residential Provisions, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by
mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International Mechanical
Code. Ambulatory care facilities and Group I-2 occupancies shall be ventilated
by mechanical means in accordance with Section 407 of the International
Mechanical Code.
IBC SECTION 1210
TOILET AND BATHROOM REQUIREMENTS
   *IBC Section 1210.2.2, exception #2; changed to read as follows:
   2.   Toilet rooms that are accessed only through a private office, not for
common or public use and that have not more than one water closet; provided
that walls around urinals comply with the minimum surrounding material
specified by Section 419.3 of the Plumbing Code.
IBC SECTION 1211
   *IBC Section 1211; added to read as follows:
   1211.1 Scope. Sound insulation requirements for noise sensitive uses near
airports shall be in compliance with Appendix L.
CHAPTER 14 - EXTERIOR WALLS
IBC SECTION 1404
INSTALLATION OF WALL COVERINGS
   *IBC Section 1404.2; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   All wood or other products exposed to the weather shall be painted or
treated with an approved treatment, or shall possess a natural or inherent
protection method.
CHAPTER 15 - ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
IBC SECTION 1505
FIRE CLASSIFICATION
   *IBC Section 1505.7; delete.
IBC SECTION 1507
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS
   *IBC Section 1507.10.1; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Engineered roofs designed to provide adequate drainage after the
longtime deflection from dead loads or designed to support maximum loads,
including possible ponding of water from any source, including snow, due to
deflection, may have a design slope of a minimum of one-eighth unit vertical in
12 units horizontal (1- percent slope).
   *IBC Section 1507.12.1; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Engineered roofs designed to provide adequate drainage after the
longtime deflection from dead loads or designed to support maximum loads,
including possible ponding of water from any source, including snow, due to
deflection, may have a design slope of a minimum of one-eighth unit vertical in
12 units horizontal (1- percent slope).
IBC SECTION 1512
REROOFING
   *IBC Section 1512.1; add a sentence at end to read as follows:
   1512.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or
replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in
compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1.
   *IBC Sections 1512.6 and 1512.7; added to read as follows:
   1512.6 Maintain existing provisions. When reroofing, or repairing existing
roofing, the installer is required to insure the following items are
maintained:
   1.   Existing roof drains and drainage systems are maintained clear an
unobstructed When in the opinion of the Building Official the existing drainage
system appears inadequate, the system shall be re-evaluated and when necessary
required to comply with the provisions for new construction.
   2.   Fire-retardant requirements are maintained.
   1512.7 Attic space. Construction of a sloped or flat roof over an existing
roof in a manner that creates an attic or a concealed space shall require the
removal of any existing roofing material, composed of tar, asphalt or roof
insulation, from the newly created attic space.
CHAPTER 16 - STRUCTURAL DESIGN
IBC SECTION 1611
RAIN LOADS
   *IBC Section 1611.1; changed to read as follows:
   1611.1 Design rain loads. Each portion of a roof shall be designed to
sustain the load of rainwater that will accumulate on it if the primary
drainage system for that portion is blocked plus the uniform load caused by
water that rises above the inlet of the secondary drainage system at its design
flow. The design rainfall shall be based six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate.
IBC SECTION 1612
FLOOD LOADS
   *IBC Section 1612.1; changed to read as follows:
   1612.1 General. Within flood hazard areas as established in other City
ordinances, all new construction of buildings, structures and portions of
buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures, including
substantial improvements and restoration of substantial damage to buildings and
structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the effects of flood
hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions specified by the
Department of Transportation and Public Works. For buildings that are located
in more than one flood hazard area, the provisions associated with the most
restrictive flood hazard area shall apply.
   At the discretion of the Director of Transportation and Public Works, or his
authorized representative, any or all of the provisions of this section may be
used.
   *IBC Section 1612.3; delete.
CHAPTER 17 - SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
IBC SECTION 1704
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS, CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY AND
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION
   *IBC Section 1704.2; changed to read as follows:
   1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the
Building Official for construction as specified in Section 105, the owner or
the owner's authorized agent, or the registered design professional in
responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more
approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction
on the types of work listed under Section 1705 and identify the approved
agencies to the Building Official. The special inspector shall not be employed
by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition to the
inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in Section
110.
   {'{'}Exceptions unchanged{'}'}
   *IBC Section 1704.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of
construction and or upon request, the approved agencies shall provide written
documentation to the registered design professional in responsible charge and
the building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or
training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and
tests during construction. {'{'}Remainder unchanged{'}'}
   *IBC Section 1704.2.4; changed to read as follows:
   1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special
inspections and tests. The approved agency shall submit reports of special
inspections and tests to the Building Official upon request, and to the
registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection
reports shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed
in conformance to approved construction documents. {'{'}Remainder unchanged
{'}'}
   *IBC Section 1704.2.5.2; changed to read as follows:
   1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrication
required by Section 1704 are not required where the work is done on the
premises of a fabricator registered and approved to perform such work without
special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the fabricator's
written fabrication procedures and quality control manuals that provide a basis
for control of materials and workmanship, with periodic auditing of fabrication
and quality control practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is
enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections program. At completion of
fabrication, the approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance
to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design
professional in responsible charge, stating that the work was performed in
accordance with the approved construction documents. The certificate of
compliance shall also be made available to the Building Official upon request.
   *IBC Section 1705.19; changed to read as follows:
   [F] 1705.19 Testing for smoke control. Smoke control systems shall be tested
in accordance with this section, Section 909.18.8 and as directed by the fire
code official.
CHAPTER 18 - SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
IBC SECTION 1801
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 1801.2; added to read as follows:
   1801.2 Hazards. Whenever the building official determines that any existing
excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to
life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or
stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon
which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of
said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official,
shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation
or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the
requirements of this code.
IBC SECTION 1804
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL
   *IBC Section 1804.4; changed to read as follows:
   1804.4 Site grading. The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation shall
be sloped away from the building at a slope of not less than one unit vertical
in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) for a minimum distance of 10 feet
(3048 mm) measured perpendicular to the face of the wall. If physical
obstructions or lot lines prohibit 10 feet (3048 mm) of horizontal distance, a
5-percent slope shall be provided to an approved alternative method of
diverting water away form the foundation. Swales used for this purpose shall be
sloped a minimum of 2 percent where located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the
building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the
building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the
building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the
building. See Figure 1804.3. See also Section 1809.7.1 and Figure 1809.7.1.
   Exception: Where climatic or soil conditions warrant, the slope of the
ground away from the building foundation shall be permitted to be reduced as
approved by the Transportation Public Works Storm Water Section.
   The procedure used to establish the final ground level adjacent to the
foundation shall account for additional settlement of the backfill.
   *IBC Figure 1804.3; added to read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9816.png]
 
IBC SECTION 1807
FOUNDATI ON WALLS, RETAINING WALLS AND EMBEDDED POSTS AND POLES
   *IBC Section 1807.2.5; added to read as follows:
   1807.2.5 Material. Wood retaining walls exceeding four (4) feet in height
shall be constructed of new wood properly treated for such use. Measurement
shall be from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall. See Section
105.2, item #4 for retaining walls in succession. See Section 1610.1.
IBC SECTION 1808
FOUNDATIONS
   *IBC Section 1808.10; added to read as follows:
   1808.10 Minimum distance of swimming pools from foundations. Swimming pools
closer than 5' to a nearby building foundation, measured from outside pool wall
to the foundation, may not be closer than one horizontal foot at finish grade
for every vertical foot of swimming pool depth.
   Exception: Systems designed by an engineer registered in the State of Texas.
IBC SECTION 1809
SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS
   *IBC Section 1809.7.1; added to read as follows:
   1809.7.1 Alternate foundations. When engineered foundations are not required
by other sections of this code, and unless in soils considered inadequate, as
determined by the Building Official, for structures of standard construction,
Figure No. 1809.7.1 may be accepted as an alternate foundation design for the
occupancies and conditions specified.
FIGURE NO. 1809.7.1
* Figure No. 1809.7.1; added as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9818.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9820.png]
 
CHAPTER 23 - WOOD
IBC SECTION 2304
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
   *IBC Section 2304.12.1.2.1; added to read as follows:
   2304.12.1.2.1 Exterior bottom plates. All exterior wall bottom plates shall
be of naturally durable or preservative-tr eated wood.
   *IBC Section 2304.12.2.7; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: When chemicals or other methods of protection are undesirable to
the building owner/buyer provided an exposed exterior surface in compliance
with Figure 1804.3 is provided.
IBC SECTION 2308
CONVENTI ONAL LIGHT-FRAMED CONSTRUCTION
   *IBC 2308.7.1; changed to read as follows:
   2308.7.1 Ceiling joist spans. Spans for ceiling joists shall be in
accordance with Table 2308.7.1(1). Attic storage shall be considered another
floor. (See definition of Attic). For other grades and species, and other
loading conditions, refer to the AWC STJR.
   Decking for equipment access and work area, as required in the Mechanical
Code, shall comply with the decking requirements for a floor, or shall be a
minimum of a single layer of 3/4" plywood.
   *IBC Section 2308.7.7; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: When purlins are supported by struts to a joist in lieu of a
bearing wall, such joists must be designed as a double floor joists for the
span applied. Adequate bracing shall be provided to prevent rotation.
CHAPTER 24 - GLASS AND GLAZING
IBC SECTION 2406
SAFETY GLAZING
   *IBC Section 2406.3: exception 1 is deleted.
CHAPTER 27 - ELECTRICAL
   *IBC Chapter 27; changed to read as follows:
SECTION 2701
GENERAL
   2701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 70 shall govern the
design, construction, erection and installation of the electrical components,
appliances, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by
this code. The International Fire Code, and NFPA 70 shall govern the use and
maintenance of electrical components, appliances, equipment and systems. The
International Existing Building Code and NFPA 70 shall govern the alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement and addition of electrical components,
appliances, or equipment and systems.
   2701.1.1 COPS. For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain
continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require
continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management,
national security, or business continuity, see the Electrical Code, Article
708.
CHAPTER 29 - PLUMBING SYSTEMS
IBC SECTION 2901
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 2901.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the
provisions of Chapter 4 of the Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise
between the two chapters, the Code Official shall determine which provision
applies.
IBC SECTION 2902
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES
   *IBC Section 2902,1; changed to read as follows:
   2902.1 Minimum number of fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for
the type of occupancy and in the minimum number shown in Table 2902.1. based on
the actual use of the building or space and as follows:
   1.   Self-service storage facilities: shall be provided with one unisex
accessible restroom for tenant usage.
   2.   Each Recreational Vehicle Park, or portion of a Manufactured Home Park
used for recreational vehicles, shall contain one (1) or more service buildings
providing separate sanitary facilities for men and women.
      a.   No lot space shall be located farther than five hundred (500) feet
from such a service building.
      b.   The entrances to such buildings shall be clearly marked to show
which gender the facilities serve.
      c.   Fixtures shall be provided at the following ratio per twenty (20)
lots or fraction thereof:
         Toilets:   Men (1) / Women (2)
         Urinals:   Men (1)
         Lavatories:   Men (1) / Women (1)
         Showers:   Men (1) / Women (1)
      d.   Each building providing sanitary fixtures shall contain at least one
(1) slop sink.
      e.   If male and female sanitary facilities are housed within the same
structure, they shall be separated by walls extending from the floor to the
ceiling.
      f.   Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with
self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be individual and equipped with self-
closing doors. If dressing compartments are provided, each compartment shall be
equipped with a stool or a bench. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct
view of the interior when the exterior doors are open.
   Uses not shown in Table 2902.1 shall be considered individually by the code
official. The number of occupants shall be determined by the code official.
Occupancy classification shall be determined in accordance with this code. In
other than E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be
lowered, if requested in writing, by the applicant sating reasons for a reduced
number and approved by the code official.
   *IBC Table 2902.1; add a footnote "g" in the title and after the table as
follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9823.png]
 
DRINKING FOUNTAINS
(SEE SECTION 410 OF THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE)g
   g.   Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant
load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for
dining and/or drinking establishments.
   *IBC Section 2902.1.4; add new Section 2902.1.4 to read as follows:
   2902.1.4 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to
the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be
provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
   2902.1.4.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall
be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food
dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be
required based on convenience of use by employees.
   2902.1.4.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at
least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is
conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning
tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location
of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City of Fort
Worth Consumer Health Section.
   *IBC Section 2902.2; changed to read as follows:
   2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate
facilities shall be provided for each sex.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Separate facilities shall not be required for private dwelling units
or sleeping units.
      2.   Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of
50 or less.
      3.   Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies
in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or less.
      4.   Separate facilities shall not be required in business occupancies in
which the maximum occupant load is 25 or fewer.
      5.   Separate facilities shall not be required to be designated by sex
where single-user toilets rooms are provided in accordance with Section
2902.1.2.
      6.   Separate facilities shall not be required where rooms having both
water closets and lavatory fixtures are designed for use by both sexes and
privacy for water closets are installed in accordance with Section 405.3.4 of
the International Plumbing Code. Urinals shall be located in an area visually
separated from the remainder of the facility or each urinal that is provided
shall be located in a stall.
      7.   Self-service storage facilities need only provide one unisex
restroom for storage tenant usage. A single unisex employee restroom, when
permitted and when accessible by the tenants, may count for such restroom. Such
restroom shall be located near the facility entrance. Spaces converted to uses
other than self-service storage shall comply with other applicable restroom
provisions for that individual space.
      8.   Aircraft T-hangar facilities need not install tenant restrooms when
in compliance with the following:
         a.   Each such tenant hangar space is less than 2,000 square feet in
area.
         b.   There are restrooms located within 500 feet of the lease space.
   *IPC Section 2902.3; change to read as follows:
   2902.3 Required public toilet facilities. Customers, patrons, and visitors
shall be provided with public toilet facilities in structures and tenant spaces
intended for public utilization. Facilities for public and employee use may be
located in adjacent structures on the same property and under the same
ownership, lease or control. The number of plumbing fixtures located within the
required toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance with section 403 for
all users. Toilet rooms or bathing rooms accessed only through a private office
shall not be counted toward compliance with section 403. Employees shall be
provided with toilets facilities in all occupancies. Employee toilet facilities
shall be either separate or combined employee and public toilet facilities.
   Exceptions: {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
CHAPTER 30 - ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS
IBC SECTION 3001
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 3001.6; added to read as follows:
   3001.6 General. The owner shall be responsible for the safe operation and
maintenance of each elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk installation
and shall cause periodic inspections, tests and maintenance to be made on such
conveyances.
SECTION 3002
HOISTWAY ENCLOSURES
   *IBC Section 3002.10, 3002.10.1, 3002.10.2 and 3002.11; added to read as
follows:
   3002.10 Pits. (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.2.1; Inquiry 07-50) A pit shall be
provided for each individual elevator.
   3002.10.1 Drainage. (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.2.2.3 thru 2.2.2.6)
   2.2.2.3   Permanent provisions shall be made to prevent accumulation of
ground water in the pit.
   2.2.2.4   Drains and sump pumps, where provided, shall comply with the
applicable plumbing code, and they shall be provided with a positive means to
prevent water, gases, and odors from entering the hoistway.
   2.2.2.5   In elevators provided with Firefighters' Emergency Operation, a
drain or sump pump shall be provided. The sump pump/drain shall have the
capacity to remove a minimum of 11.4 m3/h (3,000 gal/h) per elevator.
   2.2.2.6   Sumps and sump pumps in pits, where provide, shall be covered. The
cover shall be secured and level with the pit floor.
   3002.10.2 Discharge. When drainage is installed, whether required or
voluntary, discharge shall comply with the following:
   1.   Where there is no expectation of hydraulic fluid or oil contamination,
the drainage may discharge into the sanitary sewer system, subject to the
approval of the Water Department Pre-treatment Division.
   2.   If installed in a location with possible contamination, a trap or
interceptor rated for the expected flow rate with a minimum "storage" capacity
equivalent to the volume of hydraulic fluid or oil that could be leaked into
the drain, will be required prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer, subject
to the approval of the Water Department Pre-treatment Division.
   3.   In either situation, discharge to the storm drainage system is not
permitted.
   4.   Gravity drains that comply with the above provisions should be
discussed with the Building Official before installation.
   5.   Drainage to a storage tank is not permitted without specific approval.
Overflow of such tanks shall be in compliance with the provisions listed in
items 1 through 3 above.
   3002.11 Other pipes, ducts or electrical wiring. See Sections 3002.9 and
3005.6 and the following:
   (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.8.2.2) Only such electrical wiring, raceways,
cables, coaxial wiring, and antennas used directly in connection with the
elevator, including wiring for signals, for communication with the car, for
lighting, heating, air conditioning, and ventilating the car, for fire
detecting systems, for pit sump pumps, and for heating and lighting the
hoistway and/or the machinery space, machine room, control space, or control
room shall be permitted to be installed inside the hoistway, machinery space,
machine room, control space, or control room
   (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.8.3.4) Other pipes or ducts conveying gases, vapors,
or liquid and not used in connection with the operation of the elevator shall
not be installed in any hoistway, machinery space, machine room, control space
or control room.
IBC SECTION 3005
MACHINE ROOM
   *IBC Section 3005.1; add two sentences to read as follows:
   Elevator machine rooms shall be provided. All elevator control circuit
boards, switch gears, etc. that is necessary to maintain the operation of the
elevator during an emergency event shall be located within the machine room or
inside the elevator hoistway if not prohibited by other provisions.
   *IBC Section 3005.4; delete the two exceptions
   *IBC Section 3005.5; deleted.
   *IBC Section 3005.7; added to read as follows:
   ]F] 3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces
and control spaces. Fire protection in machine rooms, control rooms, machinery
spaces and controls paces shall comply with section 3005.7.1 through 3005.7.4
   [F] 3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as
prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1.
   [F] 3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be
installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control
spaces and elevator hoi st-ways.
   [F] 3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have
a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device
provided for each floor that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system.
   [F] 3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from
infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic
sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided.
   [F] 3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with
Section 3005.5 shall not be installed.
IBC SECTION 3007
FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATOR
   *IBC Section 3007.6; amended and new Section 3007.6.6 added to read as
follows:
   3007.6 Fire service access elevator lobby. The fire service access elevator
shall open into a fire service access elevator lobby in accordance with
Sections 3007.6.1 through 3007.6.6.
   [F] 3007.6.6 Storage and furniture. Where fire service access elevators are
required, fire service access elevator lobbies shall be maintained free of
storage and furniture. See Fire Code Section 607.
CHAPTER 31 - SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION
IBC SECTION 3102
MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
   *IBC Section 3102.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Subject to approval of the building official and fire code official, such
structures erected on a building, balcony or deck may also be considered as a
Tent, as defined in the Fire Code, and in compliance with Chapter 24 of the
Fire Code
   *IBC Section 3102.4.1; added to read as follows:
   3102.4.1 Membrane Covered Parking Structures. As an alternate to the
provisions of this code, membrane parking structures may comply with all of the
following:
   a.   Must pass NFPA 701.
   b.   Maximum area per structure of combination of structures considered as
one building does not exceed 12,000 sq.ft.
   c.   The covered structure is separated from other structures and any other
building on the same property by a minimum of 20'.
   d.   The covered structure is separated from the property line or center
line of public way of at least 10'.
   e.   The structure will be considered a Type V-B enclosed parking garage.
IBC SECTION 3103
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
   *IBC Section 3103; delete.
IBC SECTION 3113
RELOCATABLE BUILDINGS
   *IBC Section 3113; delete.
CHAPTER 32 - ENCROACHMENT INTO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
IBC SECTION 3201
GENERAL
   *IBC Section 3201.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Encroachments shall require an executed agreement as required by Division II
or Division III of this Chapter.
   *IBC Section 3201.5; added to read as follows:
   3201.5 Projections. The projection limitations specified in Section 3202
shall be applied when determined as necessary by the building official during
the encroachment review process. Any encroachment approved by City Council may
project further than listed herein.
IBC SECTION 3202
ENCROACHMENTS
   *IBC Section 3202.2; changed to read as follows:
   3202.2 Encroachments above grade and below 8 feet in height. Encroachments
into the public right-of-way above grade and below 8 feet (2438 mm) in height
shall be prohibited except as provided for in Sections 3202.2.1 through
2302.2.4.
   *IBC Section 3202.2.4; added to read as follows:
   3202.2.4 Doors and windows. Doors and windows encroaching into the right of
way shall be approved by the Transportation and Public Works department.
   *IBC Section 3202.4; delete.
   *IBC Chapter 32, Divisions 11 and III; added to read as follows;
Division II
Encroachment of Public Property
TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS
   3203 General. No person, firm, or corporation shall use or occupy a public
Right Of Way, inclusive of street area, alley area, or sidewalk area without
first complying with the requirements of this chapter.
   Exceptions: 1. Use of public property for work that does not fall under the
jurisdiction of the Building, Energy, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing,
Residential or Sign Codes.
   2.   Entire street widths may be approved for closure by the Director of
Transportation and Public Works, provided the length of time does not exceed
one 8-hour day. For this purpose, no encroachment is required under this
chapter.
   3.   For Sidewalk Cafes, see City Code, Chapter 20, Article IX, "Sidewalk
Cafes," and Section 111.6.2 of the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
   Temporary encroachments may be used to permit the temporary use of public
property for other purposes besides construction or demolition. The Department
of Transportation/Public Works in these cases shall formulate a policy covering
such use.
   3204 - Permit Required
   3204 General. Temporary encroachment of public property shall not occur
until the applicant executes a Temporary Consent Agreement with the City and
obtains an Encroachment Permit from the Building Official.
   3204.1 Temporary Consent Agreement. The applicant shall execute three (3)
copies of a Consent Agreement with the City upon forms furnished by the
Building Official. The forms for such agreement shall be approved from time to
time by the City Attorney. Executed forms shall be kept and made available in
the offices of the Building Official and City Secretary.
   3204.2 Liability Insurance. The Temporary Consent Agreements shall be
accompanied by proof that the applicant has secured and paid for a policy of
public liability insurance covering all public risks related to the proposed
use and occupancy of public property as described in the agreement and permits.
The amount of insurance coverage shall be at least the maximum amounts of
liability which can be imposed upon the City under State law.
   Each such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled or
amended without at least ten (10) days advance written notice to the City.
Insurance shall be maintained for the length of encroachment.
   3204.3 Plans. Each Temporary Consent Agreement shall be accompanied by a
plan showing the location and amount of public property to be occupied; the
location of all railings, fences, canopies and construction offices, sheds and
other appurtenances; and the nature and location of all warning devices
necessary to protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   The Encroachment Permit shall not be considered as a construction permit for
the items required to be shown on the plan except those required for pedestrian
protection as required by Chapter 33.
   3204.4 Permit Fee. The applicant shall pay a permit fee based upon the area
used and the expected length of use as specified in Fort Worth Building
Administrative Code
   If the length of time is underestimated, an additional permit fee will be
required. If the fee is paid before the permit expires, the permit can be
extended. If after the permit expires, a new permit must be applied for.
   The area for consideration includes all areas removed from public use,
inclusive of traffic barricade areas.
   3204.5 Issuance. The Building Official shall issue an Encroachment Permit
when the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
   3205 Refund. If the length of time is overestimated, the Building Official
shall, upon requests, calculate the permit fee based upon the actual number of
days and return any overages to the applicant except that a minimum of the
amounts listed in Section 3204.4 per permit will be kept.
   3206 Inspections. An inspection must be obtained after all barricades,
fences, railings and other forms of pedestrian and vehicular protection are in
place. A final inspection must be obtained after all such items are removed.
   3207 - Building Official Authority
   3207 General. The Building Official is hereby authorized to execute the
Encroachment Agreement on behalf of the City for temporary use or occupancy of
public property for areas as listed in this section. Areas larger than those
specified herein will require City Council approval before the Agreement can be
executed.
   3207.1 Area. The Building Official and the Director of Transportation and
Public Works shall determine the area of street, alley or public sidewalk which
may be used during the construction or demolition period for work space and for
storage of materials and equipment. Such area shall be based upon the actual
need of the builder, with due consideration being given to public
inconvenience.
   The area allowed for use without requiring City Council approval shall be as
follows:
   1.   Not more than two (2)-lanes of a four (4)-lane street; nor one (l)-lane
of a two (2)-lane street; nor one (l)-lane of a one way street may be blocked.
   2.   Alleys adjoining a building site provided that a clear and unobstructed
roadway of not less than 10 feet in width is maintained through such alley if
such roadway is required for use by fire trucks, garbage trucks or for access
to public utilities or other buildings on the alley.
   3.   Any portion of a public sidewalk adjoining a building site except the
walkway area required to be maintained for public use.
   4.   Not withstanding the above provisions, no use will be authorized within
8 feet 6 inches of the center line of any railway track.
   3208 - Special Provisions
   3208.1 Earth and Rubbish. Earth or other waste material taken from buildings
shall not be stored either upon sidewalks or streets, but shall be removed
therefrom each day upon accumulation. When dry rubbish is being handled, same
shall be wetted so as to prevent dust and blowing debris.
   3208.2 Demolition. No wrecked or waste materials shall be placed upon any
floor of any building during the course of demolition so as to cause the
overloading of such floor. Such materials shall be lowered to the ground
immediately upon displacement. No material shall be thrown from a building to a
sidewalk or pavement but shall be conveyed to the ground by properly
constructed chutes.
   Blasting, pulling or throwing of masonry walls shall not be permitted except
in emergencies as approved by the Fire Chief and the Building Official.
Division III
Encroachment of Public Property
PERMANENT ENCROACHMENTS
   3209 General. No part of any building or structure, or any appendage
thereto, shall permanently project into, over, or under any public property,
easement, or right-of-way except as authorized by this chapter.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Environmental monitoring wells when approved by City Council or the
authority delegated to the Department of Code Compliance.
      2.   Backflow protection devices when approved by the authority delegated
to the Water Department.
      3.   Private irrigation lines located along residential local streets.
      4.   Any encroachment that the Director of the Development Services
Department determines (1) existed before the City's ownership interest of the
public property and (2) does not interfere with the public purpose and use of
the public property.
   3210 - Encroachment Agreement Required
   3210.1 General. All permanent encroachments into public property, including
public right-of-way and easements, shall require a duly executed Encroachment
Agreement.
   3210.2 Authority. The Director of the Development Services Department, or in
the Director's absence, the Director's designated Assistant Director, is hereby
authorized to execute Encroachment Agreements on behalf of the City, except
when the encroachment into public property is a Tier III Major Encroachment as
described in Section 3210.3.3 below. Tier III Major Encroachments must be
approved by City Council.
   3210.3 Encroachment Tiers. All permanent encroachments into public property,
inclusive of public right-of-way and easements, shall be categorized and
divided into the following tiers:
   3210.3.1. Tier I Minor Encroachments. Minor Encroachments are those that, by
their size or construction method, are simple in nature, that may be removed
from the public property in a short period of time, and that have only a minor
impact on public property. An aerial encroachment shall not be considered a
Tier I Minor Encroachment if it projects more than twelve inches over, into, or
above the public property. However, an aerial encroachment located at least
eight feet above grade level shall be considered a Tier I Minor Encroachment if
it projects no more than four feet over the public property and is fully
supported by a building or other structure not located on public property. Tier
I Minor Encroachments could include, but are not limited to, those examples
shown in the accompanying table.
 
Tier I
Minor Encroachments
Arcades                                Marquee signs
Awnings                                Planters
Bay windows and oriels                 Private irrigation lines located along
Benches                                thoroughfares or arterial roadways
Bicycle racks                          unless included under a separate
Blade signs                            agreement with the City
Canopies                               Public art installations
Cornices and sills                     Stoops and stairs
Door swings                            Security cameras and appurtenances
Eaves                                  Sustainable landscaping such as
Handicap ramps                         xeriscaping,
Wooden, Chain Link, or Cast Iron Fence Rain gardens and bio-swales
                                       Trash receptacles
 
   Tier I Minor Encroachments shall require a non-refundable application fee
however shall not require an annual fee. Tier I Minor Encroachment shall
require proof that the applicant has secured and paid for a policy of public
liability insurance covering all public property on which the encroachment is
located during construction and continuing through the entire term of the
Encroachment Agreement in an amount that is at least the maximum amount of
liability that can be imposed upon the City under State law unless a lower
amount or different insurance coverage is approved by Risk Management. Each
insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or amended without
at least thirty (30) days advanced written notice to the City. Insurance shall
be maintained for the length of the Encroachment Agreement.
   3210.3.2. Tier II Standard Encroachments. Tier II Standard Encroachments are
those that are more complex in nature than Tier I Minor Encroachments, but not
as substantial or complex as Tier III Major Encroachments. Tier II Standard
Encroachments could include, but are not limited to, the examples shown in the
following table.
 
Tier II Standard
Encroachments
Balconies                                                  Retaining Walls
Dumpster Enclosure Masonry Fence or Walls (Concrete Block, Storm Drains
Brick or Stone)                                            Private water lines
                                                           Fences
 
   Tier II Standard Encroachments shall require a non-refundable application
fee and, for as long as the approved encroachment exists, an annual
encroachment fee as specified in Table 1-F in section 119 of the Building
Administrative Code. However, for Tier II Standard Encroachments, the annual
fee shall not be applied if such encroachment is on City-owned easements. A
Tier II Standard Encroachment shall require proof that the applicant has
secured and paid for a policy of public liability insurance covering all public
property on which the encroachment is located during construction and
continuing through the entire term of the Encroachment Agreement in an amount
that is at least the maximum amount of liability that can be imposed upon the
City under State law unless a lower amount or different insurance coverage is
approved by Risk Management. Each insurance policy shall provide that it cannot
be cancelled or amended without at least thirty (30) days advanced written
notice to the City. Insurance shall be maintained for the length of the
Encroachment Agreement.
   3210.3.3. Tier III Major Encroachments. Tier III Major Encroachments are
those encroachments that, due to their size, complexity, or construction
method, have a substantial impact on public property or those that utilize a
significant portion of the public property, easement, or right-of-way and are
not included in a separate agreement with the City. Tier III Major
Encroachments include, but are not limited to, those shown in the accompanying
table.
 
   Tier III
   Major Encroachments
Basements          Tunnels
Parking structures Underground walkways
Sky bridges
 
   Tier III Major Encroachments shall require a non-refundable application fee
and, for as long as the approved encroachment exists, an annual encroachment
fee as specified in Table 1-F in section 119 of the Building Administrative
Code. However, for Tier III Major Encroachments, the annual fee shall not be
applied to encroachment improvements on City-owned easements. Tier III Major
Encroachment Agreement shall require proof that the applicant has secured and
paid for a policy of public liability insurance covering all public property on
which the encroachment is located during construction and continuing through
the entire term of the Encroachment Agreement. The amount of insurance coverage
shall be at least the maximum amounts of liability that can be imposed upon the
City under State law. Each insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be
canceled or amended without at least thirty (30) days advanced written notice
to the City. Insurance shall be maintained for the length of the Encroachment
Agreement and evidence of such insurance coverage must be provided to the City
on an annual basis during the term of the Encroachment Agreement.
   3210.3.4. Determination Authority. The Director of the Development Services
Department or their respective designee shall, upon request of an interested
party, make a determination of the degree of encroachment into or on to the
public property to determine the appropriate tier category.
   3210.4 Application. The applicant shall execute an Encroachment Agreement
with the City upon forms furnished by the Building Official or designee. The
forms for such an agreement shall be approved from time to time by the City
Attorney's Office. Executed forms shall be filed in the real property records
of the applicable county, and kept and maintained in the offices of the
Department of Development Services and the records of the City Secretary.
   3210.5 Plans. Each Encroachment Agreement shall be accompanied by a plan
showing the nature and location of the encroachment and amount of public
property to be occupied with details of the structure of encroachment and shall
include any additional information requested by the department affected by the
encroachment.
   3210.6 Application Fee. Each application for an Encroachment Agreement shall
require a non-refundable application fee as specified in Table 1-F in section
119 of the Building Administrative code.
   3210.7 Annual Fee. For Tier II Standard Encroachments and Tier III Major
Encroachments, for as long as the approved encroaching improvement(s) exists,
the property owner shall be responsible for payment of an annual encroachment
fee as established by City Council. The annual fee shall not be applied to
encroachments on easements. Tier I Minor Encroachments shall not require an
annual encroachment fee.
   3211 - Permits. Approval of the Encroachment Agreement does not eliminate
the need for proper permits to do work as required by any other provision of
the City code or other law or regulation. No work may commence without all
necessary permits as required by applicable City or other law or regulation.
   3212 - Signs. Advertising signs projecting into public property are to be
considered a permanent occupancy of public property, provided however, upon the
termination of the Encroachment Agreement such signage shall be removed from
public property.
   Exception: An identification sign displayed as part of the marquee, provided
the sign contains no off-premise advertising, is displayed to identify or
locate the building or place of business and the height of the message does not
exceed three (3) feet.
   Signs that are covered by existing Encroachment Agreements shall have those
Encroachment Agreements become null and void when a sign is altered in size,
removed or requires structural repair.
CHAPTER 33 - SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION
IBC SECTION 3305
SANITARY
   *IBC Section 3305.1; changed to read as follows:
   3305.1 Facilities required. Sanitary facilities shall be provided for
occupants and customers during construction, remodeling or demolition
activities in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.
   Exception: When the remodel includes the sanitary facilities, other
facilities must be available or temporary facilities provided.
IBC SECTION 3306
PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS
   *IBC Section 3306.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   When falling debris may, in the opinion of the Building Official, create a
hazardous situation to pedestrians or motorist, barriers shall be required as
specified in Section 3306.6.
   *IBC Section 3306.2; add second paragraph to read as follows:
   When authorization to close the sidewalk is obtained, the Building Official
may permit a solid fence. The contractor shall place pedestrian warning signs
on each side of the barricade at corners occupied by said barricades. The
pedestrian signs shall read as follows:
WARNING
"Pedestrians are required by law to use
the opposite side of the street."
WARNING
"No Parking or Standing of Vehicles."
IBC SECTION 3314
FIRE WATCH DURING CONSTRUCTION
   *IBC Section 3314.1: changed to read as follows:
   [F] 3314.1 Fire watch during combustible construction. A fire watch shall be
provided during nonworking hours for construction that exceeds 40 feet (12 192
mm) in height above the lowest adjacent grade at any point along the building
perimeter, for new multistory construction with an aggregate area exceeding
50,000 square feet (4645 m2) per story or as required by the fire code
official.
CHAPTER 35 - REFERENCED STANDARDS
   *IBC Chapter 35, "Referenced Standards"; amend the standards listed below to
read as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9825.png]
 
CHAPTER 36 - DOCKS, PIERS AND BOATHOUSES
   *Chapter 36; added to read as follows:
CHAPTER 36
DOCKS, PIERS AND BOATHOUSES
IBC SECTION 3601
GENERAL
   3601 General. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any body of
water within the corporate limits of Fort Worth that is under the jurisdiction
and control of the City of Fort Worth. In the absence of other provisions, this
chapter may be used on bodies of water not under the control of the City of
Fort Worth.
   This chapter and the "Docks, Piers and Boat House" standards, adopted
elsewhere, may be more stringent than other provisions of this code and other
codes.
   3601.1 Variances/Water Department Release. Lake Worth is owned by the City
of Fort Worth. The Fort Worth Water Department has the charge for the safety of
the water, as well as, safe usage of the water system. As such, some provisions
in this chapter shall be designated as a regulation from the Water Department
and will be identified as (WD). Any such section identified with (WD) cannot be
granted a variance by the Construction and Fire Prevention Board without first
obtaining a release from the Director of the Water Department.
IBC SECTION 3602
DEFINITIONS
   3602 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
   DEAD LOAD. The permanent inert weight of materials of construction
incorporated into the structure, including fixed or permanent attachments, such
as bumpers, railings, winch stands, roof structures, etc.
   As further defined in Chapter 16, the weight of materials of construction
incorporated into the building, including but not limited to walls, floors,
roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, finishes, cladding and other
similarly incorporated architectural and structural items, and fixed service
equipment including the weight of cranes. All dead loads are considered
permanent loads.
   DECKING. The surface material that forms the floor of the structure.
   As further defined in Chapter 16, an exterior floor supported on at least
two opposing sides by an adjacent structure, and/or posts, piers or other
independent supports.
   DOCK, PIER, OR BOAT HOUSE (or any combination). A structure extending from
the shore into the water to permit the landing and mooring of vessels. The term
"dock", "pier" or "boat house" includes the anchoring system and any walkways
or bridges that will attach to the structure itself.
   HUNT ABSORPTION TEST. A test documenting the rate at which flotation
material absorbs liquid, as well as the quantity of liquid absorbed.
   LAKEFRONT PROPERTY LINE. The property line that borders the regulated water
area. (For Lake Worth, "as shown on the final plat of record or survey for the
property".)
   LAKE WORTH MANAGEMENT OFFICE (LWMO). That group in the Water and Property
Management Departments responsible for review and approval of improvements to
structures, prior to permitting, at or in Lake Worth and who shall administer
the requirements of those departments.
   LIVE LOAD. Any moving or variable superimposed load on the structure.
   As further defined in Chapter 16, those loads produced by the use and
occupancy of the building or other structure and do not include construction or
environmental loads such as wind load, snow load, rain load, earthquake load,
flood load or dead load.
   LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of building
materials, occupants and their possessions, environmental effect, differential
movement and restrained dimensional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in
which variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as dead loads.
All other loads are variable loads.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (RPE). A professional engineer currently
registered with the State of Texas as a professional engineer.
   STRUCTURAL DEAD LOAD. The weight of the structure and its ability to support
itself.
   STRUCTURE. When used in this Chapter shall be inclusive of entire dock, pier
or boat house, including the walkway, anchoring system, cables, floats,
electrical, plumbing and any other related components or materials installed in
conjunction with the construction, maintenance, or use of the dock.
   WALKWAY (or BRIDGE). A passage that provides access from the land or a boat
dock, marina, or other floating facility.
SECTION 3603
PERMITS
   3603 Permit Required. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or
move any dock, pier, boathouse or combination to any body of water within the
corporate limits of Fort Worth, that is under the jurisdiction and control of
the City of Fort Worth, without complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   Each application for a permit, together with plans for a dock, pier,
boathouse, or any combination thereof shall be submitted as specified in
Chapter 1 of this code and as may be specified in other City codes.
   Where such structures are constructed on Lake Worth or any body of water
subject to the jurisdiction of another department of the City of Fort Worth,
the additional approval of such department shall be obtained.
   Submittal of a permit application is not permission to begin work.
Construction is not permitted to begin until a permit is ISSUED.
IBC SECTION 3604
USE
   3604 Use. Docks, piers and boathouses for private use shall normally be
classified as a Group U Occupancy. Other occupancies may be allowed when the
use is permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, together with the approval of any
other appropriate department of the City of Fort Worth, and the construction
complies with this code for said use.
IBC SECTION 3605
DESIGN AND DESIGN LOADS.
   3605.1 General. When designed by an RPE, the RPE shall apply the appropriate
loads when doing calculations. Such factors shall include, but not be limited
to:
   a.   dead load
   b.   live load
   c.   roof load
   d.   wind load and wave action; which should be considered as simultaneously
applied
   e.   when intended to have boats attached to the structure for storage, the
effects of such estimated loads, such as wind and wave, on the boat that are
transferred to the structure shall also be considered.
   f.   when intended to have boats lifted out of the water, the effects of
such estimated loads, such as wind on the boat and dead load of the boat, that
are transferred to the structure shall also be included.
   g.   surface areas at and above the water line, when authorized, including
walls, screens, tarps, etc.
   h.   except as allowed for in Section 3605.3, flotation devices shall be
designed to withstand the same dead load and live load as a fixed structure.
   3605.2 All Occupancies. Regardless of the occupancy category assigned, all
structures shall comply with the following provisions:
   a.   Piles shall conform to Chapter 18 of this Code.
   b.   All docks, piers and boathouses shall be designed to withstand the
loads as specified in Chapter 16 of this code, based upon the Occupancy
classification as assigned by the Building Official.
      Exception: Private residential structures, classified as a Group U, may
use the design loads as specified in Section 3605.3.
   c.   (WD) Structures shall be able to withstand a minimum of two-foot high
wave action at normal water levels. (For Lake Worth, up to 594 ft. above sea
level.) Floating docks must be designed with anchorage footing and piers to
remain in place without floating off at the high water levels (For Lake Worth,
this will be 601 ft. above sea level.)
   d.   (WD) Cables and chains used in anchoring systems shall be designed with
a minimum working load safety factor of 3.0 for cable and 2.0 for chains.
   e.   (WD) Walkways and bridges shall have a maximum slope under dead load of
a 4:1 ratio to any direction at the lowest expected water level. (For Lake
Worth, 591 ft. above sea level.)
   3605.3 Group U Occupancies. When private structures associated with
residential uses are assigned a Group U Occupancy classification, the design
provisions provided in Section 3605.3.1 through 3605.3.2, may be used in lieu
of Chapter 16.
   3605.3.1 Flotation devices shall be designed to support the dead load plus
30- pounds per square foot (PSF) live load applied to deck area.
   3605.3.2 Structural frame shall be designed to support 40 pounds per square
foot (PSF) live load applied to the full surface area of the deck.
IBC SECTION 3606
CONSTRUCTION
   3606 Dock and Pier Construction. When not designed by an RPE, the proposed
design shall incorporate the following minimum provisions:
   3606.1 Piles. Wood piles shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter.
Metal piles shall be a minimum of three (3) inches inside diameter pipe. Such
piles shall be driven to a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches below the
top layer of silt. Such piles shall be driven in pairs, one on either side of
the platform, and braced as required by section 3606.6. Such piles shall not be
spaced apart more than ten (10) feet center to center.
   3606.2 Box cribs. Sets of structural columns of the same size forming a box
crib may be used. Such crib shall be braced as required in Section 3606.6 and
anchored as required in Section 3607.
   3606.3 Beams. Beams shall be defined as those members which connect to piles
to support the stringers. All beams when of wood shall be a minimum 2-inch
material.
   3606.4 Stringers. Stringers shall be defined as those members usually
supporting the decking. All stringers when of wood shall be of a minimum 2-inch
material.
   3606.5 Decking.
   3606.5.1 Wooden platform decking shall be of a minimum nominal 2-inch
material.
   3606.5.2 Other materials, to include lightweight concrete or metal decking
may be used when approved by the Building Official. Such decking shall meet the
load requirements of Section 3605.
   3606.6 Bracing.
   3606.6.1 Materials. All wooden bracing shall be of a minimum nominal 2-inch
x 6-inch material attached through the brace and supporting members with two
(2) one half inch galvanized bolts. Steel tie rods shall be a minimum three
quarter inch diameter galvanized that are fitted through drilled holes in the
piles.
   3606.6.2 Bracing shall be accomplished by one or more of the following
methods:
   a.   Cross or "X" bracing. Cross or "X" bracing at each set of piles and box
cribs. The angle of the bracing shall be between 45 and 60 degrees off
horizontal. Each member of the brace shall be placed on the outward facing
portion of the pile.
   b.   Knee bracing. Knee bracing may be used on each pile attached to and
paralleling the platform deck. The angle of the bracing shall be between 45 and
60 degrees off horizontal.
   3606.7 Attachment of deck. Attachment of the platform deck to beams and
piles shall be accomplished by attaching the beams to the piles and box cribs
by a minimum of two (2) one half inch galvanized through bolts.
IBC SECTION 3607
ANCHORAGE
   3607 Anchorage of Floatation and box crib structures. Such structures shall
be anchored with solid units that will provide the following anchorage:
   a.   Docks and piers less than fifty (50) feet in length: An anchor on each
corner that will support one-fourth of the total dead load plus one-eighth the
total live load.
   b.   Docks and piers fifty (50) feet or more in length: Anchors at the
midpoint of the piers.
   c.   All docks and piers shall be anchored to the shore line.
   d.   All anchors shall be of masonry, concrete, or steel and shall be
securely fastened to the dock or pier by cable, chain, or other approved
methods.
IBC SECTION 3608
REQUIRED WATER PROOFING.
   3608.1 All wood below one (1) foot above spillway elevation on lakes (for
Lake Worth, 595 feet) or below one (1) foot above the 50-year flood elevations
on other bodies of water shall be treated lumber. Creosote is not allowed.
   3608.2 All metal, including bolts, lag bolts, and fasteners, shall be
galvanized zinc or other approved materials.
IBC SECTION 3609
FLOTATION MATERIAL
   3609 Floatation Material. All flotation units shall adequately support the
dead and live loads of all beams, stringers, and platforms. Data shall be
submitted to and approved by the Building Official showing that the buoyancy of
such units will support the loads imposed.
   Only flotation units made of materials which will not affect the water
quality in any way may be used. Flotation units shall be constructed of
material that has never been used in any manner for storage of toxic or
hazardous material. Proof that the flotation units meet the requirements must
be provided to and approved by the Building Official.
   (a)   (WD) Flotation material shall be extruded polystyrene, expanded
polystyrene, or a copolymer of polyethylene and polystyrene and shall have a
minimum density of 0.9 pounds per cubic foot, and be of consistent quality
throughout the float. Beads shall be firmly fused together, and there shall be
no voids inside the encasement. Flotation material shall have a water rate
absorption of less than 3.0 pounds per cubic foot over seven (7) days when
tested by the Hunt Absorption Test. Other flotation material may be considered
if it meets all of the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   (WD) Flotation material shall be encased in solid polyethylene or a
polyurethane type coating, both of which shall be watertight and have a nominal
thickness of 0.125 inches.
   (c)   (WD) Drums made of plastic, whether new or recycled, or metal shall
not be used for encasements or floats.
   (d)   (WD) Materials which are considered unacceptable for this purpose
include but are not limited to standard steel 55 gallon drums, any metal which
may corrode in the aqueous environment, and any material which may release
toxic or hazardous material into the lake proper.
   (e)   (WD) All flats shall be warranted for a minimum of eight (8) years
against sinking, becoming waterlogged, cracking, peeling, fragmenting, or
losing beads, and shall not be prone to damage by animals.
   (f)   (WD) Floats that are punctured, exposing the foam to erosion or
deterioration, shall be replaced immediately.
IBC SECTION 3610
BOATHOUSES
   3610 Boathouse construction. Construction of boathouses or other structures
shall meet or exceed the requirements for framing and coverage as specified in
other parts of this code. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, the
load of the intended use exceeds the capability of the minimum construction
design specified, plans and specification may be required to be designed by a
Registered Professional Engineer (RPE).
IBC SECTION 3611
PROHIBITED USES
   3611.1 (WD) Toilet facilities. No toilet facilities of any type shall be
allowed on any Structure built past the Lakefront Property Line.
   3611.2 (WD) Fuel pumping. Fuel pumping facilities exceeding 55 gallons are
not allowed on structures that extend past the Lakefront Property Line.
IBC SECTION 3612
SAFETY DEVICES
   3612.1 (WD) Photocell light. Any Structure that extends more than 100 feet
from the Lakefront Property Line shall be equipped with a white photocell light
of no less than 200 lumens that operates continually from dusk to dawn. Such
lighting shall be provided with a cover on the top of the light to minimize
light dispersion upward and toward the shore. The LWMO may require that
lighting be placed on structures less than 100 feet from the shoreline when in
LWMO decides it is warranted to enhance boating safety. It is the Dock owner's
responsibility to ensure that all required lighting is properly maintained and
operational at all times.
   3612.2 (WD) Water supply A potable water supply can be plumbed to the first
floor (lower deck) provided that backflow prevention devices are installed and
inspected in accordance with 12.5, Article V, Division 3, Cross Connection
Control of the City Code and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the City Council.
APPENDIX L
   *IBC Appendix L, added to read as follows:
IBC APPENDIX L
INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT
DIVISION II
SOUND INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR NOISE SENSITIVE USES NEAR AIRPORTS
SECTION L1212
GENERAL
   L1212.1 Scope. The regulations and requirements shall apply to all new
residential buildings and new noise-sensitive non-residential buildings, as
defined herein, that are located wholly or partially within the boundaries of
the 65 DNL or greater noise contours as designated in Figure L1212.1(1).
   The term "new" shall apply to new detached buildings built after the
effective date of this ordinance, and shall include later additions or
modifications to those same buildings. The term shall also include a Change of
Occupancy in existing buildings from a nonprotected occupancy to one of the
protected occupancies listed herein.
   Buildings in existence prior to the effective date, and additions to or
modifications of those same buildings, shall not be required to comply, except
when a Change of Occupancy from a non-protected occupancy to one of the
protected uses is involved.
SECTION L1213
DEFINITIONS
   L1213.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
   Aircraft noise - is generally expressed in terms of it's A-weighted sound
level, in units called "decibels." Strictly speaking, the decibel unit should
be abbreviated only by "dB"; however, for clarity "dBA" and "dB(A)" are often
used to highlight the fact that the sound level measurement has been A-
weighted.
   Noise exposure - in areas around airports is expressed in terms of the Day-
Night Average Sound Level, which is abbreviated by "DNL" in text and "Ldn" in
equations.
   NOISE-SENSITIVE NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS -
      1.   Nursing homes and hospitals, generally classified as Group I; and
      2.   Child day care centers, Adult day care centers and schools,
generally classified as Group E and Group I-4.
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES: Single-family, Two-family, Townhouse, Multifamily,
and Assisted Living uses, generally classified as Group R, whether in a single
occupancy or mixed occupancy.
   Sound insulation properties - of building construction materials are
described by Sound Transmission Loss (TL) or Sound Transmission Class (STC).
The higher the TL or STC value, the less sound will be transmitted through the
building material.
SECTION L1214
PURPOSE
   L1214.1 General. All buildings and structures with protective uses, as
applicable under this Division, shall be required to have minimum sound
insulation standards and requirements to protect the persons within designated
noise sensitive buildings from excessive exterior noise through regulation of
design, construction and modification of such buildings. After proper sound
insulation measures are taken, the interior sound level, attributable to
exterior sources, shall not exceed 45 dB.
   L1214.2 Protected Uses:
   1.   Single-family, two-family, townhouse, multi-family, and Assisted Living
uses, generally classified as Group R, whether in a single occupancy or mixed
occupancy,
   2.   Nursing homes and hospitals, generally classified as Group I; and
   3.   Child day care centers, Adult day care centers and schools, generally
classified as Group E and Group I-4.
   All new construction with those uses, and any Change of Use to those uses,
must comply with the sound reduction construction requirements.
   Any option, door, window, or product that is not listed in this document may
be used provided sufficient documentation is submitted to confirm appropriate
testing to achieve the required STC rating.
SECTION L1215
BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
   L1215.1 General. Compliance with the following prescriptive provisions shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this Division.
   Exception: In lieu of the prescriptive provisions listed below, an
acoustical design may be submitted showing that the interior sound level,
attributable to exterior sources, shall not exceed 45 dB. Such design must be
prepared by a person experienced in the field of acoustical engineering or a
registered architect. The design documentation with the appropriate seal shall
be attached.
   L1215.2 Building requirements for construction in the 65 dB Contour
   L1215.2.1 Exterior Windows. Exterior windows must have STC rating 25 or
greater, or approved for 65 dB or higher. If using other windows not listed in
the tables, the applicant must provide acceptable manufacturer's documentation
on STC rating.
   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not exceed 20
percent of the floor area.
   L1215.2.2 Exterior walls. Exterior walls must have STC rating of 25 or
greater, or approved for 65 dB or higher. Walls that are exterior of the
protected use, but interior to the building, separating the protected use from
the remainder area, such as, an enclosed garages, unused space, warehouse,
etc., may be reduced to an STC of 20.
   If using other walls not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   L1215.2.3 Exterior Doors. Exterior doors must be STC rating 25 or greater,
or approved for 65 dB or higher. Doors that are exterior of the protected use,
but interior to the building, separating the protected use from the remainder
area, such as, an enclosed garages, unused space, warehouse, etc., may be
reduced to an STC of 20, or may use option Door 21, 22 or 23.
   If using other doors not listed in the tables, applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with the Exterior Window
provisions listed above, unless using door options Door la, lb, 1c or 1d.
   L1215.2.4 Roof/Ceiling. Roof/Ceiling assembly must be STC rating of 25 or
greater, or approved for 65 dB or higher. If using other Roof/Ceiling
assemblies not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide acceptable
manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   a.   An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms on the
uppermost level of Group R buildings.
   b.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-value as required by the Energy Code, but not less than R-30
rating applied between the ceiling joists.
   c.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
      1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic enclosure
shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
      2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
   d.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line and shall
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted by this code. The
total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of
the room.
   L1215.2.5 Floors. Floors must be STC rating of 25 or greater, or approved
for 65 dB or higher. This includes floors exposed to outside air; e.g. floors
over garage, raised floors over pier and beam structures, cantilevered floors
projecting from the exterior walls, etc. which would include all floors subject
to the Energy Code.
   If using floors not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   All crawlspace vents must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-
rigid insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is
at least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached
to prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall
also be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   L1215.2.6 Ventilation.
   a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the applicable
code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
   b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used.
   c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety-degree (right angle)
bends.
   d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   L1215.2.7 Fireplaces. Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be
fitted with a spark arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass
doors across the front of the firebox.
   L1215.2.8 Wall and Ceiling Openings
   a.   Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be grouted
or caulked airtight, except for weep holes.
   b.   Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an
interior rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are
prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air
conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less
standard in the room to which they provide access.
   c.   At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
   L1215.3 Building requirements for construction in the 70 dB Contour
   L1215.3.1 Exterior Windows. Exterior windows must have STC rating 30 or
greater, or approved for 70 dB or higher. It is permitted to use windows and
doors of less than 30 STC but not less than 25 STC rating, provided the wall is
upgrade to an STC 38 or higher, and non-compliance windows/door area shall not
exceed 20% of the floor area per room.
   If using other windows not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not exceed 20
percent of the floor area.
   L1215.3.2 Exterior walls. Exterior walls must have STC rating of 30 or
greater, or approved for 70 dB or higher. Walls that are exterior of the
protected use, but interior to the building, separating the protected use from
the remainder area, such as, an enclosed garages, unused space, warehouse,
etc., may be reduced to an STC of 25. When the wall separates the protected use
from an unfinished tenant space, the outside finish of the wall need not be
installed until the space is finished out.
   If using other walls not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   L1215.3.3 Exterior Doors. Exterior doors must be STC rating 30 or greater,
or approved for 70 dB or higher. It is permitted to use windows and doors of
less than 30 STC but not less than 25 STC rating, provided the wall is upgrade
to an STC 38 or higher, and non-compliance windows/door area shall not exceed
20% of the floor area per room.
   Doors that are exterior of the protected use, but interior to the building,
separating the protected use from the remainder area, such as, an enclosed
garages, unused space, warehouse, etc., may be reduced to an STC of 25, or may
use option Door 21, 22 or 23.
   If using other doors not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with the Exterior Window
provisions listed above, unless using door options Door 3a, 3b or 3c.
   L1215.3.4 Roof/Ceiling. Roof/Ceiling assemblies must be STC rating of 30 or
greater, or approved for 70 dB or higher. If using other Roof/Ceiling
assemblies not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide acceptable
manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   a.   An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms on the
uppermost level of Group R buildings.
   b.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-value as required by the Energy Code, but not less than R-30
rating applied between the ceiling joists.
   c.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
      1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic enclosure
shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
      2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
   d.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line and shall
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted by this code. The
total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of
the room.
   L1215.3.5 Floors. Floors must be STC rating of 30 or greater, or approved
for 70 dB or higher. This includes floors exposed to outside air; e.g. floors
over garage, raised floors over pier and beam structures, cantilevered floors
projecting from the exterior walls, etc. which would include all floors subject
to the Energy Code.
   If using other floors not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   All crawlspace vents must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-
rigid insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is
at least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached
to prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall
also be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   L1215.3.6 Ventilation
   a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the applicable
code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
   b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used.
   c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety-degree (right angle)
bends.
   d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   L1215.3 7 Fireplaces. Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be
fitted with a spark arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass
doors across the front of the firebox.
   L1215.3.8 Wall and Ceiling Openings.
   a.   Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be grouted
or caulked airtight, except for weep holes.
   b.   Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an
interior rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are
prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air
conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less
standard in the room to which they provide access.
   c.   At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
   L1215.4 Building requirements for construction in the 75 dB or greater
Contour
   L1215.4.1 Exterior Windows. Exterior windows must have STC rating 35 or
greater, or approved for 75 dB or higher. It is permitted to use windows and
doors of less than 35 STC but not less than 30 STC rating, provided the wall is
upgrade to an STC 44 or higher, and non-compliance windows/door area shall not
exceed 20% of the floor area per room.
   If using other windows not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not exceed 20
percent of the floor area.
   L1215.4.2 Exterior walls. Exterior walls must have STC rating of 35 or
greater, or approved for 75 dB or higher. Walls that are exterior of the
protected use, but interior to the building, separating the protected use from
the remainder area, such as, an enclosed garages, unused space, warehouse,
etc., may be reduced to an STC of 30. When the wall separates the protected use
from an unfinished tenant space, the outside finish of the wall need not be
installed until the space is finished out.
   If using other walls not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   L1215.4.3 Exterior Doors. Exterior doors must be STC rating 35 or greater,
or approved for 75 dB or higher. It is permitted to use windows and doors of
less than 35 STC but not less than 30 STC rating, provided the wall is upgrade
to an STC 44 or higher, and non-compliance windows/door area shall not exceed
20% of the floor area per room.
   Doors that are exterior of the protected use, but interior to the building,
separating the protected use from the remainder area, such as, an enclosed
garages, unused space, warehouse, etc., may be reduced to an STC of 30, or may
use option Door 21, 22 or 23.
   If using other doors not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   a.   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with the Exterior
Window provisions listed above, unless using door options Door 5a, 5b or 5c.
   b.   The joint between the wall opening and the door frame shall be
continuously filled with glass fiber insulation and the exterior cover trim
shall be continuously caulked to seal the joint.
   L1215.4.4 Roof/Ceiling. Roof/Ceiling assemblies must be STC rating of 35 or
greater, or approved for 75 dB or higher. If using other Roof/Ceiling not
listed in the tables, the applicant must provide acceptable manufacturer's
documentation on STC rating.
   a.   An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms on the
uppermost level of Group R buildings.
   b.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral wool
with a minimum R-value as required by the Energy Code, but not less than R-30
rating applied between the ceiling joists.
   c.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
      1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic enclosure
shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
      2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
   d.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely enclosed
light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening. A
secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line and shall
be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass. The
weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted by this code. The
total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of
the room.
   L1215.4.5 Floors. Floors must be STC rating of 35 or greater, or approved
for 75 dB or higher. This includes floors exposed to outside air; e.g. floors
over garage, raised floors over pier and beam structures, cantilevered floors
projecting from the exterior walls, etc. which would include all floors subject
to the Energy Code.
   If using other floors not listed in the tables, the applicant must provide
acceptable manufacturer's documentation on STC rating.
   All crawlspace vents must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-
rigid insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is
at least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached
to prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall
also be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   L1215.4.6 Ventilation
   a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least the
minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the applicable
code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
   b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used.
   c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety-degree (right angle)
bends.
   d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating type
with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   L1215.4.7 Fireplaces. Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be
fitted with a spark arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass
doors across the front of the firebox.
   L1215.4.8 Wall and Ceiling Openings
   a.   Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be grouted
or caulked airtight, except for weep holes.
   b.   Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an
interior rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are
prohibited. Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air
conditioning, or other openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less
standard in the room to which they provide access.
   c.   At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
SECTION L1216
Sound Waves
   L1216.1 General. The following are examples of compliance issues and
methods.
   Airplanes, jets and helicopters (aircraft) approach structures from
different angles. It is not always from overhead. Low flying aircraft, as well
as, take offs and landings will create sound waves that approach structures
from all sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9827.png]
 
Sound waves are just that, waves. They travel out in a circular method from the
producing object. They enter through openings and in a case like an attic,
reverberate within the cavity. When the entry of such waves cannot be prevented
such as with the installation of attic ventilation, dampening devices are
needed to prevent the reverberation.
Figure 2-2 displays the three different major paths for noise transmission into
a dwelling: air infiltration through gaps and cracks, secondary elements such
as windows and doors, and primary building elements such as walls and the roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9829.png]
Low-frequency sound Is most efficiently transmitted through solid structural
elements such as walls, roofs, doors, and windows. High frequencies travel best
through the air gaps.
Within these broad categories, different building materials have different
responses based on the frequency of the incident sound and varying abilities to
insulate against sound.
   ∙    Ducts to the outside, whether intake or exhaust, and all ducts in the
attic or crawl space can be lined with 1-inch acoustical internal lining
material and have at least one 90-degree (right angle) elbows (turns) thereby
breaking the line-of-sight to the outside as shown in Figure 3-6. It must be
noted that there is concern than this fibrous acoustical lining material will
affect air quality. Installing a duct sound attenuator (silencer) is an
alternative to this technique; there are silencers available that do not
contain fibrous lining. These measures ensure that the ventilation system is
not bringing additional aircraft noise into the house.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9831.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9833.png]
 
Attic Insulation
When considering the upgrade of thermal insulation to reduce noise levels it is
important to understand what the insulation will do. Thermal insulation
materials will act to absorb sound that is reverberating in the attic or in the
space between flat panels. It does not prevent noise from entering the space.
That is, it has no appreciable acoustic "insulating" properties but acts as an
absorbent instead.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9835.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9837.png]
 
When using roof vents, whether a ridge vent or a single vent, a trough should
be constructed and hung from the joists. The trough should be as wide as
possible to cover the area of the vent. For ridge vents, it is preferable that
it extend from joists to joists, leaving enough room around the edges for the
required amount of venting. For single vents, the trough should be installed at
the appropriate angle to match the roof slope.
The trough should be as long as the roof vent, perhaps a few inches longer, and
capped on the ends.
The inside of the trough should be lined with 1" approved semi-rigid sound
insulation.
SECTION L1217
COMPLIANCE TABLES
   L1217.1 For allowable compliance tables of walls, windows, doors, roof/
ceiling and floors, see the Compliance Packet as approved by the Building
Official.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9839.png]
 
(Ord. 9280, § 2, passed 3-3-1985; Ord. 9832, § 2, passed 2-2-1987; Ord. 9960,
§§ 1—3, passed 9-22-1987; Ord. 10115, § 2, passed 5-17-1988; Ord. 10167, §§ 1,
2, passed 9-13-1988; Ord. 10327, § 2, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 10653, §§ 1—8,
passed 8-14-1990; Ord. 10697, § 1, passed 10-16-1990; Ord. 10793, § 1, passed
2-19-1991; Ord. 11388, § 3, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 11515, § 1, passed 3-8-1994;
Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 13625, § 2, passed 10-27-1998; Ord.
13721, § 1, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 13744, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 13811, §
1, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 14043, § 1, passed 1-4-2000; Ord. 14485, § 1, passed
1-16-2001; Ord. 14646, § 2, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 14933, §§ 1, 2, passed 1-22-
2002; Ord. 15533, § 2, passed 4-29-2002; Ord. 15783, § 1, passed 12-9-2003;
Ord. 15948, § 2, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 16162, § 1, passed 10-12-2004; Ord.
17071, § 1, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 17201, § 1, passed 9-25-2006, eff. 10-2-
2006; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17530, § 1, passed 5-1-2007,
eff. 5-10-2007; Ord. 17680, § 1, passed 8-9-2007; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 3,
passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 18338-10-2008, § 5, passed 10-21-2008; Ord. 18459-02-
2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009; Ord. 18473-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-10-2009; Ord.
19117-04-2010, § 1, passed 4-20-2010; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-22-
2011; Ord. 20142-03-2012, § 1, passed 3-27-2012; Ord. 20425-09-2012, § 1,
passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 20427, § 1, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-
2012; Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 21189-04-
2014, § 1, passed 4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord. 21343-07-2014, § 1, passed 7-
22- 2014; Ord. 21344-07-2014, § 1, passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 22372-08-2016, § 1,
passed 8-30-2016; Ord. 22517-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1- 2017;
Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-2017,
§ 1, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 23445-10-2018, § 1, passed 10-16-2018; Ord. 24030-
02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 24514-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-10-2020;
Ord. 25382-03-2022, § 2, passed 3-8- 2022, eff. 4-1-2022; Ord. 26723-02-2024, §
1, passed 2-27-2024, eff. 3-6-2024)
§ 7-48 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting Building Code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 9280, § 3, passed 3-3-1985; Ord. 10115, § 3, passed 5-17-1988; Ord.
10327, § 3, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 11388, § 4, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13625, §
3, passed 10-27-1998; Ord. 14646, § 3, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15948, § 3, passed
4-13-2004; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 3, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22517-12-2016, § 3,
passed 12-6- 2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25382-03-2022, § 3, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-49 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
herein provided.
(Ord. 10115, § 4, passed 5-17-1988; Ord. 10327, § 4, passed 6-20-1989; Ord.
11388, § 5, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13625, § 4, passed 10-27-1998; Ord. 14646, §
4, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15948, § 4, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 4,
passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22517-12-2016, § 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017;
Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23- 2019; Ord. 25382-03-2022,
§ 4, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-50 ACCESSIBILITY STANDARD FOR CERTAIN CITY ASSISTED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
PROGRAMS.
   (a)   This section is to require certain standards in the construction of
new single-family dwellings or one to four units, duplexes and triplexes that
are constructed with city assistance as defined in subsection (b) below, to
make houses more accessible for people with disabilities.
   (b)   The following requirements shall be applicable to the construction of
new, single-family dwellings or one to four units, duplexes and triplexes
(“applicable dwelling units”), with city assistance. For purposes of this
section, “city assistance” shall mean funds for the construction of applicable
dwelling units in any city-funded program, with the funding source of CDBG,
HOME or any other federal, state or local housing programs.
   (c)   The following design requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Requirement 1. Building entrances. Applicable dwelling units must
provide at least one building entrance on an accessible route served by a no-
step entrance or a ramp in compliance with the CABO/ANSI-A117.1, Accessible and
Usable Buildings and Facilities Standard, as adopted by the Fort Worth building
code (“accessibility standard”) and having a maximum slope not to exceed one in
12 (1:12); unless it is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual
characteristics of the site as determined by a City of Fort Worth building
official (“city building official”) upon review of the written request set
forth in subsection (d) below. The building entrance doors shall comply with
the accessibility standard and shall have a minimum clear opening of 32 inches.
The entrance may be at the front, side or back of a dwelling as long as it is
served by an accessible route such as a garage or sidewalk.
      (2)   Requirement 2. Interior doors. All applicable dwelling units,
whether or not on an accessible route, shall provide doors designed to allow
sufficient width for the passage of wheel chairs. Except those serving closets
less than 15 feet square in area, interior doors within an applicable dwelling
unit must provide a minimum of 30 inches clear opening. A two-foot eight-inch
door or standard six foot sliding patio door assembly is deemed sufficient to
comply with this requirement, provided however, compliance with requirements on
maneuvering clearance at doors in the accessibility standard shall not be
mandatory.
      (3)   Requirement 3. Accessible routes into and through the applicable
dwelling unit. An applicable dwelling unit must provide an accessible route
through the hallways and passageways of the first floor of the unit. Further,
the accessible route must provide a minimum width of 36 inches, except through
doors, and be level with ramped or beveled changes at door thresholds.
      (4)   Requirement 4. Wall reinforcement in bathroom. Reinforcement in the
walls shall be provided at designated locations as specified by the
accessibility standard, so that grab bars may be installed, if needed, at a
later date without the necessity of removing portions of the existing wall.
      (5)   Requirement 5. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls. All applicable dwelling units shall be designed
and constructed to contain light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other controls in compliance with the requirements of the accessibility
standard. Where multiple controls serve the same elements (e.g., two remote
switches for a light) only one must be accessible.
   (d)   (1)   Subsection (c) above, requirement 1, building entrances, may be
waived by the city building official when in his or her opinion, due to grade
or site conditions (“conditions”), access by ramp is unattainable.
      (2)   A person requesting said waiver shall file a written request
(“request”) with the city building official at the City of Fort Worth planning
and development department and include all documents necessary to prove the
existence of the conditions. The request shall demonstrate that conditions on
the site render it impossible to comply with the requirements for exterior
accessibility in this section.
      (3)   Within ten calendar days from the receipt of a completed request,
city building official shall render a written decision. A copy of the decision
shall be filed in the official records of the planning and development
department. Appeals to the city building official’s decision shall be made to
the construction and fire prevention board in accordance with §
7-47 of the city code.
(Ord. 14171, §§ 1—4, passed 4-25-2000; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§§ 7-51—7-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IIIA: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
§ 7-61 THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The residential code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2021
edition of the International Residential Code of the International Code Council
(ICC), and the same as amended is hereby adopted as the city's residential
code.
   (b)   The following provisions of the Appendix to the 2021 International
Residential Code are hereby specifically adopted as amended as part of the
Residential Code of the City of Fort Worth:
      (1)   Appendix Chapter AA, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping;
      (2)   Appendix Chapter AB, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliance
Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances listed for use
with Type B vents;
      (3)   Appendix Chapter AC, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Drafts and
Direct-vent Venting Systems;
      (4)   Appendix Chapter AG, Piping Standards for Various Applications;
      (5)   Appendix Chapter AK, Sound Insulation Requirements for Noise
Sensitive Uses near Airports (local amendment);
      (6)   Appendix Chapter AN, Venting Methods;
      (7)   Appendix Chapter AP, Sizing of Water Piping Systems;
      (8)   Appendix Chapter AR, Light Straw-Clay Construction;
      (9)   Appendix Chapter AS, Strawbale Construction; and
      (10)   Appendix Chapter AX, Docks, Piers and Boathouses (local
amendment).
   (c)   The provisions of the building code, mechanical code, plumbing code
and energy code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used as part of this code for
any provision, requirement or method that does not exist in this code. The
Electrical code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used as the electrical
provisions, replacing Chapters 34 through 43 of this code.
   (d)   One copy of the 2021 edition of the International Residential Code,
marked as Exhibit "A", is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed
in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection.
   (e)   Any errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Residential Code, as they are discovered, are considered
as part of this code.
(Ord. 14649, § 1, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15949, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
17681-08-2007, § 1, passed 8-9-2007; Ord. 19602-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-22-2011;
Ord. 22519-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25383-03-2022, §
1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-62 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2021 edition of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   **IRC Chapter 1; Chapter 1, "Part I - Scope and Application" and "Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement" provisions of this Code shall be governed by
the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IRC SECTION R202
DEFINITIONS
   *IRC Section R202; definitions are deleted, changed and new definitions are
added to read as follows:
ATTIC. The space between the ceiling assembly and the roof assembly. The
installation of decking, other than the minimum decking required for equipment
access and maintenance, shall be considered another floor.
ATTIC, HABITABLE. (deleted)
BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Any of the following shall be considered as a change of
occupancy where the current International Building Code requires a greater
degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of
egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
   1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.
   2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of activity
within, a building or structure.
   3.   A change of use.
The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and access
to and from the building structure or site, as necessary to achieve the purpose
of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
CHANGE OF USE. A change in the use of a building or a portion of a building,
within the same group classification, or from one zoning use category to
another, for which there is a change in application of the code requirements.
CODE OFFICIAL. Where ever the term code official is used in this Code it shall
mean building official.
EGRESS COURT. A court or yard which provides access to a public way for one or
more exits.
ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
FIRE RETARDANT TREATED WOOD. Pressure-treated lumber and plywood in accordance
with Sections 2303.2,2303.2.1, 2303.2.2, 2303.2.3 and 2303.2.4 of the Building
Code that exhibit reduced surface burning characteristics and resist
propagation of fire.
FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction.
MEDIA ROOM. A space intended primarily for viewing or listening to media. Space
may include but are not limited to large screen televisions, surround sound
systems, and comfortable seating.
OCCUPIED ROOF. Uncovered roof or roof deck, designed to be occupied for uses
other than mechanical equipment or building services, including but not limited
to swimming pools, dining, amusement, gardens and parking. Such areas shall be
considered as another level in which an occupancy exists.
PATIO COVER. One-story structures not exceeding 12 feet (3657 mm) in height.
Enclosure walls shall be permitted to be of any configuration, provided the
open or glazed area of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at
least 65 percent of the area below a minimum of 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) of
each wall, measured from the floor. Openings shall be permitted to be enclosed
with (1) insect screening, (2) approved translucent or transparent plastic not
more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness, (3) glass conforming to the
provisions of Section R308, or (4) any combination of the foregoing.
PLUMBING. For the purpose of using Chapters 25 through 33, as adopted, shall
mean:
      The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing
appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to any structure, in
connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting
systems, and public or private water supply systems.
For the purpose of complying with the Texas State Plumbing License Law, shall
mean:
      All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances, including disposal
systems, drain or waste pipes, or any combination of these that:
      supply, recirculate, drain, or eliminate water, gas, medical gasses and
vacuum, liquids, and sewage for all personal or domestic purposes in and about
buildings where persons live, work, or assemble; connect the building on its
outside with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or combinations
of these, on the premises, or the water main on public property; and carry
waste water or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service lateral on
public property or the disposal or septic terminal that holds private or
domestic sewage.
      The installation, repair, service, maintenance, alteration, or renovation
of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances on premises where
persons live, work, or assemble that supply gas, medical gasses and vacuum,
water, liquids, or any combination of these, or dispose of waste water or
sewage.
PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and the
International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term "Plumbing
Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
PLUMBING SYSTEM. For the purpose of using this code, as adopted, shall mean:
      Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and
traps, supports and appurtenances; water-treating or water-using equipment;
soil, waste and vent pipes; sanitary drains, storm sewers and building sewers
to an approved point of disposal, in addition to their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
SLEEPING ROOM. A room intended for sleeping including a closet designed to
accommodate the storage of clothing.
TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical,
Electrical, Sign, and Existing Building codes which regulate the construction,
alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or
structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or
more attached units individually separated by property lines in which each unit
extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two
sides.
WALL, RETAINING. A wall that resists lateral soil load and other imposed loads.
Part III - Building Planning and Construction
CHAPTER 3 - BUILDING PLANNING
IRC TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
   *Table R301.2(1); fill in as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
       WIND DESIGN                                          SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
GROUND                    Special    Wind-      SEISMIC                 Frost           ICE BARRIER  FLOOD   AIR      MEAN
SNOW   Speedd Topographic wind       bourne     DESIGN      Weatheringa line   Termitec UNDERLAYMENT HAZARDg FREEZING ANNUAL
LOAD   (mph)  effectsk    regioni    debris     CATEGORYf               depthb          REQUIREDh            INDEXi   TEMPj
                                     zonem
       10 5
5lb/   mph                                                                     very                  local            64.9
ft2    (3-    NO          NO         NO         A           Moderate    6"     heavy    NO           code    150      °F
       sec-
       gust)
MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIAo
                                                Indoor
                          Altitude   Coincident winter      Indoor winter design dry-   Outdoor winter       Heating
Elevation                 correction wet bulb   design dry- bulb temperature            design dry-bulb      temperature
                          factorr               bulb                                    temperature          difference
                                                temperature
686'                                 75°F                  70°F                       25°F
                                     Indoor     Indoor
                          Daily      summer     summer      Indoor summer design dry-   Outdoor summer       Cooling
Latitude                  range      design     design      bulb temperature            design dry- bulb     temperature
                                     relative   relative                                temperature          difference
                                     humidity   humidity
33°F                     M          50%        55%         75°F                       99°F
 
IRC TABLE R301.5
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS
(in pounds per square foot)
   *IRC Table R301.5; delete the rows "Uninhabitable attics with limited
storagebs", "Habitable attics and attics served with fixed stairs", and
footnote g.
IRC SECTION R302
FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
   *IRC SectionR302.1; changed to read as follows:
   R302.1 Exterior walls. Construction, projections, openings and penetrations
of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings shall comply with Table
R302.1(1); or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section P2904 shall comply with Table R302.1(2)
   Exceptions:
   1.   Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls perpendicular to
the line used to determine the fire separation distance.
   2.   Walls of dwellings and accessory structures located on the same lot.
   3.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool sheds and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar structures, provided the floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet (18.58 m2), are not required to provide wall protection
based on location on the lot. Projections beyond the exterior wall shall not
extend over the lot line.
   4.   Dwellings, detached garages, tool sheds, storage sheds and other
accessory buildings located within 2 feet (610 mm) of a lot line are permitted
to have roof eave projections not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm). Projections
beyond the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line.
   5.   Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are permitted.
   6.   Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed within zero
(0) feet of the property line without fire-resistive or opening protection when
the location of such is approved as required by other City ordinances.
   *IRC Section R302.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   R302.2.1 Double walls. Each townhouse unit shall be separated from other
townhouse units by two 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies tested in
accordance with ASTM El19, UL 263 or Section 703.2.2 of the International
Building Code. (See Figure R302.2.1)
   *IRC Section R302.2.2; changed to read as follows:
   R302.2.2 Common walls. Common walls separating townhouse units shall be
assigned a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Item 1 or 2 and shall be
rated for fire exposure from both sides. Common walls shall extend to and be
tight against the exterior sheathing of the exterior walls, or the inside face
of exterior walls without stud cavities, and the underside of the roof
sheathing. The common wall shared by two townhouse units shall be constructed
without plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents, other than water-
filled fire sprinkler piping in the cavity of the common wall. Electrical
installations shall be in accordance with Chapters 34 through 43. Penetrations
of the membrane of common walls for electrical outlet boxes shall be in
accordance with Section R302.4. (See Figures R302.2.2(l) and R302.2.2(2))
   1.   Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 is
provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM El19, UL 263 or Section 703.2.2 of
the International Building Code.
   2.   Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 is
not provided, the common wall shall be not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance-
rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM El19, UL 263 or Section
703.2.2 of the International Building Code.
   Exception: Common walls are permitted to extend to and be tight against the
inside of the exterior walls if the cavity between the end of the common wall
and the exterior sheathing is filled with a minimum of two 2- inch no mina l
thickness wood studs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9845.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9843.png]
Figure R302.2.2(2)
Townhouse Separation
Multiple Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9847.png]
 
   *IRC Section 302.3; add an exception 3 and 4 to read as follows:
   3.   Newly constructed two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a
property line through the structure shall be separated as required for
townhouses.
   4.   Existing two-family dwelling units divided by a property line with a
replat shall comply with this code or with the following:
      a.   All penetrations in the existing demising wall will be fire-caulked
and sealed to prevent and/or reduce penetration of fire.
      b.   All holes shall be appropriately repaired, patched and sealed.
      c.   The dividing wall must be continued through the attic space to the
underside of the roof deck with no less than 5/8" Type-X gypsum board each
side.
   *IRC Section 302.7; changed to read as follows:
   R302.7 Under-stair protection. Enclosed space under stairs that is accessed
by a door or access panel shall have walls, under-stair surface and any soffits
protected on the enclosed side with 5/8-inch (15.8 mm) fire-rated gypsum board
or one-hour fire-resistive construction.
   Exception: Not less than 1/2-inch gypsum board or equivalent when the
dwelling unit is provided with a fire sprinkler system, and sprinkler head
coverage is provided in the enclosed accessible space.
IRC SECTION R303
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
   *IRC Section R303.3, exception; changed to read as follows:
   Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and
a local exhaust system, complying with one of the following, are provided.
   1.   The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with
Section M1507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the
outdoors. For the purpose of this exception, to the outdoors shall mean through
the wall or roof deck using approved products installed in accordance with
manufacturer's installation instructions. Or, in lieu of the exterior, bathroom
vents may terminate within 6" of an attic eave vent
   2.   Bathrooms that contain only a water closet, lavatory or water closet
and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan
or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
   *IRC Section 303.9; add exception 4 to read as follows:
   4.   Required glazed openings may face into a patio cover when in compliance
with Section R328.
   *IRC Section R303.10; change to read as follows:
   R303.10 Required heating. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) at a point
3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 2 feet (610 mm) from exterior walls in all
habitable rooms at the design temperature. The installation of one or more
portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this
section.
IRC SECTION R311
MEANS OF EGRESS
   *IRC Section R311.1.1; added to read as follows:
   R311.1.1 Fire separation distance. Exterior stairways and ramps shall have a
minimum of 3 feet fire separation distance as defined in this code, measured
from the outside edge of the stair or ramp.
IRC SECTION R312
GUARDS AND WINDOW FALL PROTECTION
   *IRC Section R312.2.1; add #3 to read as follows:
   3.   Operable windows without fall protection installed in the original
portion of a historical contributing structure, when creating or installing new
windows, or when adjusting the window dimensions of an existing window, as
approved by the Historical Cultural and Landmark Commission during their
approval process when determined to be appropriate to maintain the historical
significance.
[F] IRC SECTION R313
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   *IRC Section R313; deleted.
IRC SECTION R314
SMOKE ALARMS
   *IRC Section R314.3; Change #2 and add item #6 to read as follows:
   R314.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
   1.   In each sleeping room.
   2.   Outside each separate sleeping area and each media room in the
immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and media room.
   3.   On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and
habitable attics and not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In
dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than
one full story below the upper level.
   4.   Not less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally from the door or opening of
a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent
placement of a smoke alarm required by this section.
   5.   In the hallway and in the room open to the hallway in dwelling units
where the ceiling height of a room open to a hallway serving bedrooms exceeds
that of the hallway by 24 inches (610 mm) or more.
   6.   In each media room
IRC SECTION R315
CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS
   *IRC Section R315.2.2; exception 2 changed to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
   2.   Installation, alteration or repair of electrical or plumbing systems.
IRC SECTION R317
PROTECTION OF WOOD AND WOOD-BASED PRODUCTS AGAINST DECAY
   *IRC Section R317.1; change item 3 to read as follows:
   3.   Sills and sleepers on a concrete or masonry slab that is in direct
contact with the ground unless separated from such slab by an impervious
moisture barrier, except that all exterior wall bottom plates shall be of
naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.
   *IRC Section R317.5; added to read as follows:
   R317.5 Weather exposure. All wood or other products exposed to the weather
shall be painted or treated with an approved treatment, or shall possess a
natural or inherent protection method.
IRC SECTION R318
PROTECTION AGAINST SUBTERRANEAN TERMITES
   *IRC Section R318.1; changed and an exception added to read as follows:
   R318.1 Subterranean termite control. In areas favorable to damage from
termites as indicated by Table R301.2, protection shall be one of the following
methods, or a combination of the following methods, or provided with other
industry accepted methods of termite protection.
   {'{'}Items 1 through 6 unchanged{'}'}
   Exception: When chemicals or other methods of protection are undesirable to
the owner/buyer provided an exposed exterior surface in compliance with Figure
R401.3 is provided.
IRC SECTION R322
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
   *IRC Section R322.1; changed to read as follows:
   R322.1 General. Buildings and structures, when permitted to be constructed
in whole or in part in flood hazard areas, including A or V Zones and Costal A
Zones, as established by other applicable regulations and substantial
improvements and repair of substantial damage of buildings and structures in
flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
provisions specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works or,
when permitted, as contained in this section. Buildings and structures that are
located in more than one flood hazard area shall comply with the provisions
associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area. Buildings and
structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be
designed and construed in accordance with the provisions specified by the
Department of Transportation and Public Works or, when permitted, in accordance
with ASCE 24.
IRC SECTION R327
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
   *IRC Section R327.1.1; added to read as follows:
   R327.1.1 Adjacency to Structural Foundation. Depth of the swimming pool and
spa shall maintain a ratio of 1:1 from the nearest building foundation or
footing of a retaining wall.
   Exception: A sealed engineered design drawing of the proposed new structure
shall be submitted for approval.
IRC SECTION R331
WOOD RETAINING WALLS
   *IRC Section R331; added to read as follows:
   R331 Wood retaining walls. Wood retaining walls exceeding four (4) feet in
height shall be constructed of new wood properly treated for such use.
Measurement shall be from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.
IRC SECTION R332
PATIO COVERS
   *IRC Section R332; added to read as follows:
   R332.1 Scope. Patio covers shall conform to the requirements of this
section.
   R332.2 Permitted uses. Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached from
or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used only for
recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as carports, garages, storage
rooms or habitable rooms.
   R332.3 Light and Ventilation/Emergency Egress. Exterior openings required
for light and ventilation shall be permitted to open into a patio cover,
provided that the patio cover shall be unenclosed if such openings are serving
as emergency egress or rescue openings from sleeping rooms. Where such exterior
openings serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio cover, unless
unenclosed, shall be provided with exits confirming to the provisions of
Section R311.
CHAPTER 4 - FOUNDATIONS
IRC SECTION R401
GENERAL
   *IRC Section 401.2; add second paragraph to read as follows:
   R401.2 Requirements. Foundation construction ...{'{'}bulk of section
unchanged{'}'} ... installed and tested in accordance with accepted engineering
practice.
   Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-
tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a
Texas-registered engineer.
   *IRC Section 401.3; changed to read as follows:
   R401.3 Drainage. Surface drainage shall be diverted to a storm sewer
conveyance or other approved point of collection that does not create a hazard.
Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from the foundation. The grade
shall fall a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) within the first 10 feet (3048 mm).
See Figure R401.3.
   Exception: {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
IRC FIGURE R401.3
DRAINAGE AND TERMITE PROTECTION
   *IRC Figure No. 401.3; added as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9855.png]
 
   *IRC Section R401. 5; added to read as follows :
   R401. 5 Mini mum distan ce of swim ming pools from foundations. Swimming
pools may not be closer to a building foundation than one horizontal foot at
finish grade for every vertical foot of swimming pool depth.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Systems designed by an engineer registered in the State of Texas.
   2.   Swimming pools 5 feet or greater from the foundation.
IRC SECTION R403
FOOTINGS
   *IRC Section R403.1.1; add a sentence and a second paragraph to read as
follows:
   Before using Table R403.1(l) through R403.1(3) or Table R403.4 for any value
above 1,500 psf, a report establishing the load-bearing value of the soil shall
be submitted.
   Unless in soils considered inadequate, as determined by the Building
Official, for structures of standard construction in which engineering design
is not used, Figure No. R403.1.1 may be accepted as an alternate foundation
design for the occupancies and conditions specified.
IRC FIGURE R403.1.1
PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS
   *IRC Figure No. 403.1.1; added as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9853.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9851.png]
 
CHAPTER 6 - WALL CONSTRUCTION
IRC SECTION R602
WOOD WALL FRAMING
   *IRC Section R602.6.1; change to read as follows:
   R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is
placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall
necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50
percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick
(1.37 mm) (16Ga) and 3 inches (76 mm) wide minimum shall be fastened across and
the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch)
having a minimum length of 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent.
Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The
metal tie must extend not less than 6 inches past the opening. See Figure
R602.6.1.
   Exception: When the entire side of the wall with the notch or cut is covered
by wood structural panel sheathing. However, piping and duct protection as
required in other provisions will still be required.
   *IRC Figure R602. 6.1; delete and replace as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9849.png]
 
CHAPTER 7 - WALL CONVERGING
IRC SECTION R703
EXTERIOR COVERING
   *IRC Section R703. 8.4.1; chang e to read as follow s:
   R703.8.4.1 Size and spacing. Veneer ties, if strand wire, shall be not less
... {'{'}bulk of section unchanged{'}'} ... Each tie shall support not more
than 2.67 square feet (0.25 m2) of wall area and shall be spaced according to
one of the following methods:
   1.   When ties are placed on studs 16" o.c., they shall be spaced no further
apart than approximately 24" vertically starting approximately 12" from the
foundation.
   2.   When ties are placed on studs 24" o.c., they shall be spaced no further
apart than approximately 16" vertically starting approximately 8" from the
foundation.
   Exception: {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   *IRC Table R703.8.4(l); add a footnote "g" to read as follows:
 
BACKING AND TIE MINIMUM TIE MINIMUM TIE FASTNERa,c AIRSPACE
 
   g.   When using ties that will flex when pushed (sheet metal ties), spot
bedding of cement mortar shall be installed on all such ties.
CHAPTER 8 - ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION
IRC SECTION R802
WOOD ROOF FRAMING
   *IRC Section R802.4.5; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: In lieu of bracing to a bearing wall, purlins may be braced to a
double floor joists using the spans permitted by Table R502.3.1(l), Dead Load =
10 psf, for 12 o.c. spacing. If this double floor joist is not elevated above
the ceiling below, but is installed such that the bottom edge is in contact
with the ceiling material, the double joists must comply with the above span
provisions, and also be one depth size, nominal 2", larger than the other
ceiling joists.
CHAPTER 9 - ROOF ASSEMBLIES
IRC SECTION R902
FIRE CLASSIFICATION
   *IRC Section 902.1; changed and exception 5 added to read as follows:
   R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as
set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B or C roofing shall be
installed. Classes A, B and C roofing required by this section to be listed
shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry
and exposed concrete roof deck.
   2.   Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or
sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate
installed on noncombustible decks.
   3.   Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounces per square foot
cooper sheets installed over combustible decks
   4.   Class A roof assemblies include slate installed over underlayment over
combustible decks.
   5.   Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached
buildings of U occupancies having not more than 200 sq.ft, of projected roof
area. When exceeding 200 sq.ft, of projected roof area, one-story detached
buildings of U occupancies may use nonrated non-combustible coverings.
IRC SECTION R908
REROOFING
   *IRC Sections R908.7 and R908.8; added to read as follows:
   R908.7 Maintain existing provisions. When reroofing, or repairing existing
roofing, the installer is required to insure the following items are
maintained:
   1.   Existing roof drains and drainage systems are maintained clear an
unobstructed. When in the opinion of the Building Official the existing
drainage system appears inadequate, the system shall be re-evaluated and when
necessary required to comply with the provisions for new construction.
   2.   Fire-retardant requirements are maintained.
   R908.8 Attic space. Construction of a sloped or flat roof over an existing
roof in a manner that creates an attic or a concealed space shall require the
removal of any existing roofing material, composed of tar, asphalt or roof
insulation, from the newly created attic space.
Part IV - Energy Conservation
CHAPTER 11 - [RE] ENERGY EFFICIENCY
IRC SECTION N1101
GENERAL
   *IRC Section N1101.1; changed to read as follows:
   [E] 1101.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design and construction of
buildings for energy efficiency.
   [E] 1101.1.1 Criteria. Buildings shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the International Energy Conservation Code.
   {'{'}remainder of chapter deleted{'}'}
Part V - Mechanical
CHAPTER 13 - GENERAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
IRC SECTION M1305
APPLIANCE ACCESS
   *IRC Section 1305.1.2; changed to read as follows:
   M1305.1.2 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be
provided ... {'{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... where access is
required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches
by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large
enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, access to the
attic space shall be provided by one of the following:
   1.   A permanent stair.
   2.   A pull down stair with minimum weight capacity of 300 lbs.
   3.   An access door from an upper floor level.
   4.   An access panel, only when the equipment can be reached from the panel
opening and only with prior approval of the code official.
   Exceptions:
      1.   The passageway and level service space are not required where the
appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening
      2.   Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829
mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway
shall be not greater than 50 feet (15 250 mm) in length.
   Solid flooring as specified for the passageway of this section shall be
flooring that complies with the provisions as required for a floor or shall not
be less than one layer of 3/4" plywood.
   Water heaters shall not be installed in residential attics.
   Exception: Tankless water heaters.
   *IRC Section M1305.1.2.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
   *IRC Section M1305.1.3.3; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
CHAPTER 14 - HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES
IRC SECTION M1411
HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT
   *IRC Section M1411.3.2; changed to read as follows:
   M1411.3.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate
disposal system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper, cross-linked polyethylene,
CPVC, galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene or PVC pipe or
tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature and exposure
rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance
with the applicable provisions of Chapter 30. Condensate waste and drain line
size shall be not less than the discharge size of the pan but not less than 3/
4-inch (19 mm) nominal diameter and shall not decrease in size from the drain
pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from
more than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or
tubing shall be sized in accordance with Table 314.2.2 of the International
Plumbing Code.
CHAPTER 15 - EXHAUST SYSTEMS
IRC SECTION M1502
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
   *IRC Section M1502.4.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   The size of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length nor at the
point of termination.
   *IRC Section M1502.4.2; changed to read as follows:
   M1502.4.2 Duct Installation. Exhaust ducts shall be support at 4-foot (1219
mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust ducts
joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1 and shall be
mechanically fastened. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar
fasteners that protrude the inside of the duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are
enclosed in wall or ceiling cavities, such cavities shall allow the
installation of the duct without deformation.
IRC SECTION M1503
RANGE HOODS
   *IRC Section M1503.6; changed to read and add exception as follows:
   M1503.6 Makeup air required. Where one or more gas, liquid or solid fuel-
burning appliance that is neither direct-vent nor uses a mechanical draft
venting system is located within a dwelling unit's air barrier, each exhaust
system capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s)
shall be mechanically or passively provided with makeup air at a rate
approximately equal to difference between exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet
per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with not fewer than one
damper complying with Section M1503.6.2.
   Exception: Makeup air is not required for exhaust systems installed for the
exclusive purpose of space cooling and intended to be operated only when
windows or other air inlets are open. Where all appliances in the house are of
sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the exhaust hood system
shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s)
without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in
excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup
air at a rate approximately to the difference between the exhaust air rate and
600 cubic feet per minute.
IRC SECTION M1505
MECHANICAL VENTILATION
   *IRC Section M1505.2; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water
closet, lavatory or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved
mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from
the air.
CHAPTER 20 - BOILERS AND WATER HEATERS
IRC SECTION M2005
WATER HEATERS
   *IRC Section M2005.1; changed to read as follows:
   M2005.1 General. Water heaters shall be installed in accordance with Chapter
28, the manufacturer's installation instructions and the requirements of this
code. Water heaters, other than tankless water heaters, shall not be installed
in an attic. Access to water heaters shall comply with the requirements of
Section M1305. Gas-fired water heaters shall ...{'{'}remainder of paragraph
unchanged{'}'}.
   *IRC Section 2005.2; changed to read as follows:
   M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be
installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a
bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion
air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be
from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in
accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International
Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device.
Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required.
   *IRC Section 2005.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   M2005.2.1 Water heater access. Access to tankless water heaters that are
located in an attic or any water heater located in an underfloor crawl space is
permitted to be through a closet located in a sleeping room or bathroom where
ventilation of those spaces is in accordance with this code.
Part VI - Fuel Gas
CHAPTER 24 - FUEL GAS
IRC SECTION G2404
GENERAL
   *IRC Section G2404.12; added to read as follows:
   G2404.12 Location. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other
applicable ordinances, no fuel gas system or parts thereof shall be located in
any lot other than the lot which is the site of the building, structure, or
premises served by such facilities.
   No subdivision, sale, or transfer of ownership of existing property shall be
made in such manner that the area, clearance, and access requirements of this
Code are decreased.
IRC SECTION G2412
GENERAL
   *IRC Section 2412.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel
tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag.
The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
   "WARNING
   1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
   Do Not Remove"
IRC SECTION G2415
PIPING SYSTEM INSTALLATION
   *IRC Section G2415.7.1; changed to read as follows:
   G2415.7.1 (404.7.1) Piping through bored holes or notches. Where the piping
is installed through holes or notches in framing members and the piping is
located less than 1 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall,
roof, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached, ...{'{'}Remainder of section
unchanged{'}'}.
   *IRC Section G2415.7.2; changed to read as follows:
   G2415.7.2 (404.7.2) Piping installed in other locations. Where the piping is
located within a framing member and is less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) from the
framing members face to which wall, roof, ceiling or floor membranes will be
attached, ... {'{'}Remainder of section unchanged{'}'}.
   *IRC Section G2415.9; changed to read as follows:
   G2415.9 (404.9) Above-ground piping outdoors. All aboveground piping
installed outdoors shall be elevated not less ... {'{'}remainder of section
unchanged{'}'} ... shall be sealed.
   *IRC Section G2415.12; changed to read as follows:
   G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems, other
than LP Gas systems regulated by the Texas Railroad Commission, shall be
installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) below grade.
   *IRC Section G2415.12.1 (404.12.1); delete.
IRC SECTION G2417
INSPECTIONS, TESTING AND PURGING
   *IRC Section G2417.1; changed to read as follows:
   G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all
piping installations shall be visually inspected and pressure tested to
determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and instillation practices
comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the
applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine
compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give
reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is
ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the
inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit
holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the
test pressure prescribed in the following tests.
   *IRC Section G2417.1.3; delete.
   *IRC Section G2417.4, G2417.4.1 and G2417.4.2; changed to read as follows:
   G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured
with a diaphragm gauge designed and calibrated to read, record or indicate a
pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of
pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Gauges shall be
calibrated per manufacturer's recommendation or at a minimum of one (1) time
per year, to insure accuracy.
   G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. {'{'}no change{'}'}.
   G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length
of time satisfactory to the code official, but not less than 15 minutes.
   *IRC Section 2417.4.3; added to read as follows:
   G2417.4.3 (406.4.3) Mixed gas piping systems. Welded and non-welded gas
piping systems shall not be mixed without the installation of cut-off devices
so that each system can be isolated and tested separately as required in this
section.
   Existing mixed piping systems lawfully in existence at the time of the
adoption of this code may remain. Any retesting of such a mixed system shall be
at the lower testing pressure required for the piping involved. Such a system
shall be so labeled with the operating pressure in a manner as required by the
Code Official.
IRC SECTION G2420
SHUTOFF VALVES
   *IRC Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); changed to read as follows:
   G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve...{'
{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged{'}'}... in accordance with the appliance
manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within
3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox.
IRC SECTION G2421
FLOW CONTROL
   *IRC Section G2421.1 (410.1); add a second paragraph and exception to read
as follows:
   Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to
appliances as specified in Section M1305.
   Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the
regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic
opening.
IRC SECTION G2422 (411)
APPLIANCE CONNECTIONS
   *IRC Section G2421.1 (410.1); delete exceptions as follows:
   G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) Prohibited locations and penetrations. Connectors
shall not be concealed within, or extended through, walls, floors, partitions,
ceilings or appliance housings.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Rigid steel pipe connectors shall be permitted to extend through
openings in appliance housings.
   2.   Fireplace inserts that are factory equipped with grommets, sleeves or
other means of protection in accordance with the listing of the appliance.
IRC SECTION G2439
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
   *IRC Section G2439.7.1; changed to read as follows:
   G2439.7.1 (614.9.1) Material and Size. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth
interior finish and shall be construed of metal a minimum of 0.016-inch (0.4
mm) thick. The exhaust duct size shall be 4" (102 mm) nominal in diameter. The
size of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length nor at the point
of termination.
   *IRC Section G2439.7.2; changed to read as follows:
   G2439.7.2 (614.92) Duct Installation. Exhaust ducts shall be support at 4-
foot (1219 mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall
extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Ducts
shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude the inside
of the duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without
deformation.
IRC SECTION G2445
UNVENTED ROOM HEATERS
   *IRC Section G2445.2; changed to read as follows:
   G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not
be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
   Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in
dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when
installed, when approved by the building official unless an unsafe condition is
determined to exist as described in Section R115.
IRC SECTION G2448
   *IRC Section G2448.1.1; changed to read as follows:
   G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water
heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald
protection shall be in accordance with this code. Water heaters, other than
tankless water heaters, shall not be installed in attics.
Part VII - Plumbing Code
CHAPTER 25 - PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION
IRC SECTION P2503
INSPECTION AND TESTS
   *IRC Section P2503.8.1 and P2503.8.2; changed to read as follows:
   P2503.8.1 (312.10.1) Inspections. Annual inspections shall be made of all
backflow prevention assemblies to determine whether they are operable. In the
absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that testing is
performed.
   P2503.8.2 (312.10.2) Testing. Reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers, double check valve assemblies, reduced pressure detector fire
protection backflow prevention assemblies, double detector check valve
assemblies, hose connection backflow preventers, spillproof vacuum breakers and
pressure vacuum breaker assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation,
immediately after repairs or relocation and at least annually. The testing
procedure shall be performed in accordance with applicable local provisions. In
the absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that
testing is done in accordance with one of the standards listed in the Plumbing
Code Section 312.
CHAPTER 26 - GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
IRC SECTION P2602
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
   *IRC Section P2602.3; added to read as follows:
   P2602.3 (301.8) Location. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other
applicable ordinances, no plumbing system, drainage system, building sewer,
private sewage disposal system or parts thereof, shall be located in any lot
other than the lot which is the site of the building, structure, or premises
served by such facilities.
   No subdivision, sale, or transfer of ownership of existing property shall be
made in such manner that the area, clearance, and access requirements of this
Code are decreased.
IRC SECTION P2603
STRUCTURAL AND PIPING PROTECTION
   *IRC Section P2603.2.2; added to read as follows:
   P2603.2.2 (305.7) Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of
a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking
garages or other locations in a manner in which they would be exposed to damage
shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner.
   *IRC Section P2603.3; changed to read as follows:
   P2603.3 Protection against corrosion. Metallic piping, except for cast iron,
ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with
steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry.
Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil.
Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a
thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing
shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that
penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be
installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing.
   *IRC Section P2603.5: changed to read as follows:
   P2603.5 (305.4) Freezing. In localities having a winter design temperature
of 32 degrees (0° C) or lower as shown in Table R301.2(l) of this code, above
ground water, soil or waste pipes shall not be installed outside of a building,
in exterior walls, in attics or crawl spaces, or in any other place subjected
to freezing temperatures unless adequate provision is made to protect such
pipes from freezing by insulation (3/4" wall in attics or under floor and wall
in exterior walls) or heat or both. Water service shall be installed not less
than 12 inches (305 mm) deep and not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the
frost line.
   *IRC Section P2603.5.1; changed to read as follows:
   P2603.5.1 (305.4.1) Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12
inches (304 mm) below grade.
CHAPTER 27 - PLUMBING FIXTURES
IRC SECTION P2706
WASTE RECEPTORS
   *IRC Section P2706.1.2; changed to read as follows:
   P2706.1.2 (802.4.3) Standpipes. Standpipes shall be individually trapped.
Standpipes shall extend a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) and a maximum of 42
inches (1067 mm) above the trap weir. Access shall be provided to all standpipe
traps and drains for rodding. Standpipes serving automatic clothes washers
shall have their traps above the floor level. No standpipe shall be installed
below the ground.
   *IRC Section P2706.1.3; added to read as follows:
   P2706.1.3 (804.1) Condensate waste. When the condensate waste from air
conditioning coils discharges by direct connection to a lavatory tailpiece or
to an approved accessible inlet on a bathtub overflow, the connection shall be
located in the area controlled by the same person controlling the air-
conditioned space.
IRC SECTION P2709
SHOWER RECEPTORS
   *IRC Section P2709.2 (421.5.2); change the second paragraph to read as
follows:
   The lining material shall extend not less than 3 inches (76 mm) beyond or
around the rough jambs and not less than 3 inches (76 mm) above finish
thresholds and shall extend outward over the threshold, when present, and
fastened to the outside of the threshold jamb. Sheet-applied load bearing,
bonded waterproof membranes shall be applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
IRC SECTION 2724
SPECIALTY TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES AND VALVES
   *IRC Section P2724.1 (501.8); add a sentence at the end to read as follows:
   Temperature controls of a water heater shall not be used as the temperature
control for tempered water.
CHAPTER 28 - WATER HEATERS
IRC SECTION P2801
GENERAL
   *Section P2801; change to read as follows:
   P2801.6 Required pan. Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water
storage tank is installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will
cause damage, the tank shall be installed in a pan constructed of one of the
following:
   1.   Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm)
in thickness.
   2.   Plastic not less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) in thickness.
   3.   Other approved materials.
IRC SECTION P2804
RELIEF VALVES
   *IRC Section P2804.6.1; changed to read as follows:
   P2804.6.1 (504.6) Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping
serving a pressure-relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination valve
shall:
   1.   Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
   2.   When the drain pipe is run exposed in an area outside of the room where
the water heater is located, in a manner that would make it subject to damage,
the drain shall discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the
water heater.
   3.   Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and
shall discharge full size to the point of disposal.
   4.   Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving
any other relief device or equipment.
      Exception: Multiple relief devices of a single tenant may be installed to
a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the code official and
permitted by the manufacture's installation instructions and installed with
those instructions. Relief devices of multiple tenants may only share the same
discharge system when approved by the code official and the discharge point is
in a common area under the building owner's control.
   5.   Discharge to the floor drain, to an indirect waste receptor or to the
outdoors. The point of disposal shall not be in another tenant area. Where
discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping
shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located
in a conditioned area. The discharge pipe shall not discharge into the pan
required in Section P2801.5.
      Exception: When a water heater retrofit or replacement occurs on a slab
foundation and the line cannot be discharged to an approved location the T&P
discharge line can be piped to the water heater pan provided with all of the
following:
      1.   An approved mechanical device is installed that will shut off the
water supply to the water heater when water is detected inside the pan;
      2.   A device is installed that will sound an audible alarm when water is
detected inside the pan to alert the occupants that a leak has occurred.
   6.   Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural
damage.
   7.   Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the
building occupants.
   8.   Not be trapped.
   9.   Be installed so as to flow by gravity.
   10.   Not terminate more than 6 inches (152 mm) above the floor drain or
waste receptor. When discharging outside the building, the point of discharge
shall be with the end of the pipe not more than two (2) feet (610 mm) nor less
than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the ground or the floor level of the area
receiving the discharge and pointing downward.
   11.   Not have a threaded connection at the end of the piping.
   12.   Not have valves or tee fittings.
   13.   Be constructed of those materials listed in Section P2904.5 or
materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME Al
12.4.1.
   14.   Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief-valve outlet,
where the relief-valve discharge piping is constructed of PEX or PE-RT tubing.
The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place.
CHAPTER 29 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
IRC SECTION P2902
PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
   *IRC Section P2902.3; changed to read as follows:
   P2902.3 (608.1) Backflow protection. A means of protection against backflow
shall be provided in accordance with applicable local regulations and Sections
P2902.3.1 through P2902.3.7. Backflow prevention applications shall conform to
Table P2902.3, except as specifically stated in Sections P2902.4 through
P2902.5.5.
   *IRC Section P2902.5.3; changed to read as follows:
   P2902.5.3 (608.17.5) Lawn Irrigation systems. The potable water supply to
lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric
vacuum breaker, a pressure vacuum-breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Valves shall ...{'{'}remainder
of section unchanged{'}'} ... backflow preventer.
IRC SECTION P2903
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
   *IRC Section P2903.2.1; added to read as follows:
   P2903.2.1 (604.4.1) State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated
maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the State
flow rate shall take precedence.
   *IRC Section P2903.9.2; change to read as follows:
   P2903.9.2 (606.1) Water heater or hot water storage tank valve. A readily
accessible full-open valve shall be installed in the cold-water supply pipe to
each water heater or hot water storage tank at or near the water heater or hot
water storage tank. Access to the valve shall be on the same floor, located
near the equipment and only serving the hot water storage tank or water heater.
The valve shall not interfere or cause a disruption of the cold water supply to
the remainder of the cold water system.
CHAPTER 30 - SANITARY DRAINAGE
IRC SECTION P3001
GENERAL
   *IRC Section P3001.4; added to read as follows:
   P3001.4 (701.9) Abandoned building sewers and private disposal systems. All
abandoned building sewers and private sewer disposal systems shall be plugged
or capped in an approved manner. All abandoned treatment tanks and seepage pits
shall have the contents pumped and discarded in an approved manner. The top or
entire tank shall be removed and the remaining portion of the tank or
excavation shall be filled immediately after connection to a public sewer
system or after abandonment of a private sewage disposal system. The permittee
shall be responsible for the filling of the tank.
   * Section P3003.9; change to read as follows:
   P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from
moisture. A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent
cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA
B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be
made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855.
Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
IRC TABLE P3005.4.1
MAXIMUM FIXTURE UNITS ALLOWED TO BE CONNECTED TO BRANCHES AND
STACKS
   *IRC Table P3005.4.1 (710.1(1)); add a footnote "c" for 3 " diameter pipe to
read as follows:
   c No more than three (3) water closets shall be permitted on any 3 inch
diameter horizontal branch or drain.
IRC TABLE P3005.4.2
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FIXTURE UNITS ALLOWED TO BE CONNECTED TO
THE BUILDING DRAIN, BUILDING DRAIN BRANCHES OR THE BUILDING
SEWER
   *IRC Table P3005.4.2 (710.1(2)); add a footnote "c" for 3 " diameter pipe to
read as follows:
   c No more than three (3) water closets shall be permitted on any 3 inch
diameter horizontal branch or drain.
CHAPTER 31- VENTS
IRC SECTION P3103
VENT TERMINALS
   *IRC Section P3103.1; changed to read as follows:
   P3103.1 (903.1.1) Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where the roof
is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection or equipment and
appliance maintenance, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet
(2134 mm) above the roof.
IRC SECTION P3111
COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEM
   *IRC Section P3111.1; changed to read as follows:
   P3111.1 (915.1) Type of fixture. A combination waste and vent system shall
not serve fixtures other than floor drains, standpipes, sinks and lavatories
and indirect waste receptors. A combination waste and vent system shall not
receive the discharge of a food waste grinder.
Part VIII - Electrical Code
IRC CHAPTER 33 THROUGH 43
   *IRC Chapters 33 through 43; delete and replace with the following:
   The Electrical Code, as adopted elsewhere, shall serve as the Electrical
provisions of this code. All references to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical
Code as adopted.
Appendix
IRC APPENDIX K
   *IRC Appendix K; added to read as follows:
APPENDIX K
SOUND INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR NOISE SENSITIVE USES NEAR AIRPORTS
SECTION AK101
GENERAL
   AK101.1 Scope. The regulations and requirements shall apply to all new
residential buildings and new noise-sensitive non-residential buildings, as
defined herein, that are located wholly or partially within the boundaries of
the 65 DNL or greater noise contours as designated in Figure AK101.1(1).
   The term "new" shall apply to new detached buildings built after the
effective date of this ordinance, and shall include later additions or
modifications to those same buildings. The term shall also include a Change of
Occupancy in existing buildings from a non-protected occupancy to one of the
protected occupancies listed herein.
   Buildings in existence prior to the effective date, and additions to or
modifications of those same buildings, shall not be required to comply, except
when a Change of Occupancy from a nonprotected occupancy to one of the
protected uses is involved.
SECTION AKI02
DEFINITIONS
   AK102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
   Aircraft noise - is generally expressed in terms of it’s A-weighted sound
level, in units called "decibels." Strictly speaking, the decibel unit should
be abbreviated only by "dB"; however, for clarity "dBA" and "dB(A)" are often
used to highlight the fact that the sound level measurement has been A-
weighted.
   Noise exposure - in areas around airports is expressed in terms of the Day-
Night Average Sound Level, which is abbreviated by "DNL" in text and "Ldn" in
equations.
   NOISE-SENSITIVE NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS -
   1.   Nursing homes and hospitals, generally classified as Group I; and
   2.   Child day care centers, Adult day care centers and schools, generally
classified as Group E and Group I-4.
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES: Single-family, Two-family, Townhouse, Multi-family,
and Assisted Living uses, generally classified as Group R, whether in a single
occupancy or mixed occupancy.
   Sound insulation properties - of building construction materials are
described by Sound Transmission Loss (TL) or Sound Transmission Class (STC).
The higher the TL or STC value, the less sound will be transmitted through the
building material.
SECTION AK103
PURPOSE
   AKI03.1 General. All buildings and structures with protective uses, as
applicable under this chapter, shall be required to have minimum sound
insulation standards and requirements to protect the persons within designated
noise sensitive buildings from excessive exterior noise through regulation of
design, construction and modification of such buildings. After proper sound
insulation measures are taken, the interior sound level, attributable to
exterior sources, shall not exceed 45 dB.
   With the request for a building permit application, or Change of Use permit
application, submitted plans shall show evidence of compliance with the sound
insulation requirements. Compliance shall consist of submittal of an acoustical
analysis report as follows:
   1.   In accordance with the prescriptive requirements of Section AK104 or
the default ratings of Section AK105; or
   2.   Any qualified design prepared under by a person experienced in the
field of acoustical engineering or a registered architect.
SECTION AK104
BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
   AK104.1 General. Compliance with the following prescriptive provisions shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter.
   AK104.2 Building requirements for construction in the 65 dB zone.
   1.   Exterior Walls.
      Walls that form the exterior envelope may be as listed below and shall be
constructed as follows:
      a.   Wood walls with studs at least 4 inches in nominal depth. Exterior
finish shall be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or
any siding material allowed by this code. Wood, metal or cementitious fiber
siding shall be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
         Wall insulation shall be at least R-13 glass fiber, or mineral wool or
equal and shall be installed continuously throughout the stud space. Foam
insulation, as permitted by this code, shall be accepted provided it solidifies
to a spongy state and not solid or rigid.
         Interior wall finish shall be at least 1/2" gypsum wallboard
      b.   Masonry or concrete load bearing walls. Masonry walls with a surface
weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot will require an interior
supporting studwall that is finished as required by Item a above.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any wall designated in Section AK105 with
a default STC value of 25* or greater.
   2.   Exterior Windows
      Windows in the exterior envelope shall be constructed as follows:
      a.   All openable windows in the exterior walls shall have a laboratory
sound transmission class rating of at least STC 30 dB and shall have air
infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested
according to ASTM E-283; or, shall be double thermopane windows meeting the
requirements of the Energy Code.
      b.   All fixed windows in the exterior walls shall be at least 1/4-inch
thick and shall be set in non-hardening glazing materials; or, shall be double
thermopane windows meeting the requirements of the Energy Code.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any window designated in Section AKI05
with a default STC value of 25* or greater.
      d.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not
exceed 20 percent of the floor area.
   3.   Exterior Doors
      a.   Exterior hinged doors shall be as follows:
         1.   a door and edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 30 dB; or
         2.   a door, other than a hollow core wood door, that complies with
the Energy Code; or,
         3.   any door installed with a storm door; or,
         4.   doors installed as part of a vestibule.
      b.   Sliding glass doors shall have glass that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 30 dB; or, shall be a sliding glass
door that complies with the Energy Code.
      c.   Access doors from a garage to a room within a dwelling shall have a
laboratory sound transmission rating of at least STC 30 dB; or, shall comply
with the Energy Code as a door in the exterior envelope.
      d.   Or, it is permitted to use any door designated in Section AK105 with
a default STC value of 25* or greater.
      i.   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with item 2 above,
unless used in a door as listed in 3a above.
   4.   Roof/Ceiling Construction
      a.   Roof rafters shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and shall be covered
on their top surface with 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code. An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms
on the uppermost level of Group R buildings.
      b.   Commercial type flat roofs are permitted if insulated as required by
the Energy Code and a separate lay-in ceiling is added below with an airspace
between the two.
      c.   Cathedral ceilings are discouraged but, if installed, must have
enough space to install the insulation of Item d below, with a minimum of 6"
air space between the insulation and the roof deck.
      d.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral
wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      e.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
         1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic
enclosure shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid
insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at
least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to
prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also
be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
         2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
      f.   Ceilings shall be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick;
         or,
         1/2" gypsum board on resilient channels (RC) installed 16" o.c.
perpendicular to the joists. Gypsum screws into the RC shall not be long enough
to penetrate the wood stud by more than 1/4" if occurring over the stud
location;
         or,
         a lay-in ceiling with an airspace.
      g.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line and
shall be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic, tempered or laminated glass.
The weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted by this code. The
total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of the roof area of
the room.
   5.   Floors
      The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade
or over a fully enclosed basement or crawlspace. All door and window openings
in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. All crawlspace vents
must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   6.   Ventilation
      a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least
the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the Mechanical
Code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
      b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used,
      c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten- foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety degree (right angle)
bends.
      d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating
type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   7.   Fireplaces
      Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be fitted with a spark
arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass doors across the
front of the firebox.
   8.   Wall and Ceiling Openings
      Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an interior
rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited.
Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air conditioning, or other
openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less standard in the room to
which they provide access.
      At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
   *STC ratings may overstate the actual attenuation provided by as much as 3
dB, therefore, 25 STC rating in lieu of 20 is mandated.
   AK104.3 Building requirements for construction in the 70 dB zone.
   1.   Exterior Walls
      Walls that form the exterior envelope may be as listed below and shall be
constructed as follows:
      a.   Wood walls with studs at least 4 inches in nominal depth. Exterior
finish shall be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or
any siding material allowed by this code. Wood, metal or cementitious fiber
siding shall be installed over 1/2-inch solid sheathing.
         Wall insulation shall be at least R-13 glass fiber, or mineral wool or
equal and shall be installed continuously throughout the stud space. Foam
insulation, as permitted by this code, shall be accepted provided it solidifies
to a spongy state and not solid or rigid.
         Interior wall finish shall be at least 5/8-inch gypsum wallboard or
plaster; or,
         1/2" gypsum wallboard installed on resilient channels (RC) installed
16" o.c. perpendicular to the studs. Gypsum screws into the RC shall not be
long enough to penetrate the wood stud by more than 1/4" if occurring over the
stud location.
      b.   Masonry or concrete load bearing walls. Masonry walls with a surface
weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot will require an interior
supporting studwall that is finished as required by Item a above.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any wall designated in Section AK105 with
a default STC value of 30* or greater. When using door/window openings with a
default STC value of less than 30 STC but not less than 25 STC, the STC of the
wall shall be downrated by 20%.
   2.   Exterior Windows
      Windows in the exterior envelope shall be constructed as follows:
      a.   All openable windows in the exterior walls shall have a laboratory
sound transmission class rating of at least STC 35 dB and shall have air
infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested
according to ASTM E-283.
      b.   All fixed windows in the exterior walls of rooms shall:
         1.   Have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC
35 db, or
         2.   Be 5/8-inch laminated glass with a laboratory sound transmission
class rating of at least STC 35 db and shall be set in non-hardening glazing
materials, or
         3.   Be glass block at least 3-1/2 inches thick.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any window designated in Section AK105
with a default STC value of 30* or greater.
      d.   The total area of glazing in rooms used for sleeping shall not
exceed 20 percent of the floor area.
   3.   Exterior Doors
      a.   Exterior hinged doors shall be as follows:
         1.   a door and edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 35 dB; or
         2.   a door, other than a hollow core wood door, that complies with
the Energy Code and installed with a storm door; or,
         3.   doors installed as part of a vestibule.
      b.   Sliding glass doors shall have glass that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 35 dB.
      c.   Access doors from a garage to a room within a dwelling shall have a
laboratory sound transmission rating of at least STC 30 dB; or, shall comply
with the Energy Code as a door in the exterior envelope.
      d.   Or, it is permitted to use any door designated in Section AK105 with
a default STC value of 30* or greater.
      e.   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with item 2 above,
unless used in a door as listed in 3a above.
   4.   Roof/Ceiling Construction
      a.   Roof rafters shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and shall be covered
on their top surface with 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code. An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms
on the uppermost level of Group R buildings.
      b.   Commercial type flat roofs are permitted if insulated as required by
the Energy Code and a separate lay-in ceiling is added below with an airspace
between the two.
      c.   Cathedral ceilings are discouraged but, if installed, must have 3/4"
solid decking above, enough space to install the insulation of Item d below,
with a minimum of 6" air space between the insulation and the roof deck.
      d.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral
wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      e.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
         1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic
enclosure shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid
insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at
least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to
prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also
be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
         2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
      f.   Ceilings shall be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials shall be mounted on resilient channels;
         or,
         a lay-in ceiling with an airspace.
      g.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line or at a
point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing and
the secondary glazing and shall be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted
by this code. The total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
   5.   Floors
      The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade
or over a fully enclosed basement or crawlspace. All door and window openings
in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. All crawlspace vents
must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   6.   Ventilation
      a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least
the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the Mechanical
Code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
      b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used.
      c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten- foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety-degree (right angle)
bends.
      d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating
type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   7.   Fireplaces
      Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be fitted with a spark
arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass doors across the
front of the firebox.
   8.   Wall and Ceiling Openings
      Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an interior
rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited.
Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air conditioning, or other
openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less standard in the room to
which they provide access.
      At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
   *STC ratings may overstate the actual attenuation provided by as much as 3
dB, therefore, 30 STC rating in lieu of 25 is mandated.
   AK104.4 Building requirements for construction in the 75 dB or greater
areas.
   1.   Exterior Walls
      Walls that form the exterior envelope may be as listed below and shall be
constructed as follows:
      a.   Wood walls with studs at least 4 inches in nominal depth. Exterior
finish shall be stucco, minimum 7/8-inch thickness, brick veneer, masonry, or
any siding material allowed by this code. Wood, metal or cementitious fiber
siding shall be installed over 3/4-inch solid sheathing.
         Wall insulation shall be at least R-13 glass fiber, or mineral wool or
equal and shall be installed continuously throughout the stud space. Foam
insulation, as permitted by this code, shall be accepted provided it solidifies
to a spongy state and not solid or rigid.
         Interior wall finish shall be at least 5/8-inch gypsum wallboard
installed on resilient channels (RC) installed 16" o.c. perpendicular to the
studs. Gypsum screws into the RC shall not be long enough to penetrate the wood
stud by more than 1/4" if occurring over the stud location.
      b.   Masonry or concrete load bearing walls. Masonry walls with a surface
weight of less than 40 pounds per square foot will require an interior
supporting studwall that is finished as required by Item a above.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any wall designated in Section AKI05 with
a default STC value of 35* or greater. When using door/window openings with a
default STC value of less than 35 STC but not less than 30 STC, the STC of the
wall shall be downrated by 20%.
   2.   Exterior Windows
      Windows in the exterior envelope shall be constructed as follows:
      a.   All openable windows in the exterior walls shall have a laboratory
sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB and shall have air
infiltration rate of no more than 0.5 cubic feet per minute when tested
according to ASTM E-283.
      b.   All fixed windows in the exterior walls of rooms shall:
         1.   Have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC
40 db, or
         2.   Be 5/8-inch laminated glass with a laboratory sound transmission
class rating of at least STC 40 db and shall be set in non-hardening glazing
materials, or
         3.   Be glass block at least 3-1/2 inches thick.
      c.   Or, it is permitted to use any window designated in Section AKI05
with a default STC value of 35* or greater.
      d.   The total area of windows and doors in rooms used for sleeping shall
not exceed 20 percent of the floor area.
   3.   Exterior Doors
      a.   Exterior hinged doors shall be as follows:
         1.   a door and edge seal assembly that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB; or
         2.   a solid-core wood or insulated metal door at least one (1) inch
thick separated by an airspace of at least four (4) inches from another door,
which can be a storm door. Both doors shall be tightly fitted and weather-
stripped; or,
         3.   doors installed as part of a vestibule.
      b.   Sliding glass doors shall have glass that has a laboratory sound
transmission class rating of at least STC 40 dB;
         or,
         a double sliding glass door, separated by a minimum four-inch
airspace. Each door shall comply with the air leakage rate of the Energy Code.
Glass shall be at least three-sixteenths (3/16) inch thick but not equal in
thickness between the two doors, and tempered or laminated.
      c.   Access doors from a garage to a room within a dwelling shall have a
laboratory sound transmission rating of at least STC 30 dB; or, shall comply
with the Energy Code as a door in the exterior envelope.
      d.   Or, it is permitted to use any door designated in Section AKI05 with
a default STC value of 35* or greater.
         e.   View windows in doors and sidelights shall comply with item 2
above, unless used in a door as listed in 3a above.
         f.   The joint between the wall opening and the door frame shall be
continuously filled with glass fiber insulation and the exterior cover trim
shall be continuously caulked to seal the joint.
   4.   Roof/Ceiling Construction
      a.   Roof rafters shall have a minimum slope of 4:12 and shall be covered
on their top surface with 1/2-inch solid sheathing and any roof covering
allowed by this code. An accessible attic space shall be provided above rooms
on the uppermost level of Group R buildings.
      b.   Commercial type flat roofs are permitted if insulated as required by
the Energy Code and a separate lay-in ceiling is added below with an airspace
between the two.
      c.   Cathedral ceilings are discouraged but, if installed, must have 1"
solid decking above, have enough space to install the insulation of Item d
below, with a minimum of 6" air space between the insulation and the roof deck.
Structural information shall be provided confirming adequate support of the
decking.
      d.   Attic insulation shall be batt or blown-in glass fiber or mineral
wool with a minimum R-30 rating applied between the ceiling joists.
      e.   Attic ventilation, when installed, shall be:
         1.   Gable vents or other attic vents that penetrate the attic
enclosure shall be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid
insulation attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at
least six inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to
prevent direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also
be positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced. Or,
         2.   Eave vents that are located under the roof overhang.
      f.   Ceilings shall be finished with gypsum board or plaster that is at
least 5/8-inch thick. Ceiling materials shall be mounted on resilient channels;
         or,
         a lay-in ceiling with an airspace.
      g.   Skylights shall penetrate the ceiling by means of a completely
enclosed light well that extends from the roof opening to the ceiling opening.
A secondary openable glazing panel shall be mounted at the ceiling line or at a
point that provides at least a 4-inch space between the skylight glazing and
the secondary glazing and shall be glazed with at least 3/16-inch plastic or
laminated glass. The weather-side skylight shall be any type that is permitted
by this code. The total size of skylights shall be no more than 20 percent of
the roof area of the room.
   5.   Floors
      The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade
or over a fully enclosed basement or crawlspace. All door and window openings
in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. All crawlspace vents
must be fitted with a 1/2" plywood panel, with 1" semi-rigid insulation
attached to the surface facing the vent, so that the panel is at least six
inches larger than the vent opening on all sides and is attached to prevent
direct line-of-site perpendicular to the vent. The new panel shall also be
positioned so that the amount of ventilation is not reduced.
   6.   Ventilation
      a.   A ventilation system shall be provided that will provide at least
the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements of the Mechanical
Code, in each room without opening any windows, door or other opening to the
exterior. Openable windows or doors will not be counted for compliance with the
fresh air provisions. Fresh air must be brought in through the HVAC system.
      b.   Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units
shall not be used.
      c.   All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall
contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining.
Each duct shall be provided with a ninety-degree (right angle) bend in the duct
such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting
cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Residential bathroom vents
discharging at an eave vent need only to have two ninety-degree (right angle)
bends.
      d.   Kitchen cooktop vent hoods shall be the non-ducted recirculating
type with no ducted connection to the exterior.
   7.   Fireplaces
      Each fireplace constructed of masonry units shall be fitted with a spark
arrestor, a damper as required by code and shall have glass doors across the
front of the firebox.
   8.   Wall and Ceiling Openings
      Openings in the exterior that degrades its ability to achieve an interior
rating of 45 dB or less when all doors and windows are closed are prohibited.
Any access panels, pet doors, mail delivery drops, air conditioning, or other
openings must be designed to maintain the 45 dB or less standard in the room to
which they provide access.
      At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the
space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the
pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall.
   *STC ratings may overstate the actual attenuation provided by as much as 3
dB, therefore, 35 STC rating in lieu of 30 is mandated.
SECTION AKI04.5
Sound Waves
   AK104.5 General. The following are examples of compliance issues and
methods.
Airplanes, jets and helicopters (aircraft) approach structures from different
angles. It is not always from overhead. Low flying aircraft, as well as, take
offs and landings will create sound waves that approach structures from all
sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9869.png]
 
Sound waves are just that, waves. They travel out in a circular method from the
producing object. They enter through openings and in a case like an attic,
reverberate within the cavity. When the entry of such waves cannot be prevented
such as with the installation of attic ventilation, dampening devices are
needed to prevent the reverberation.
Figure 2-2 displays the three different major paths for noise transmission into
a dwelling: air infiltration through gaps and cracks, secondary elements such
as windows and doors, and primary building elements such as walls and the roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9867.png]
 
Low-frequency sound is most efficiently transmitted through solid structural
elements such as walls, roofs, doors, and windows. High frequencies travel best
through the air gaps.
Within these broad categories, different building materials have different
responses based on the frequency of the incident sound and varying abilities to
insulate against sound.
   ∙    Ducts to the outside, whether intake or exhaust, and all ducts in the
attic or crawl space can be lined with l-inch acoustical internal lining
material and have at least one 90-degree (right angle) elbows (turns) thereby
breaking the line- of-sight to the outside as shown in Figure 3-6. It must be
noted that there is concern than this fibrous acoustical lining material will
affect air quality. Installing a duct sound attenuator (silencer) is an
alternative to this technique; there are silencers available that do not
contain fibrous lining. These measures ensure that the ventilation system is
not bringing additional aircraft noise into the house.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9865.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9863.png]
 
Attic Insulation
When considering the upgrade of thermal insulation to reduce noise levels it is
important to understand what the insulation will do. Thermal insulation
materials will act to absorb sound that is reverberatin g in the attic or in
the space between flat panels. It does not prevent noise from entering the
space. That is, it has no appreciable acoustic "insulating" properties but acts
as an absorbent Instead.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9861.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9859.png]
 
When using roof vents, whether a ridge vent or a single vent, a trough should
be constructed and hung from the joists. The trough should be as wide as
possible to cover the area of the vent. For ridge vents, it is preferable that
it extend from joists to joists, leaving enough room around the edges for the
required amount of venting. For single vents, the trough should be installed at
the appropriate angle to match the roof slope.
The trough should be as long as the roof vent, perhaps a few inches longer, and
capped on the ends.
The inside of the trough should be lined with 1" approved semi-rigid sound
insulation.
SECTION AK104.6
COMPLIANCE TABLES
   AK10 4.6 For allowable compliance tables of walls, windows, doors, roof/
ceiling and floors, see the Compliance Packet, as approved by the building
official.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9857.png]
 
Figure AK101.1(1)
IRC APPENDIX Q
   *IRC Appendix Q; Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs is added to this code as
an Appendix to read as follows:
APPENDIX Q
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
SECTION AQ101
GENERAL
   AQ101.1 General. The provisions of this appendix shall control the design
and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the
lot of a one- or two-family dwelling.
   The provisions of this appendix may be enforced by other code enforcement
divisions of this city but interpretation authority shall be retained by the
building official.
   AQ101.2 Pools in flood hazard areas. Pools that are located in flood hazard
areas established by Table R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground
pools and in-ground pools that involve placement of fill, shall comply with
Section AQ101.2.1 or AQ101.2.2.
   Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of
designated floodways.
   AQ101.2.1 Pools located in designated floodways. Where pools are located in
designated floodways, documentation shall be submitted to the building official
which demonstrates that the construction of the pool will not increase the
design flood elevation at any point within the jurisdiction.
   AQ101.2.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated. Where
pools are located where design flood elevations are specified but floodways
have not been designated, the applicant shall provide a floodway analysis that
demonstrates that the proposed pool will not increase the design flood
elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction.
SECTION AQ102
DEFINITIONS
   AQ102.1 General. For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used
shall be defined as follows and as set forth in Chapter 2.
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool."
BARRIER. A permanent fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof that
completely surrounds the pool or spa and obstructs access to the pool or spa.
The term "permanent" shall mean not being able to be removed, lifted or
relocated without the use of a tool.
HOT TUB. See "Swimming pool."
IN-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool."
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-
family dwelling, or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in
height.
SAFETY COVER. A structure, fabric or assembly, along with attendant
appurtenances and anchoring mechanisms, that is temporarily place or installed
over an entire pool, spa or hot tub, and secured in place afar all bathers are
absent from the water.
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See "Swimming pool."
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in
which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an
integral part of the product.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
contains water more than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground,
above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a
structure and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing
structure.
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.
SECTION AG103
SWIMMING POOLS
   AQ103.1 In-ground pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed
in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5.
   AQ103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools. Above-ground and on-ground pools
shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4.
   AQ103.3 Pools in flood hazard areas. In flood hazard areas established by
Table R301.2(1), pools in coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with ASCE 24.
SECTION AQ104
SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
   AQ104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. Permanently installed spas
and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3.
   AQ104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6.
SECTION AQ105
BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
   AQ105.1 Application. The provisions of this appendix shall control the
design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These
design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drownings
and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
   AQ105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-
ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a
barrier which shall comply with the following:
   1.   The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219mm) above grade
measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool.
The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier
shall be 2 inches (51mm) measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away
from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade,
such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the
pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is
mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between
the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches
(102mm).
   2.   Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter
(102mm) sphere.
   3.   Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone
wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions that form handholds or
footholds, except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
   4.   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and
the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches
(1143mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of
the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm)
in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing
within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
   5.   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and
the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm)
or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm).
Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
   6.   Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm)
square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the
bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
   7.   Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice
fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more
than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
   8.   Access doors or gates shall comply with the requirements of Section
AQ105.2, Items 1 through 7, and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking
device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall open outward away from the pool
and shall be self-closing and have a selflatching device. Doors or gates other
than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a self-latching device. Where
the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54
inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and
openings shall comply with the following:
      8.1   The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate
at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and
      8.2   The gate and barrier shall have not opening greater than 0.5 inch
(13 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
   9.   Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the
following conditions shall apply:
      9.1   Operable windows having a sill height of less than 48 inches (1219
mm) above the indoor finished floor and doors with direct access to the pool or
spa through that wall shall have an alarm that produces an audible warning when
the window, door or their screens are opened. The alarm shall be listed and
labeled as a water hazard entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. In
dwelling units or structures not required to be Accessible units, Type A units
or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be
located 54 inches (1371 mm) or more above the finished floor. In dwellings or
structures required to be accessible unites, Type A units or Type B units, the
operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located not greater
than 54 inches (1372 mm) and not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the
finished floor.
      9.2   A safety cover that is listed and labeled in compliance with ASTM
F1346 is installed for the pool or spa; or
      9.3   An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with
self-latching devices, is provided. Such means of protection shall provide a
degree of protection that is not less than the protection afforded by Item 9.1
or 9.2 described above.
   10.   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the
barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the top of the barrier is not
less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool,
and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then:
      10.1   The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access, or
      10.2   The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets
the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or
steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the
passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere.
   AQ105.2.1 Exceptions.
      1.   The side of an outdoor swimming pool facing a private golf course or
other restricted access area where the erection of barriers is prohibited by
deed restrictions need not have the required barrier on that side
      2.   In the case were the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or
other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along
the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge not
less than 18 inches (457 mm), a barrier is not required between natural body of
water shoreline and the pool or spa.
      3.   Natural topography that prevents direct access to the pool or spa
area shall include but not be limited to mountains and natural rock formations.
A natural barrier approved the code official shall be acceptable provided that
the degree of protection is not less than the protection afforded by the
requirements of AQ105.2.
   AQ105.3 Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool
shall comply with Section AQ105.2, Item 9.
   AQ105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb
them.
   AQ105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which
complies with ASTM F 1346, as listed in Section AQ107, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this appendix
SECTION AQ106
ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL
AND SPA SUCTION OUTLETS
   AQ106.1 General. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in
accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.
SECTION AQ107
ABBREVIATIONS
   AQ107.1 General.
ANSI-.American National Standards Institute
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
APSP-Association of Pool and Spa Professionals
2111 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22314
ASCE-American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 98411-0700
ASTM--ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428
UL-Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
SECTION AQ108
REFERENCED STANDARDS
   AQ108.1 General.
ANSI/APSP/ICC
ANSI/APSP/            Standard for Permanently Installed        AQ104.1
ICC-3—14            Residential Spas
ANSI/APSP/            Standard for above-ground/On-ground       AQ103.2
ICC-4—12            Residential Swimming Pools
ANSI/APSP/            Standard for Residential In-ground        AQ103.1
ICC-5—11            Swimming Pools
ANSI/APSP/            Standard for Residential Portable Spas    AQ104.2
ICC-6—13
ANSI/APSP/            Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance
ICC-7—13            in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas,    AQ106.1
                      Hot Tubs and Catch Basins
                                                               
ASCE                                                            
ASCE/SEI-24—13      Flood-resistant Design and Construction   AQ103.3
                                                               
ASTM                                                            
                      Performance Specification for Safety
ASTM F 1346—9I (2010Covers and Labeling Requirements for All  AQ105., AQ105.5
                      Covers for Swimming Pools Spas and Hot
                      Tubs
                                                               
UL                                                              
                      Standard for General-purpose Signaling
UL 2017—2008        Devices and Systems-with revisions        AQ105.2
                      through May 2011
 
IRC APPENDIX AX
   *IRC Appendix AX; Chapter 36 of the Building Code, Docks, Piers and
Boathouses is added to this code as an Appendix to read as follows:
APPENDIX CHAPTER AX
DOCKS, PIERS AND BOATHOUSES
SECTION AX101
GENERAL
   AX101 General. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any body of
water within the corporate limits of Fort Worth that is under the jurisdiction
and control of the City of Fort Worth. In the absence of other provisions, this
chapter may be used on bodies of water not under the control of the City of
Fort Worth.
   This chapter and the "Docks, Piers and Boat House" standards, adopted
elsewhere, may be more stringent than other provisions of this code and other
codes.
   AX101.1 Variances/Water Department Release. Lake Worth is owned by the City
of Fort Worth. The Fort Worth Water Department has the charge for the safety of
the water, as well as, safe usage of the water system. As such, some provisions
in this chapter shall be designated as a regulation from the Water Department
and will be identified as (WD). Any such section identified with (WD) cannot be
granted a variance by the Construction and Fire Prevention Board without first
obtaining a release from the Director of the Water Department.
SECTION AX102
DEFINITIONS
   AX102 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
DEAD LOAD. The permanent inert weight of materials of construction incorporated
into the structure, including fixed or permanent attachments, such as bumpers,
railings, winch stands, roof structures, etc.
As further defined in Chapter 16 of the Building Code, the weight of materials
of construction incorporated into the building, including but not limited to
walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, finishes,
cladding and other similarly incorporated architectural and structural items,
and fixed service equipment including the weight of cranes. All dead loads are
considered permanent loads.
DECKING. The surface material that forms the floor of the structure.
As further defined in Chapter 16 of the Building Code, an exterior floor
supported on at least two opposing sides by an adjacent structure, and/or
posts, piers or other independent supports.
DOCK, PIER, OR BOAT HOUSE (or any combination). A structure extending from the
shore into the water to permit the landing and mooring of vessels. The term
"dock", "pier" or "boat house" includes the anchoring system and any walkways
or bridges that will attach to the structure itself.
HUNT ABSORPTION TEST. A test documenting the rate at which flotation material
absorbs liquid, as well as the quantity of liquid absorbed.
LAKEFRONT PROPERTY LINE. The property line that borders the regulated water
area. (For Lake Worth, "as shown on the final plat of record or survey for the
property".)
LAKE WORTH MANAGEMENT OFFICE (LWMO). That group in the Water and Property
Management Departments responsible for review and approval of improvements to
structures, prior to permitting, at or in Lake Worth and who shall administer
the requirements of those departments.
LIVE LOAD. Any moving or variable superimposed load on the structure.
As further defined in Chapter 16 of the Building Code, those loads produced by
the use and occupancy of the building or other structure and do not include
construction or environmental loads such as wind load, snow load, rain load,
earthquake load, flood load or dead load.
LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of building
materials, occupants and their possessions, environmental effect, differential
movement and restrained dimensional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in
which variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as dead loads.
All other loads are variable loads.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (RPE). A professional engineer currently
registered with the State of Texas as a professional engineer.
STRUCTURAL DEAD LOAD. The weight of the structure and its ability to support
itself.
STRUCTURE. When used in this Chapter shall be inclusive of entire dock, pier or
boat house, including the walkway, anchoring system, cables, floats,
electrical, plumbing and any other related components or materials installed in
conjunction with the construction, maintenance, or use of the dock.
WALKWAY (or BRIDGE). A passage that provides access from the land or a boat
dock, marina, or other floating facility.
SECTION AX103
PERMITS
   AX103 Permit Required. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or
move any dock, pier, boathouse or combination to any body of water within the
corporate limits of Fort Worth that is under the jurisdiction and control of
the City of Fort Worth, without complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   Each application for a permit, together with plans for a dock, pier,
boathouse, or any combination thereof shall be submitted as specified in
Chapter 1 of this code and as may be specified in other City codes.
   Where such structures are constructed on Lake Worth or any body of water
subject to the jurisdiction of another department of the City of Fort Worth,
the additional approval of such department shall be obtained.
   Submittal of a permit application is not permission to begin work.
Construction is not permitted to begin until a permit is ISSUED.
SECTION AX104
USE
   AX104 Use. Docks, piers and boathouses for private use shall normally be
classified as a Group U Occupancy. Other occupancies may be allowed when the
use is permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, together with the approval of any
other appropriate department of the City of Fort Worth, and the construction
complies with this code for said use.
SECTION AX105
DESIGN AND DESIGN LOADS
   AX105.1 General. When designed by an RPE, the RPE shall apply the
appropriate loads when doing calculations. Such factors shall include, but not
be limited to:
   a.   Dead load
   b.   Live load
   c.   Roof load
   d.   Wind load and wave action; which should be considered as simultaneously
applied
   e.   When intended to have boats attached to the structure for storage, the
effects of such estimated loads, such as wind and wave, on the boat that are
transferred to the structure shall also be considered.
   f.   When intended to have boats lifted out of the water, the effects of
such estimated loads, such as wind on the boat and dead load of the boat, that
are transferred to the structure shall also be included.
   g.   Surface areas at and above the water line, when authorized, including
walls, screens, tarps, etc.
   h.   Except as allowed for in Section T3605.3, flotation devices shall be
designed to withstand the same dead load and live load as a fixed structure.
   AX105.2 All Occupancies. Regardless of the occupancy category assigned, all
structures shall comply with the following provisions:
   a.   Piles shall conform to Chapter 18 of the Building Code.
   b.   All docks, piers and boathouses shall be designed to withstand the
loads as specified in Chapter 16 of the Building Code, based upon the Occupancy
classification as assigned by the Building Official.
      Exception: Private residential structures, classified as a Group U, may
use the design loads as specified in Section T3605.3.
   c.   (WD) Structures shall be able to withstand a minimum of two-foot high
wave action at normal water levels. (For Lake Worth, up to 594 ft. above sea
level.) Floating docks must be designed with anchorage footing and piers to
remain in place without floating off at the high water levels (For Lake Worth,
this will be 601 ft. above sea level.)
   d.   (WD) Cables and chains used in anchoring systems shall be designed with
a minimum working load safety factor of 3.0 for cable and 2.0 for chains.
   e.   (WD) Walkways and bridges shall have a maximum slope under dead load of
a 4:1 ratio to any direction at the lowest expected water level. (For Lake
Worth, 591 ft. above sea level.)
   AX105.3 Group U Occupancies. When private structures associated with
residential uses are assigned a Group U Occupancy classification, the design
provisions provided in Section T3605.3.1 through T3605.3.2, may be used in lieu
of Chapter 16 of the Building Code.
   AX105.3.1 Flotation devices shall be designed to support the dead load plus
30-pounds per square foot (PSF) live load applied to deck area.
   AX105.3.2 Structural frame shall be designed to support 40 pounds per square
foot (PSF) live load applied to the full surface area of the deck.
SECTION AX106
CONSTRUCTION
   AX106 Dock and Pier Construction. When not designed by an RPE, the proposed
design shall incorporate the following minimum provisions:
   AX106.1 Piles. Wood piles shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter.
Metal piles shall be a minimum of three (3) inches inside diameter pipe. Such
piles shall be driven to a minimum depth of twenty-four (24) inches below the
top layer of silt. Such piles shall be driven in pairs, one on either side of
the platform, and braced as required by section 3606.6. Such piles shall not be
spaced apart more than ten (10) feet center to center.
   AX106.2 Box cribs. Sets of structural columns of the same size forming a box
crib may be used. Such crib shall be braced as required in Section 3606.6 and
anchored as required in Section T3607.
   AX106.3 Beams. Beams shall be defined as those members which connect to
piles to support the stringers. All beams when of wood shall be a minimum 2-
inch material.
   AX106.4 Stringers. Stringers shall be defined as those members usually
supporting the decking. All stringers when of wood shall be of a minimum 2-inch
material.
   AX106.5 Decking.
   AX106.5.1 Wooden platform decking shall be of a minimum nominal 2-inch
material.
   AX106.5.2 Other materials, to include lightweight concrete or metal decking
may be used when approved by the Building Official. Such decking shall meet the
load requirements of Section T3605.
   AX106.6 Bracing.
   AX106.6.1 Materials. All wooden bracing shall be of a minimum nominal 2-inch
x 6-inch material attached through the brace and supporting members with two
(2) one half inch galvanized bolts. Steel tie rods shall be a minimum three
quarter inch diameter galvanized that are fitted through drilled holes in the
piles.
   AX106.6.2 Bracing shall be accomplished by one or more of the following
methods:
   a.   Cross or "X" bracing. Cross or "X" bracing may be used on each set of
piles and box cribs. The angle of the bracing shall be between 45 and 60
degrees off horizontal. Each member of the brace shall be placed on the outward
facing portion of the pile.
   b.   Knee bracing. Knee bracing may be used on each pile attached to and
paralleling the platform deck. The angle of the bracing shall be between 45 and
60 degrees off horizontal.
   AX106.7 Attachment of deck. Attachment of the platform deck to beams and
piles shall be accomplished by attaching the beams to the piles and box cribs
by a minimum of two (2) one half inch galvanized through bolts.
SECTION AX107
ANCHORAGE
   AX107 Anchorage of Floatation and box crib structures. Such structures shall
be anchored with solid units that will provide the following anchorage:
   a.   Docks and piers less than fifty (50) feet in length: An anchor on each
corner that will support one-fourth of the total dead load plus one-eighth the
total live load.
   b.   Docks and piers fifty (50) feet or more in length: Anchors at the
midpoint of the piers.
   c.   All docks and piers shall be anchored to the shore line.
   d.   All anchors shall be of masonry, concrete, or steel and shall be
securely fastened to the dock or pier by cable, chain, or other approved
methods.
SECTION AX108
REQUIRED WATER PROOFING
   AX108.1 Wood. All wood below one (1) foot above spillway elevation on lakes
(for Lake Worth, 595 feet) or below one (1) foot above the 50-year flood
elevations on other bodies of water shall be treated lumber. Creosote is not
allowed.
   AX108.2 Metal. All metal, including bolts, lag bolts, and fasteners, shall
be galvanized zinc or other approved materials.
SECTION AX109
FLOTATION MATERIAL
   AX109.1 Flotation Material. All flotation units shall adequately support the
dead and live loads of all beams, stringers, and platforms. Data shall be
submitted to and approved by the Building Official showing that the buoyancy of
such units will support the loads imposed.
   Only flotation units made of materials which will not affect the water
quality in any way may be used. Flotation units shall be constructed of
material that has never been used in any manner for storage of toxic or
hazardous material. Proof that the flotation units meet the requirements must
be provided to and approved by the Building Official.
   1.   (WD) Flotation material shall be extruded polystyrene, expanded
polystyrene, or a copolymer of polyethylene and polystyrene and shall have a
minimum density of 0.9 pounds per cubic foot, and be of consistent quality
throughout the float. Beads shall be firmly fused together, and there shall be
no voids inside the encasement. Flotation material shall have a water rate
absorption of less than 3.0 pounds per cubic foot over seven (7) days when
tested by the Hunt Absorption Test. Other flotation material may be considered
if it meets all of the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   2.   (WD) Flotation material shall be encased in solid polyethylene or a
polyurethane type coating, both of which shall be watertight and have a nominal
thickness of 0.125 inches.
   3.   (WD) Drums made of plastic, whether new or recycled, or metal shall not
be used for encasements or floats.
   4.   (WD) Materials which are considered unacceptable for this purpose
include but are not limited to standard steel 55 gallon drums, any metal which
may corrode in the aqueous environment, and any material which may release
toxic or hazardous material into the lake proper.
   5.   (WD) All flats shall be warranted for a minimum of eight (8) years
against sinking, becoming waterlogged, cracking, peeling, fragmenting, or
losing beads, and shall not be prone to damage by animals.
   6.   (WD) Floats that are punctured, exposing the foam to erosion or
deterioration, shall be replaced immediately.
SECTION AX110
BOATHOUSES
   AX110.1 Boathouse construction. Construction of boathouses or other
structures shall meet or exceed the requirements for framing and coverage as
specified in other parts of this code. When, in the opinion of the Building
Official, the load of the intended use exceeds the capability of the minimum
construction design specified, plans and specification may be required to be
designed by a Registered Professional Engineer (RPE).
SECTION AX111
PROHIBITED USES
   AX111.1 (WD) Toilet facilities. No toilet facilities of any type shall be
allowed on any Structure built past the Lakefront Property Line.
   AX111.2 (WD) Fuel pumping. Fuel pumping facilities exceeding 55 gallons are
not allowed on structures that extend past the Lakefront Property Line.
SECTION AX112
SAFETY DEVICES
   AX112.1 (WD) Photocell light. Any Structure that extends more than 100 feet
from the Lakefront Property Line shall be equipped with a white photocell light
of no less than 200 lumens that operates continually from dusk to dawn. Such
lighting shall be provided with a cover on the top of the light to minimize
light dispersion upward and toward the shore. The LWMO may require that
lighting be placed on structures less than 100 feet from the shoreline when in
LWMO decides it is warranted to enhance boating safety. It is the Dock owner's
responsibility to ensure that all required lighting is properly maintained and
operational at all times.
   AX112.2 (WD) Water supply. A potable water supply can be plumbed to the
first floor (lower deck) provided that backflow prevention devices are
installed and inspected in accordance with 12.5, Article V, Division 3, Cross
Connection Control of the City Code and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the
City Council.
(Ord. 14649, § 2, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15533, § 1, passed 4-29-2002; Ord.
15949, § 2, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 17681-08-2007, § 2, passed 8-9-2007; Ord.
18319-09-2008, § 3, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 18459-02-2009, § 2, passed 2-3-2009;
Ord. 19602-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 20427-09-2012, § 2, passed 9-
25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 2, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-
2012; Ord. 21189-04-2014, § 2, passed 4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord. 22372-08-
2016, § 2, passed 8-30-2016; Ord. 22519-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-
1-2017; Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-
08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 25383-03-2022, § 2, passed 3-8-2022, eff.
4-1-2022)
§ 7-63 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting Residential Code provisions,
as amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances,
except in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct
conflict with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 14649, § 3, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15949, § 3, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19602-03-2011, § 3, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22519-12-2016, § 3, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25383-03-2022, § 3, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-64 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
herein provided.
(Ord. 14649, § 3, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15949, § 3, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19602-03-2011, § 3, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22519-12-2016, § 4, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019;
Ord. 25383-03-2022, § 4, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-65 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Cross-reference:
   International Building Code, §§
7-46 et seq.
   International Fire Code adopted, §
13-1
   International Mechanical Code, §§
7-166 et seq.
   International Plumbing Code, §§
26-1 et seq.
   Moving of buildings and structures governed by building code and minimum
building standards code, §§
7-241 et seq.
   Moving of buildings and structures not governed by building code and minimum
building standards code, §§
7-261 et seq.
   National electrical code adopted, §§
11-1 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 13743, § 1, adopted March 23, 1999, amended Art. IV, §§
7-66 through 7-165, in its entirety. Former Art. IV pertained to similar
material and derived from Ord. 12932, § 1, adopted March 25, 1997; Ord. 12989,
§ 1, adopted April 29, 1997; and Ord. 13942, § 1, adopted September 21, 1999.
DIVISION 1: IN GENERAL
§ 7-66 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the “minimum building standards code.”
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-67 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   (a)   This article is adopted pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter
54 and Chapter 214. The purpose of this article is as follows:
      (1)   To establish the minimum standards for the continued use and
occupancy of all types of buildings and structures within the City of Fort
Worth, regardless of the date of their construction, in order to safeguard the
public health, safety and welfare and to protect property;
      (2)   To provide for the authority to order and direct the method of the
securing of property that is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other
invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that such
buildings and structures could be entered or used by vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by
children; and
      (3)   To provide for the authority to address, and direct the method of
addressing, buildings and structures, which although boarded up, fenced or
otherwise secured in any manner, exhibit conditions that may constitute a
danger to the public even though secured from entry or the means used to secure
the building or structure may be inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building or structure by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a
place of harborage or could be entered or used by children.
   (b)   To accomplish the purpose of this article, the City of Fort Worth may
require one or more of the following: the vacation, relocation of occupants,
securing, repair, removal or demolition of such buildings or structures that
may endanger the health and safety of the occupants of such buildings and
structures and the general public.
   (c)   This article references several minimum standards that are established
by other codes (building, fire, electrical, mechanical and plumbing). These
standards shall be designated with a solid bar in the margin. The code
compliance division possesses the authority to enforce such provisions as
related to the purpose of this article. However, final interpretation, approval
of alternate methods and materials, and appeals will be addressed as prescribed
for in each of those codes.
   (d)   Any building or structure that is declared to be unsafe by any
designated, authorized authority for the enforcement of the building, fire,
electrical, mechanical and plumbing codes is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal
in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article or as otherwise
determined by the appropriate official.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-68 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
definitions ascribed to them in this section.
   APPROVED. Having the approval of the code compliance director as the result
of investigation and tests conducted by him or her or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific
organizations; or as having the approval of the appropriate enforcement
official of the City of Fort Worth as being in compliance with the standards
and requirements of this code of the City of Fort Worth which applies
specifically to the item in question.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. A condition, instrumentality or machine on premises,
which is dangerous to young children because of their inability to appreciate
the peril of the condition, instrumentality or machine, and which may
reasonably be expected to attract children to the premises.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING CODE. The building code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted and
amended from time to time.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of any city code or ordinance within his or
her jurisdiction or the building official’s duly authorized representative.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE CONTAINER. A truck-loaded or truck-emptied non-disposable
container, commonly referred to as a dumpster, used for the collection of
commercial garbage and rubbish.
   CURTILAGE. The space of grounds and buildings or structures immediately
surrounding a dwelling.
   DEMOLITION DELAY PROPERTY. When used in §
7-109 of this article means a structure or site which has been designated as
such by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Fort Worth.
   DIRECTOR. The director of thecode compliance department of the City of Fort
Worth, or the director’s duly authorized representative.
   DOORKNOB LOCK. A lock in a doorknob, with the lock operated from the
exterior by a key, card or combination and from the interior without a key,
card or combination.
   DOOR VIEWER. A permanently installed device in an exterior door that allows
a person inside the dwelling to view a person outside the door. The device must
be:
      (1)   A clear glass pane or one-way mirror; or
      (2)   A peephole having a barrel with a one-way lens of glass or other
substance providing an angle view of not less than 160 degrees.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof that contains not more
than two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling of one or more habitable rooms, including an
efficiency unit, which is occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitation purposes.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit with one habitable room that
contains facilities used for combined sleeping, living, cooking, eating and
sanitation purposes.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. The electrical code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted
and amended from time to time.
   ENVIRONMENT CODE. The “Environmental Protection and Compliance” chapter of
the Fort Worth city code, as adopted and amended from time to time.
   EXIT. See MEANS OF EGRESS.
   FIRE CODE. The fire code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted and amended
from time to time.
   FIRE MARSHAL. One officer of the fire department shall be designated as the
deputy chief of fire prevention, who shall be chief of the bureau of fire
prevention. He or she shall hold office in accordance with the provisions of
the Firemen’s and Policemen’s Civil Service Act. This officer may also be known
as the FIRE MARSHAL.
   FLOOR AREA. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a
building, structure, or portion thereof, exclusive of vents, shafts and courts.
The floor area of a building, structure or portion thereof, not provided with
surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal
projection of the roof or floor above.
   FRENCH DOORS. A set consisting of two exterior doors in which each door is
hinged and abuts the other door when closed. The term includes double-hinged
patio doors.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials and/or residue
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce
and other food products.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A space in a building or structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space.
   HAZARD TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND/OR WELFARE.
      (1)   A building or structure whose condition is dilapidated, substandard
or unfit for human habitation and which poses a risk or harm to the public
health, safety and welfare; and includes, but is not limited to the following.
      (2)   Any building or structure whose condition has deteriorated or is
operated or maintained in violation of the minimum standards established in
this article and as described below is hereby subject to investigation by the
director and may be deemed to be substandard and a hazard to the public health,
safety and/or welfare by the building standards commission:
         a.   When any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
egress is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic;
         b.   When the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of egress is warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe so that
it would not provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or
panic;
         c.   When the stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings or similar
structure, purpose or location;
         d.   When any portion has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind,
flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or
stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is
less than the minimum requirements of the building code for a newly constructed
building or structure of like area, height and occupancy;
         e.   When any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fail, or
to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property;
         f.   When any portion of the building or structure, or when any
member, appurtenance or ornamentation on its interior or exterior is not of
sufficient strength or stability, or is not anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that
specified in the building code for a newly constructed building or structure of
like area, height and occupancy, without exceeding the working stresses
permitted in the building code for such buildings or structures;
         g.   When any portion has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such
an extent that walls, columns or other structural portions have materially less
capacity to resist loads, winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of
similar new construction;
         h.   When the building or structure or any portion thereof is likely
to partially or completely collapse because of:
            1.   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
            2.   Faulty construction; and
            3.   The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or structure; or
the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation.
         i.   When, for any reason, the building or structure or any portion
thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
         j.   When the exterior walls or other structural members designed to
be vertical list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the
base;
         k.   When the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings;
         l.   When the building or structure is damaged, dilapidated or
deteriorated to the extent that it is an attractive nuisance;
         m.   When a building or structure has any non-supporting part, member
or portion with less than 50%, or any supporting part, member or portion with
less than 66%, of the strength, fire resistive protection or characteristics,
or weather resistive protection or characteristics required by law for a newly
constructed building or structure of like area, height and occupancy;
         n.   If the building or structure is used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, and because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is not sanitary, is unfit for human habitation, or is
in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;
         o.   If the building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate means of egress, lack
of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is a hazard;
         p.   When any portion of an abandoned building or structure, inclusive
of foundations, porches or steps, remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure without the approval of the building
standards commission;
         q.   When the building or structure or its curtilage contains
accumulations of solid waste, stagnant water or other stagnant liquid,
flammable liquids, slops or other deposits or substances, or human or animal
excrement which are:
            1.   Unwholesome, filthy, unsightly, offensive or unsanitary;
            2.   Likely to create or engender disease;
            3.   Likely to harbor vectors; or
            4.   Likely to contaminate stormwater runoff.
   HEALTH CODE. The health code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted and
amended from time to time.
   HEALTH DIRECTOR. The director of the Fort Worth department of health, or the
director’s duly authorized representative, as appointed by the city manager.
   HIGHLY SIGNIFICANT ENDANGERED PROPERTY. A structure or site which has been
designated as such by the City of Fort Worth comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL LANDMARK. A structure or site which has been
designated as such by the City of Fort Worth comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   HISTORIC AND CULTURAL LANDMARKS DISTRICT. An area which has been designated
as such by the comprehensive zoning ordinance, together with their accessory
buildings, structures, fences and other appurtenances.
   HOT WATER. Water at a temperature of not less than 110°F.
   HUMAN CONSUMPTION. Uses by humans in which water can be ingested into or
absorbed by the human body. Examples of these include, but are not limited to,
drinking, cooking, brushing teeth, bathing, washing hands, preparing foods and
washing dishes, utensils and other articles used in the preparation or
consumption of food.
   IMPROVEMENT.  Any structure or man-made object such as, but not limited to,
the following examples: fences, flag poles, yard art, retaining walls,
mailboxes, antenna, boat docks, signs and carports.
   INFESTATION. The presence of vectors such as fleas, ticks, cockroaches, lice
and rodents, and other pests such as ants, bees and wasps within or contiguous
to a dwelling unit or an accessory structure or facility incidental to the use
thereof.
   KEYED DEAD BOLT. A door lock, not in the doorknob, that locks with a bolt
into the doorjamb and is operated from the exterior by a key, card or
combination and from the interior without a key, card or combination; or a
doorknob lock that contains a bolt with at least a one-inch throw.
   KEYLESS BOLTING DEVICE.
      (1)   A door lock, not in the doorknob, that locks:
         a.   With a bolt into a strike plate screwed into the portion of the
doorjamb surface that faces the edge of the door when the door is closed or
into a metal doorjamb that serves as the strike plate, operable only by knob or
lever from the door’s interior and not in any manner from the door’s exterior,
and that is commonly known as a keyless dead bolt; or
         b.   By a drop bolt system operated by placing a central metal plate
over a metal doorjamb restraint that protrudes from the doorjamb and that is
affixed to the doorjamb frame by means of three case-hardened screws at least
three inches in length. One-half of the central plate must overlap the interior
surface of the door and the other half of the central plate must overlap the
doorjamb when the plate is placed over the doorjamb restraint. The drop bolt
system must prevent the door from being opened unless the central plate is
lifted off of the doorjamb restraint by a person who is on the interior side of
the door.
      (2)   The term KEYLESS BOLTING DEVICE does not include a chain latch,
flip latch, surface mounted solid bolt, mortise door bolt, surface-mounted
barrel bolt, surface-mounted swing bar door guard, spring-loaded nightlatch,
foot bolt or other lock or latch.
   KITCHEN. A room used, designed or intended to be used, for the preparation
of food.
   LANDLORD. Any person who is an owner, lessor, management company or managing
agent, including on-site manager, of a building or structure.
   LANDMARKS COMMISSION. The historic and cultural landmarks commission of the
City of Fort Worth.
   LODGING HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof containing not more than five
guest rooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise.
   MEANS OF EGRESS. An exit system that provides a continuous, unobstructed and
undiminished path of exit travel from any occupied point in a building or
structure to a public way. Components and elements making up the MEANS OF
EGRESS shall be as specified in the building code.
   MECHANICAL CODE. The mechanical code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted
and amended from time to time.
   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING. Any building or structure or portion thereof, which
contains three or more dwelling units and, for the purpose of this code,
includes residential condominiums.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Whenever this article makes reference to “installed as per
new construction” or “compliance as new construction,” it shall mean
construction installed in a manner as if built new today under the codes
(building, fire, electrical, mechanical and plumbing) in effect at this time.
   NUISANCE. For the purposes of this code only, means:
      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
      (2)   Any attractive NUISANCE which may prove detrimental to children,
whether in a building or structure, on the premises of a building or structure,
or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned swimming pools, spas,
wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators or junked
motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts; any structurally unsound fences or
structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation that may prove a
hazard for inquisitive minors;
      (3)   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health as
determined by the director of city services; and
      (4)   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
   OTHER PESTS. Ants, bees and wasps.
   OWNER. Any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable
ownership interest in the property.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY. For the purposes of this article, means a walkway used
exclusively as a pedestrian trafficway, excluding grade level sidewalks.
   PLUMBING CODE. The plumbing code of the City of Fort Worth as adopted and
amended from time to time.
   POSSESSION OF A DWELLING UNIT. Occupancy by a tenant under a lease,
including occupancy until the time the tenant moves out or a writ of possession
is issued by a court. It does not include occupancy before the initial
occupancy date authorized under a lease.
   POTABLE WATER. Water, which is satisfactory for human consumption and
domestic purposes.
   PROPERTY. For the purposes of this article, means land, and generally
whatever is erected upon or affixed to land. See also BUILDING and STRUCTURE.
   PUBLIC AREA. An area or a portion thereof to which the public, all residents
or a substantial group of people or residents have reasonable access,
including, but not limited to, yards, courts, parking areas, walkways, mail
rooms, laundry facilities, swimming pools, spas, cabanas, play rooms and play
yards, recreational and picnic facilities, and public assembly rooms.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Organic wastes, such as garbage, wastewater treatment
plant sludge and grease trap waste, that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause odors or gases or is
capable of providing food for or attracting birds, animals and disease vectors.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of:
      (1)   Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar
materials; or
      (2)   Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600°F to 1800°F).
   SECURITY DEVICE. A doorknob lock, door viewer, keyed dead bolt, keyless
bolting device, sliding door handle latch, sliding door pin lock, sliding door
security bar or window latch in a dwelling.
   SERVICE ROOM OR BUILDING. Any room, building or structure used for storage,
assembly, sanitary or utility purposes, and any room not included in the
definition of habitable rooms.
   SLIDING DOOR HANDLE LATCH. A latch or lock located near the handle on a
sliding glass door, operated without a key, and designed to prevent the door
from being opened.
   SLIDING DOOR PIN LOCK. A lock on a sliding glass door that consists of a pin
or nail inserted from the interior side of the door at the side opposite the
door’s handle and that is designed to prevent the door from being opened or
lifted.
   SLIDING DOOR SECURITY BAR. A bar or rod that can be placed at the bottom of
or across the interior side of the fixed panel of a sliding glass door and that
is designated to prevent the door from being opened.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, recyclables, sludge from a waste
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control
facility, and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial,
mining and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional
activities, but does not include:
      (1)   Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or
dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject
to regulation by permit issued pursuant to the Texas Water Code, Chapter 26;
      (2)   Soil, dirt, rock, sand and other natural or human-made inert solid
materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land
suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or
      (3)   Waste materials, which result from activities associated with the
exploration, development or production of oil and gas and are subject to
control by the Railroad Commission of Texas.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, an improvement, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner.
   SUBSTANDARD. Any building, property or structure inspected by the director
that is constructed or maintained in violation of any specific requirement or
prohibition applicable to such building, property or structure provided by this
article.
   VECTOR. An insect or other animal that is capable of transmitting a disease
producing organism.
   WATER CLOSET. A toilet.
   WINDOW LATCH. A device on a window that prevents the window from being
opened and that is operated without a key and only from the interior.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Fort
Worth as adopted and amended from time to time.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, §§ 14, 15, passed 3-19-
2019)
§§ 7-69—7-75 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: ADMINISTRATION
§ 7-76 DIRECTOR.
   (a)   There is hereby established in the department of code compliance,
office of the director. The director is authorized to administer and enforce
the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The director and the director’s authorized representatives shall, in
accordance with Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 18.05 be authorized to
make inspections of all buildings, structures or premises within the City of
Fort Worth for the purpose of determining compliance with this article.
   (c)   The director may appoint such number of officers and employees as
shall be authorized by the appropriations ordinance and the budget of the city.
The director may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the
functions required for the enforcement of this article.
   (d)   The director, deputies and officers shall be supplied with official
City of Fort Worth identification, and upon request, they shall exhibit such
identification when performing any duties imposed and authorized by this
article.
   (e)   The director shall forward all proposed amendments to this article to
the building official for review and, when necessary, present the same to the
appropriate board for consideration.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 16, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-77 BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION.
   The building standards commission shall have such members and purposes as
defined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 10, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 7-77.1 ABATEMENT CASES UNDER THE BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION.
   (a)   The building standards commission pursuant to the Tex. Local
Government Code §§ 54.032 and 54.043 is hereby authorized, after proper notice
and hearing to:
      (1)   Enforce ordinances relating to conditions caused by accumulations
of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places
for insects and rodents; or
      (2)   Enforce ordinances relating to a building code or condition, use or
appearance of property in a municipality.
   (b)   The commission may after notice and hearing:
      (1)   Order the repair or removal, within a fixed period, of violations
of an ordinance and further order that the city may repair or remove the
violation if the commission’s order is not complied with within the allotted
time;
      (2)   Order the repair or removal of a nuisance, within a fixed period,
of property found to be in violation of an ordinance related to a building code
or condition, use or appearance of property in a municipality;
      (3)   Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the
municipality may recover pursuant to §
7-103;
      (4)   Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or
property found on private property;
      (5)   Order the entrance on private property to secure the removal if it
is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation
of an ordinance; and
      (6)   Issue orders or directives to the chief of police of the
municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the
commission panel.
   (c)   Proceedings before the commission. All abatement cases to be heard by
the building standards commission shall be heard as prescribed by §
7-100.
   (d)   Notice of proceedings. The director of code compliance shall give
notice of all proceedings on abatement cases before the commission pursuant to
the provisions set out in §
7-101.
(Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§§ 7-78—7-85 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 7-86 DECLARATION OF MINIMUM STANDARDS; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   The standards established in this division shall be the minimum
standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings, property or
structures, regardless of when they were constructed. Any building, property or
structure that is in violation of these standards is hereby declared to be in
violation of this article and may be ordered to be one or more of the
following: vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished.
   (b)   The owner and any landlord of any premises within the City of Fort
Worth shall be responsible for maintaining the premises in compliance with the
minimum standards. The standards of this division are intended to complement
the requirements of any other applicable code or ordinance of the City of Fort
Worth, and shall not be deemed to lower any more restrictive standard required
by the codes at time of original construction or subsequent remodeling. The
duty of an owner or landlord to maintain premises in compliance with this
article is not affected by any duty this article creates upon the tenants
thereof, even if the owner or landlord has, by agreement, imposed upon the
tenants the duty of maintaining the premises and complying with this article.
   (c)   (1)   The minimum standards specified in
Division 3, §§
7-87 through
7-96 of this article are merged sections of both city code and state law.
Minimum standards established by state law cannot be appealed. Appeals
regarding the minimum standards established by the City of Fort Worth's
building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes will be addressed as
prescribed for in each of those codes.
      (2)   The building standards commission and municipal court shall have
authority relative to the administrative provisions of this article.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 2, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-87 STRUCTURAL AND MATERIALS STANDARDS.
   (a)   General. Buildings or structures may be of any type construction
permitted by and in compliance with the building code. Roofs, floors, walls,
foundations and all other structural components shall be maintained to
withstand the loads and forces for which they were required to be designed and
constructed pursuant to the code in effect at the time of construction. All
structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the
stress limitations and design criteria specified in the applicable provisions
of the building code.
   (b)   Construction materials.
      (1)   All construction materials, including, but not limited to, wood,
gypsum products, glass, fiberglass, paper, canvas, fabric, plastic, vinyl,
masonry, ceramic, plaster, brick, rock, stucco, slate, concrete, asphalt, tin,
copper, steel, iron and aluminum, that is attached to or forms any part of a
building or structure, shall be maintained in good condition.
      (2)   All wood used in the construction of buildings shall be protected
against termite damage and decay as provided in the building code. In addition,
wood used in construction of permanent structures shall not be located nearer
than six inches to earth unless it is treated wood or wood of natural
resistance to decay.
      (3)   Where wood, other than that which is approved as naturally
resistant to decay, is used it shall be painted or treated with an approved
treatment as often as necessary to maintain a barrier against insects and the
elements.
   (c)   Roofs.
      (1)   The roofs of all buildings and structures shall be maintained in
good condition and shall be maintained to withstand the loads and forces for
which they were required to be designed and constructed pursuant to the code in
effect at the time of construction. All structural elements shall be
proportioned and securely fastened to eliminate collapse hazards.
      (2)   Roofs shall be repaired when leaks, sags or holes occur or when
there are missing, charred or deteriorated shingles or rotten wood.
      (3)   Gutters and downspouts, where installed, shall be maintained in
good condition, shall be capable of performing the function for which they were
designed, and shall be securely fastened in place.
      (4)   Proper roof drainage shall be designed and constructed following
the code in effect at the time of construction, but as a minimum, shall be
maintained so as not to overload the structural design.
   (d)   Chimneys. Chimneys shall be reasonably plumb. Loose bricks or blocks
shall be rebonded. Loose or missing mortar shall be replaced.
   (e)   Foundations. Foundations and components shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be maintained to withstand the loads and forces for which
they were required to be designed and constructed pursuant to the code in
effect at the time of construction. All components shall be reasonably plumb,
proportioned and securely fastened.
   (f)   Floor area of dwelling units.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit, other than an efficiency dwelling unit, shall
have not less than two habitable rooms and shall conform to the following
minimum requirements.
         a.   For combined living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes, each
unit shall have at least one room of not less than 120 square feet of floor
area and one room of not less than 70 square feet of floor area.
         b.   Sleeping rooms which accommodate one or two persons shall have
not less than 70 square feet of floor area, plus 50 square feet of additional
floor area for each occupant in excess of two.
         c.   Each habitable room except kitchens shall not have any floor
dimension that is less than seven feet.
         d.   Each toilet shall be located in a clear space not less than 30
inches in width. The clear space in front of the toilet shall not be less than
24 inches.
      (2)   Every efficiency dwelling unit shall have one habitable room and
shall conform to the following minimum requirements:
         a.   For combined living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes, each
efficiency unit shall have one habitable room of not less than 220 square feet
of floor area if the unit is occupied by one or two persons;
         b.   For each occupant in excess of two, an additional 100 square feet
of floor area shall be provided;
         c.   Each efficiency unit shall have a separate closet; and
         d.   Each efficiency unit shall have a separate bathroom, containing a
toilet, lavatory, sink and a bathtub or shower.
   (g)   Floors.
      (1)   All floors shall be maintained in good condition, and shall be
maintained to withstand the loads and forces for which they were required to be
designed and constructed pursuant to the code in effect at the time of
construction.
      (2)   All structural elements shall be proportioned, securely fastened
and free of holes or decay to eliminate collapse or trip hazards. Cracks or
breaches in concrete floors, sufficient in size to allow insects to enter,
shall be sealed with approved materials.
   (h)   Bathroom floors and walls. The floors of toilet compartments and
bathrooms shall be finished with approved non-absorbent materials such as tile
or linoleum or similar floor coverings. Floors and walls of shower enclosures
shall be maintained in good condition free of holes, cracks, breaches, decay
and rot. Materials other than structural elements used in such floors and walls
shall be of a type that is not adversely affected by moisture.
   (i)   Counter tops and backsplashes. Kitchen and bathroom counter tops and
backsplashes surrounding kitchen sinks and lavatory sinks shall be maintained
in good condition free of decay and rot.
   (j)   Interior walls and ceilings.
      (1)   All interior walls and ceilings and portions thereof shall be
maintained in good condition, and shall be maintained to withstand the loads
and forces for which they were required to be designed and constructed pursuant
to the code in effect at the time of construction. All structural elements
shall be proportioned and securely fastened to eliminate collapse hazards.
      (2)   All interior walls and ceilings and portions thereof shall be free
of holes, breaches, significant cracks, dampness, water damage, significant
smoke damage, fire damage and mildew.
   (k)   Exterior windows.
      (1)   The glass surfaces of exterior windows shall be maintained free of
breaks and significant cracks. When damage occurs, glass shards shall be
removed promptly to reduce the risk of injury.
      (2)   Exterior windows shall be maintained in good condition, and shall
fit the contours of their frames, to prevent the entry of air, dampness and
vectors and other pests when closed.
      (3)   Each habitable room within a dwelling unit shall be provided with
natural light by means of an exterior glazed opening as required by the code in
effect at the time of construction or as required for compliance as new
construction, whichever is less restrictive.
   (l)   Exterior doors.
      (1)   The glass surfaces of exterior doors shall be maintained free of
breaks and significant cracks. When damage occurs, glass shards shall be
removed promptly to reduce the risk of injury.
      (2)   Exterior doors shall be maintained in good condition, and shall fit
the contours of their frames, so as to prevent the entry of air, dampness and
vectors and other pests when closed.
   (m)   Access, means of egress and emergency escape.
      (1)   All buildings or structures shall be located with respect to
property lines and to other buildings or structures on the same property as
required by the building code and the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the
City of Fort Worth.
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall have door access directly to the outside
or to a public corridor. All buildings or structures shall be provided with
means of egress and appurtenances as required by the building code. Each
dwelling unit shall have access to a passageway not less than the width
required by the building code at time of construction, but in no case shall it
be less than three feet in width leading to a public street or alley.
      (3)   In dwelling units of multifamily dwellings and lodging houses, each
sleeping room below the fourth story and each basement shall have at least one
window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue, as follows.
         a.   The window or exterior door shall provide access directly into a
public street, public alley, yard or exit court, or shall be brought into
compliance as new construction.
         b.   Escape or rescue windows shall comply with the most restrictive
of:
            1.   The restrictions in effect at the time of construction or
replacement;
            2.   The following dimensions;
               i.   Nineteen-inch minimum width, measured between inside edges
of window frame;
               ii.   Twenty-four and one-half inch minimum height, measured
between inside edges of window frame; and
               iii.   Forty-eight-inch maximum sill height.
         c.   1.   If a multifamily dwelling or lodging house is not in
compliance with this requirement, the owner shall, by November 30, 2000,
replace or install windows or doors of the full size necessary to comply with
current codes at the time of replacement or installation. Any multifamily
dwelling or lodging house discovered to not be in compliance by this date, or
any multifamily dwelling or lodging house annexed after this date that is not
in compliance, shall be given 30 days to come into compliance, or apply to the
construction and fire prevention board to establish a compliance deadline.
            2.   During the period of noncompliance, if any dwelling unit in a
multifamily dwelling or lodging house has a sleeping room below the fourth
story that does not comply with the emergency escape or rescue window
requirement and such unit is or becomes vacant, said unit shall not be leased
until it complies with the emergency escape or rescue window requirement.
         d.   After obtaining primary compliance with the provisions listed
above, future replacement windows may comply with the provisions of subsection
(m)(6) below.
         e.   The provisions listed above do not apply to sprinklered high-rise
buildings as defined in the building code; nor to any other building that may
be in compliance with current code for new construction.
      (4)   In dwelling units of one- and two-family dwellings, each sleeping
room below the fourth story and each basement shall have at least one window or
exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue which shall open directly
into a public street, public alley, yard or exit court as required by the code
in effect at the time of construction.
      (5)   In multifamily dwellings with a sleeping room in the loft apartment
each sleeping room shall have at least one window or exterior door approved for
emergency escape or rescue which shall open directly into a public street,
public alley, yard or exit court as required by the code in effect at the time
of construction.
      (6)   a.   When replacing a window or door that serves as the emergency
escape and rescue opening of the residential code or the building code, the new
installation shall not reduce the dimensions of the opening such that it is
noncompliant with that section. If the dimensions are already noncompliant, the
new installation shall not reduce any of the existing opening dimensions,
increasing the noncompliant conditions.
         b.   The existing window sill height need not be corrected.
         c.   This subsection (m) shall apply to multifamily dwellings only
after they have met the primary compliance items of subsection (m)(3) above.
      (7)   Bars, grilles, grates and other similar security devices may be
installed on emergency escape or rescue windows or doors in dwelling units
provided that:
         a.   A building permit is obtained prior to installation;
         b.   A final inspection is obtained from the building inspection
division upon completion of work;
         c.   The devices are equipped with approved release mechanisms which
are operable from the inside of the dwelling without the use of a key or
special knowledge or effort; and
         d.   The building or structure is equipped with smoke detectors
installed in accordance with all applicable city ordinances.
   (n)   Ventilation.
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (n)(2) below, each habitable room
within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of
an openable exterior opening. Such opening shall have an area of not less than
one-twentieth of the floor area of the room, with a minimum of five square
feet; or as required for compliance as new construction.
      (2)   In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a
mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of
providing two air changes per hour in all habitable rooms and in public
corridors. Twenty percent of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. As
an alternative, mechanical ventilation may be installed as required for
compliance as new construction.
      (3)   Except as provided by subsections (n)(4) or (n)(5) below, each
bathroom, toilet compartment, laundry room and similar rooms shall be provided
with natural ventilation by means of an openable exterior opening with an area
not less than one-twentieth of the floor area of the room, with a minimum of
one and one-half square feet. Private laundry rooms in group R, division 3 and
inside individual dwelling units of group R, division 1 occupancies are exempt
from the requirements of this subsection (n).
      (4)   In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation in
bathrooms containing a bathtub or shower or combination thereof, laundry rooms
and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the
outside, capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided. The
point of discharge of exhaust air shall be at least three feet from any opening
into the building or structure. As an alternative, mechanical ventilation may
be installed as required for compliance as new construction.
      (5)   Bathrooms which contain only a toilet or lavatory sink or
combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating
fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
   (o)   Balconies, landings, porches, decks and walkways.
      (1)   a.   All balconies, landings, porches, decks and walkways shall be
maintained in good condition and shall be maintained to withstand the loads and
forces for which they were required to be designed and constructed pursuant to
the code in effect at the time of construction.
         b.   All structural elements shall be proportioned and securely
fastened to eliminate collapse or trip hazards.
      (2)   Cracks or breaches in concrete or lightweight concrete balconies,
landings, porches or walkways, that are of sufficient size to allow water to
penetrate, shall be sealed with approved material.
      (3)   Support posts or columns that provide support to balconies,
landings, porches, decks or walkways or canopies over same, shall be maintained
in good condition, reasonably plumb and shall be maintained to withstand the
loads and forces for which they were required to be designed and constructed
pursuant to the code in effect at the time of construction. The structural
elements shall be intact, proportioned, and securely fastened to eliminate
collapse hazards.
   (p)   Handrails and railings.
      (1)   Handrails shall be provided as required by the building code.
      (2)   All handrails and railings shall be maintained in good condition,
and shall be maintained to withstand the loads and forces for which they were
required to be designed and constructed pursuant to the code in effect at the
time of construction. All components shall be proportioned and securely
fastened.
      (3)   The maintenance requirements of this subsection (p) shall not
prohibit the removal of a handrail or railing that is not required by law.
   (q)   Steps and stairways.
      (1)   a.   Steps and stairways shall be maintained in good condition and
shall be maintained to withstand the loads and forces for which they were
required to be designed and constructed pursuant to the code in effect at the
time of construction.
         b.   All components shall be proportioned and securely fastened to
eliminate trip or collapse hazards.
      (2)   Cracks or breaches in lightweight concrete in steps, balconies and
walkways, which are of sufficient size to allow water to penetrate, shall be
sealed.
   (r)   Fences, retaining walls and barriers.
      (1)   Fences, retaining walls, decorative walls and barriers shall be
maintained in good condition, and shall not be out of vertical alignment by
more than 18 degrees, unless designed as such.
      (2)   Rotted, fire damaged or broken wooden slats and support posts shall
be repaired or replaced.
      (3)   Broken or severely bent metal posts or torn, cut or ripped metal
fencing materials shall be repaired or replaced.
      (4)   Loose brick, stone, rock, mortar or similar materials on masonry
walls and barriers shall be rebonded or similarly repaired.
      (5)   The above requirements shall not prohibit a fence, retaining wall,
decorative wall or barrier from being removed if it is not otherwise required
by law.
      (6)   The above requirements shall only apply to a fence, retaining wall,
decorative wall or barrier adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   (s)   Barriers. Barriers required for swimming pools or spas shall be
maintained in accordance with all statutes and ordinances.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14177, § 1, passed 5-2-2000; Ord.
19606-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 7-88 MECHANICAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   Air conditioning.
      (1)   Fixed air conditioning systems, when provided, shall be maintained
in good condition, with clean filters and condensing units, and unobstructed
air ducts. Air conditioner condenser unit covers, panels, conduits and
disconnects shall be properly attached.
      (2)   Fixed air conditioning systems, when provided, shall be designed to
cool to a 20 degree differential between inside and outside temperatures, and
shall function to at least a 15 degree differential.
      (3)   Window-mounted air conditioning units shall not be installed in a
method that would violate the required emergency escape or rescue window
required by §
7-87(m)(3) of this article.
   (b)   Heating.
      (1)   All heating devices or appliances installed or used in a dwelling
unit shall be of an approved type.
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating facilities
capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F, at a point three feet above
the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and
maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the building code,
mechanical code and all other applicable codes.
      (3)   Portable unvented oil-burning heating appliances in any occupancy
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the fire code.
      (4)   Where heating is provided in buildings or structures other than
dwelling units, the heating facilities shall be installed and maintained in a
safe condition and in accordance with the building code, mechanical code and
all other applicable codes.
   (c)   Appliances. All appliances supplied to leased dwelling units by the
owner, including, but not limited to, heating units, air conditioning units,
cook stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, garbage disposals, ventilation hoods,
washing machines and clothes dryers, shall be maintained in operative
condition.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-89 PLUMBING STANDARDS.
   (a)   Plumbing fixtures.
      (1)   All plumbing fixtures including, but not limited to, toilets,
lavatory sinks, urinals, bidets, bathtubs, showers, kitchen sinks, mop sinks,
water and sewer lines for clothes washing machines and dishwashing machines,
traps, drains, drain lines, vent pipes, pipes or piping, supply lines,
hardware, appliances or equipment necessary to supply either natural or
liquefied petroleum gas, potable water, discharge sewage or waste water,
provide hot water or heat shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition,
and so as to function in the manner for which they were designed.
      (2)   Such plumbing fixtures shall be maintained free of cross-
connections and conditions that permit backflow into the potable water supply,
as required by
Article V, Division 3 of the Fort Worth environment code.
      (3)   Unvented waste lines are prohibited.
   (b)   Fuel supply. Supply pipes, lines or equipment that carry natural gas
or liquefied petroleum gas shall be maintained in a leak free condition. Such
pipes, lines and equipment shall be pressure tested in accordance with the
plumbing code any time a significant fire or structural collapse occurs within
a building or structure where same are located, when a gas leak is detected, or
when a gas supply pipe or line is opened ahead of a gas supply shut-off valve.
   (c)   Kitchen sinks, lavatory sinks, toilets, showers and bathtubs.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with:
         a.   A kitchen equipped with a kitchen sink; and
         b.   A minimum of one bathroom equipped with a toilet, a lavatory sink
and either a bathtub or shower.
      (2)   In all buildings or structures, each kitchen sink, lavatory sink,
mop sink, bathtub, shower, toilet, urinal, bidet, dishwasher, clothes washing
machine and water heater shall be connected to an approved potable water supply
system.
      (3)   In all buildings or structures, each kitchen sink, lavatory sink,
bathtub, shower, bidet and mop sink shall be equipped with hot and cold potable
water under pressure necessary for their normal operation. Toilets and urinals
shall be equipped with cold potable water under pressure necessary for their
normal operation.
      (4)   A room in which a toilet or urinal is located shall be separated
from food preparation or storage rooms by a solid, close-fitting door. A solid,
close fitting door is one that is designed and fitted to conform to the
contours of its frame and is free of breaches or holes.
      (5)   Each kitchen sink, mop sink, lavatory sink, toilet, urinal, bidet,
bathtub, shower, dishwasher and clothes washing machine shall be connected to
an approved municipal sanitary sewer system or to an approved private sewage
disposal system capable of performing the functions for which it was designed.
Such fixtures shall be properly vented to prevent the invasion of sewer gas
into a building or structure and to facilitate drainage of wastewater.
      (6)   All plumbing fixtures shall be installed and maintained in a safe
and sanitary condition. The flow of sewage or water from openings or breaches
in water supply lines or sewage disposal lines shall be stopped, and repair
performed as necessary to eliminate sanitary hazards.
      (7)   All sewer clean-out openings shall be capped with tight fitting
plugs except when the sewer lines are being serviced.
   (d)   Water heating equipment.
      (1)   All water heating appliances, equipment or boilers shall be
maintained in safe operating condition in compliance with the building code,
plumbing code and all other applicable laws.
      (2)   All water heating appliances shall be provided with a temperature
and pressure relief valve with an appropriate drain line to the outside
necessary for the diversion of hot water under pressure or steam to a safe
location as required by the plumbing code.
      (3)   All fuel-fired water heating appliances shall be vented as required
by the plumbing code.
      (4)   Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be located in bathrooms,
sleeping rooms or a closet accessed through a sleeping room or bathroom unless
installed in compliance as new construction.
         a.   The door to a closet which contains an existing fuel-fired water
heater may be sealed in an approved manner provided venting is installed to
obtain combustion air from an appropriate outside source or installed in
compliance as new construction.
         b.   A closet may be constructed in an approved manner around an
existing fuel-fired water heater located in a sleeping room or bathroom,
provided the closet is sealed in an approved manner and provided venting is
installed to obtain combustion air from an appropriate outside source or the
same is installed in compliance as new construction.
      (5)   Every room containing a boiler, central heating plant or hot-water
supply boiler in a multifamily dwelling shall be separated from the rest of
building or structure by not less than one-hour fire-resistive occupancy
separation; except that a separation shall not be required for such rooms with
equipment serving only one dwelling unit.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-90 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   All electrical wiring, switches, switching devices, fixtures,
appliances, outlets, lighting outlets, junction boxes, circuits, conduit,
panels, panel covers and panel boards shall be of an approved type and shall be
installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with the electrical
code of the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   Electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to carry safely a load
imposed by normal use of appliances, equipment and fixtures shall be provided
and maintained in proper working order.
   (c)   All wiring shall terminate in approved enclosures, including but not
limited to switches, switching devices, fixtures, receptacle outlets, lighting
outlets, junction boxes and panel boards.
   (d)   In each dwelling unit, each habitable room shall be provided with a
minimum of two duplex receptacle outlets installed at opposing sites.
   (e)   In each dwelling unit, each habitable room, bathroom, shower room,
hallway and stairway shall be equipped with at least one electric light fixture
or outlet controlled by a wall switch, unless a wall switch was not required by
the electrical code at the time of installation.
   (f)   Electric light fixtures located adjacent to exterior doors of all
buildings or structures shall be maintained in safe and operative condition.
   (g)   When used in dwelling units, flexible cords, such as extension cords,
shall not exceed six feet in length when measured from end to end. Appliance
cords shall not exceed six feet in length when measured from end to end. The
combined length of an appliance cord(s) and a flexible cord(s) shall not exceed
six feet in length.
   (h)   In dwelling units, existing electrical outlets in bathrooms and
existing counter top electric receptacles within six feet of a kitchen sink,
that require replacement due to defect or damage, shall be replaced with
electric receptacles with ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All
electrical outlets with ground fault circuit interrupter protection shall be
maintained in proper working order.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-91 FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   All buildings, structures or portions thereof shall be provided with
the degree of fire resistive construction as required by the building code for
the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property. They
shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by the building code and fire code. All required fire protection and
fire alarm systems shall be inspected as required by the fire code.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article, in all multifamily dwelling
complexes of eight units or more, as defined in §
7-394, a minimum clearance of 36 inches shall be maintained in a circumference
around all fire hydrants, and no obstructions shall be permitted to be
installed or located within said clearance area. For minimum clearances for all
other occupancies see the fire code.
   (c)   Buildings shall be marked with contrasting property address numbers
visible from the street in accordance with the fire code. For residential
occupancies containing more than one dwelling unit, each dwelling unit shall be
individually marked with unit identification numbers at the entrance to the
unit.
   (d)   Fireplaces.
      (1)   Fireplaces, chimney flues, screens and vent attachments shall be
maintained in good condition and cleaned as necessary.
      (2)   A landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex of eight units or
more, as defined in §
7-394, shall maintain records documenting annual inspections by maintenance
personnel:
         a.   Such records shall include a notification that chimney flues are
reasonably clean and dampers or vent attachments are functioning in a safe
manner.
         b.   The inspection records shall be maintained at the business office
of the complex for a minimum of three years and shall be made available to the
director upon request.
   (e)   Gasoline and gas-fueled vehicles and equipment. Gasoline and gas-
fueled vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds and any gas-fueled equipment shall be
parked only in approved parking areas. Such vehicles and equipment shall not be
parked, stored or repaired in any dwelling unit, office, exitway, sidewalk or
under stairways.
   (f)   Smoke detectors.
      (1)   Single and multiple-station smoke alarms (smoke detectors) shall be
installed in existing Group R occupancies and in dwellings not classified as
Group R occupancies in accordance with subsections (f)(2) through (f)(6) below.
Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall comply with UL 217.
      (2)   Group R-1. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in all of the following locations in Group R-1:
         a.   In sleeping areas;
         b.   In every room in the path of the means of egress from the
sleeping area to the door leading from the sleeping unit; and
         c.   In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. For
sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
      (3)   a.   Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. Single or multiple-station smoke
alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-
1 regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
            i.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area
in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms; and
            ii.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         b.   Exception: Single- or multiple- station smoke alarms in Group I-
1 shall not be required where smoke detectors are provided in the sleeping
rooms as part of an automatic smoke detection system.
         c.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels,
a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level.
      (4)   Location in efficiency dwelling units. In efficiency dwelling
units, detectors shall be located on the ceiling or wall of the main room. When
sleeping rooms within an efficiency dwelling unit are on an upper level, the
detector shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the
stairway. When actuated, the detector shall sound an alarm audible within the
sleeping area of the dwelling unit in which it is located.
      (5)   Interconnection.
         a.   Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
         b.   Exceptions:
            i.   Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind; and
            ii.   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
      (6)   Power source.
         a.   Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power
from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial
source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral
strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected to an
emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the
batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch
other than as required for overcurrent protection.
         b.   Exceptions:
            i.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing buildings where no construction is taking place;
            ii.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source; and
            iii.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not
result in the removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes exposing the
structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which
could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior
finishes.
   (g)   Rented or leased residential occupancies.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, the term DWELLING UNIT shall include
the following:
         a.   All one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, including
manufactured homes; and
         b.   All one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings where one or
more rooms are rented for use as permanent residence under a single lease.
      (2)   Smoke detectors. All dwelling units which are currently rented,
leased or sub-leased, or are hereafter rented, leased or sub-leased shall be
provided with smoke detectors which meet the requirements of the ordinance
under which construction or subsection (f) above, whichever is more
restrictive. Those occupancies which are leased for the first time or to a new
lessee shall have smoke detectors installed prior to occupancy by the lessee.
The smoke detector purchase and installation shall be the sole responsibility
of the landlord.
      (3)   Duty to inspect and repair. Upon commencement of a tenant’s
possession of a dwelling unit containing a smoke alarm, the landlord shall have
a duty to test the smoke detector to verify that it is in working order. Upon
installation of a smoke detector by a landlord after commencement of the
tenant’s possession of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall have a duty to test
the smoke detector to verify that it is in good working order. Documentation
verifying compliance with this provision shall be submitted to the fire code
official upon request.
      (4)   Notice of malfunction. During the term of the rental agreement or
any renewal or extension thereof, the landlord shall have a duty to inspect and
repair a smoke detector only if the tenant has given notice to the landlord of
malfunction or has made a request to the landlord for inspection or repair. The
notice to the landlord need not be in writing unless written notice is required
in the rental agreement. The landlord shall comply with the tenant’s request
for inspection and repair within a reasonable time, considering the
availability of material, labor and utilities.
      (5)   Cause of malfunction. A landlord shall not have a duty to repair a
smoke detector if the damage or malfunction is caused by the tenant or the
tenant’s family, guest or invitee during the term of the rental agreement or
any renewal or extension period of the rental agreement. Provided, however, a
landlord shall have a duty to repair or replace a smoke detector covered by
this subsection (g) if the tenant pays in advance for the reasonable cost of
repair or replacement, including labor, materials, taxes and overhead.
      (6)   Testing. A landlord shall have satisfied the duty to inspect or
repair a damaged or malfunctioning smoke detector if, after a test of the smoke
detector, the test indicates that the smoke detector is in good working order.
      (7)   Battery replacement. After commencement of possession by the tenant
of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall have no duty to provide replacement
batteries for a battery operated smoke detector which was in good working order
according to a test of the smoke detector at the time of commencement of
possession by the tenant.
      (8)   Offense. A person commits an offense if, as landlord of a dwelling
unit, that person:
         a.   Fails to install a smoke detector in compliance with this
section;
         b.   Fails to test or repair a smoke detector in compliance with this
section; or
         c.   Allows a dwelling unit to be occupied without obtaining
documentation signed by both the landlord (or his or her authorized
representative) and the tenant verifying compliance with this section. This
documentation shall be furnished to the fire chief on request.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14177, § 1, passed 5-2-2000; Ord.
19606-03-2011, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-
2019)
§ 7-92 STANDARDS FOR PROVISION OF UTILITIES TO DWELLING UNITS BY A LANDLORD.
   (a)   This section applies to utilities provided by a landlord to a
residential tenancy.
   (b)   Except as provided by subsection (c) below, a landlord shall not
interrupt or cause the interruption of electric, gas, water and sewage utility
service paid directly to a utility company by a tenant, or furnished to a
tenant by the landlord, unless the interruption results from bona fide repairs,
construction or an emergency. The phrase “cause the interruption of” includes
the cutoff of a utility by a utility company due to the landlord’s nonpayment
of the utility bill.
   (c)   A landlord may interrupt or cause the interruption of electrical
service furnished to a tenant by the landlord if:
      (1)   The electrical service furnished to the tenant is not individually
metered or submetered for the dwelling unit;
      (2)   The electrical service connection with the utility company is in
the name of the landlord or the landlord’s agent;
      (3)   The tenant is at least seven days late in paying the rent;
      (4)   The landlord has mailed or hand-delivered to the tenant at least
five days before the date the electrical service is interrupted a written
notice that states:
         a.   The earliest date of the proposed termination of electrical
service;
         b.   The amount of rent the tenant must pay to avert the interruption;
and
         c.   The name and location of the individual to whom or the location
of the on-site management office where the delinquent rent may be paid during
the landlord’s normal business hours.
      (5)   The interruption does not begin before or after the landlord’s
normal business hours; and
      (6)   The interruption does not begin on a day, or on a day immediately
preceding a day, when the landlord or other designated individual is not
available or the on-site management office is not open to accept rent and
restore electrical service.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-93 SANITATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   Infestations. Where evidence of infestation exists, the owner or
landlord of a vacant one- or two- family dwelling, a vacant or occupied
multifamily dwelling, or any other building, structure or property, shall
eliminate infestations of vectors, rodents or other pests. It shall be a
defense if the landlord can show that the landlord had a vacant one- or two-
family dwelling, a vacant or occupied multifamily dwelling, or any other
building, structure or property treated to eliminate vectors, rodents or other
pests within the preceding 30 days.
   (b)   Screens.
      (1)   On every dwelling unit not provided with a thermostatically
controlled central heating and air conditioning system, all exterior openings
capable of being used for ventilation shall be securely screened with 16/18
mesh insect wire to prevent the entrance of vectors and other pests.
      (2)   This requirement shall not apply to exterior doors. All other
exterior openings that could allow the entry of vectors and other pests shall
be securely screened, closed or sealed.
   (c)   Public toilet and shower facilities. Toilet and shower facilities
provided for public use in retail stores, places of public assembly and common
areas of a multifamily dwelling shall be maintained in a sanitary and operative
condition.
   (d)   Swimming pools, spas, ponds and fountains. Water in swimming pools,
spas, ponds, fountains and other containers shall be maintained to prevent the
breeding or harborage of insects, and shall not emit odors that are foul and
offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities.
   (e)   Sewage overflow. All areas contaminated by sewage overflow shall be
sanitized immediately after servicing is completed.
   (f)   Vacant dwellings. The interiors of all vacant dwelling units shall be
maintained free of solid waste. The owner or landlord of a vacant dwelling unit
shall not use it for the storage of swimming pool chemicals, cleaning
chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, rodenticides, fertilizers, paints, solvents,
gasoline, gasoline-powered equipment or combustible materials of any kind.
   (g)   Public areas. The premises of any building or structure shall be
maintained free of weeds or grass in excess of 12 inches and accumulations of
solid waste.
   (h)   Solid waste collection in multifamily dwellings.
      (1)   A landlord shall make certain that solid waste is collected from a
multifamily dwelling a minimum of once each week. The use of city solid waste
collection service is optional for multifamily dwellings. The collection and
storage for collection of solid waste at a multifamily dwelling shall conform
to the requirements of
Article VIII of the environment code of the City of Fort Worth.
      (2)   A landlord who furnishes commercial waste containers at a
multifamily dwelling, for city or private collection services, shall maintain
such containers in good mechanical condition and shall repair such containers
when necessary. Except while being cleaned, the drain plugs of such containers
shall be secured in the drain holes to prevent leaking.
      (3)   A landlord who furnishes commercial waste containers at a
multifamily dwelling, for city or private collection services, shall cause such
containers to be emptied a minimum of once every seven days. The director of
the code compliance department, and his authorized representatives, may when
necessary to safeguard the environment or the public health, safety or welfare,
order a landlord:
         a.   To empty the containers more often than weekly;
         b.   To increase the number of commercial waste containers on their
premises; and
         c.   To increase the size of the commercial waste containers used on
the premises.
      (4)   A landlord who furnishes commercial waste containers at a
multifamily dwelling shall have such containers emptied as often as necessary
to prevent their contents from overflowing or causing offensive odors, and
shall be responsible for cleaning the interior surfaces of such containers as
often as necessary to keep the surfaces free of garbage and other organic
material.
      (5)   A landlord who furnishes commercial waste containers, shall have
the containers placed on the premises of the multifamily dwelling in a position
where the doors and lids will not be obstructed when being opened or closed,
and where the containers may be freely serviced or emptied. Commercial waste
containers shall not be placed on or over any public rights-of-way, alleys,
streets and parkways, in a required parking space or off the premises of the
owner’s property.
      (6)   Each person who uses commercial waste containers at a multifamily
dwelling for the disposal of putrescible waste, and each landlord of a complex
where such containers are located, shall keep all lids and doors of the
containers securely closed at all times, except when being emptied or filled.
All garbage and rubbish shall be placed in plastic bags, which have been tied
or otherwise secured, prior to being placed in such containers.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 17, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-94 MISCELLANEOUS STANDARDS.
   (a)   Storage.
      (1)   Storage of any articles is prohibited under the exit stairways of
any building or structure. This prohibition shall not apply to enclosed storage
areas located under stairways which were built and which are maintained in
accordance with the building code and the fire code.
      (2)   Storage of appliances, household furnishings, construction
materials, automotive parts, junk or similar materials is prohibited within the
curtilage of residentially used property. This prohibition shall not apply to
the storage or display of barbecue grills, patio furniture or recreational
equipment designed for exterior use, or to construction materials on the
premises for an active, in-progress construction project.
   (b)   Playground equipment at multifamily dwelling complexes of eight units
or more, as defined in §
7-394.
      (1)   An owner or landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall
maintain records of annual inspections by maintenance personnel that document
that playground equipment, where provided, is maintained in good condition as
follows:
         a.   Free from protruding nails and screws, sharp edges, rusted metal
and splintered wood, metal or plastic;
         b.   Capable of resisting all forces and loads for which they were
designed and constructed; and
         c.   With all structural elements intact, proportioned and securely
fastened and anchored to prevent collapse hazards.
      (2)   Records required by this subsection (b) shall be maintained in the
business office of the complex for a period of not less than three years, and
shall be made available to the director upon request.
   (c)   Dead trees and limbs. Dead trees and tree limbs, which are reasonably
capable of causing injury to persons or damage to property, shall be abated
within seven days after:
      (1)   Being discovered by the owner or landlord or the owner or
landlord’s maintenance personnel; or
      (2)   The owner or landlord is notified of their existence.
   (d)   Special hazards.
      (1)   When any building or structure is significantly damaged by fire,
flood, wind or other natural or human-made calamity, the owner or landlord
shall remove from the premises all refuse, debris and charred and partially
burned lumber and other material.
      (2)   If a building or structure is damaged to such an extent that it is
not capable of being repaired, the owner or landlord shall remove from the
premises all of the remaining portion of the building or structure.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-95 SECURITY DEVICES.
   A landlord of a leased dwelling unit shall equip the unit with security
devices at the landlord’s expense as follows.
   (a)   If a tenant is in possession of a dwelling unit, the landlord shall
equip the unit with:
      (1)   A window latch on each exterior window of the dwelling unit;
      (2)   A doorknob lock or keyed dead bolt on each exterior door;
      (3)   A sliding door pin lock on each exterior sliding glass door of the
dwelling;
      (4)   A sliding door handle latch or a sliding door security bar on each
exterior sliding glass door of the dwelling; and
      (5)   A keyless bolting device and a door viewer on each exterior door of
the dwelling including doors that open into interior corridors.
   (b)   If a tenant is in possession of a dwelling unit with French doors, one
door of each pair of French doors shall meet the requirements of subsection (a)
above and the other door shall have:
      (1)   A keyed dead bolt or keyless bolting device capable of insertion
into the doorjamb above the door and a keyless bolting device capable of
insertion into the floor or threshold, each with a bolt having a throw of one
inch or more; or
      (2)   A bolt installed inside the door and operated from the edge of the
door, capable of insertion into the doorjamb above the door, and another bolt
installed inside the door and operated from the edge of the door capable of
insertion into the floor or threshold, each bolt having a throw of three-
fourths inch or more.
   (c)   A landlord is exempt from installing a keyless bolting device on an
exterior door of a dwelling unit if a tenant or occupant in the dwelling is
over 55 years of age or has a physical or mental disability, the tenant
requests, in writing, that the landlord deactivate or not install the keyless
bolting device, and the tenant certifies in the request that the tenant or
occupant is over 55 years of age or has a physical or mental disability. A
landlord is not exempt as provided by this subsection (c) if the landlord knows
that the requirements of this subsection (c) have not been met.
   (d)   A landlord is exempt from installing a keyed dead bolt or a doorknob
lock on an exterior door if at the time the tenant agrees to lease the
dwelling:
      (1)   At least one exterior door usable for normal entry into the
dwelling has both a keyed dead bolt and a keyless bolting device installed in
accordance with the height, strike plate and throw requirements of subsection
(f) below; and
      (2)   All other exterior doors have a keyless bolting device installed in
accordance with the height, strike plate and throw requirements of subsection
(f) below.
   (e)   A security device required by this section shall be maintained in an
operable condition while a tenant is in possession of a dwelling unit. However,
a landlord may deactivate or remove the locking mechanism of a doorknob lock or
remove any device not qualifying as a keyless bolting device if a keyed dead
bolt has been installed on the same door.
   (f)   Height, strike plate and throw requirements.
      (1)   A keyed dead bolt or a keyless bolting device required by this
subsection (f) shall be installed at a height:
         a.   Not lower than 36 inches from the floor; and
         b.   Not higher than 54 inches from the floor if installed prior to
September 1, 1993, and not higher than 48 inches from the floor if installed on
or after September 1, 1993.
      (2)   A keyed dead bolt or a keyless bolting device shall:
         a.   Have a strike plate screwed into the portion of the doorjamb
surface that faces the edge of the door when the door is closed; or
         b.   Be installed in a door with a metal doorjamb that serves as the
strike plate.
      (3)   A keyed dead bolt or keyless dead bolt installed in a dwelling unit
on or after September 1, 1993, shall have a bolt with a throw of not less than
one inch.
      (4)   The requirements of this subsection (f) do not apply to keyed dead
bolt or a keyless bolting device in one door of a pair of French doors that is
installed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b) above.
   (g)   A sliding door pin lock or sliding door security bar shall be
installed at a height not higher than 54 inches from the floor if installed
prior to September 1, 1993, and not higher than 48 inches from the floor if
installed on or after September 1, 1993.
   (h)   All security devices shall be operable from inside a dwelling unit
without the use of a key, tool or special knowledge or effort, and shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the building and fire codes.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-96 TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A person who is a tenant or a dwelling unit shall:
      (1)   Not disable the smoke detectors in the dwelling unit and shall
maintain the smoke detectors in an operative condition;
      (2)   Not maintain or use any incinerator or barbecue pit in a manner
that would cause a fire hazard, and shall not burn any combustible material in
a manner that would endanger the life or property of any person thereby;
      (3)   Not use portable barbecues or cooking appliances within ten feet of
a building or structure or on balconies, walkways or landings;
      (4)   Maintain the interior and exterior portions of the person’s
dwelling unit free from accumulations of solid waste and other conditions
conducive to the infestation of vectors and other pests;
      (5)   Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the tenant
supplies in accordance with all applicable ordinances;
      (6)   Not alter a structure or its facilities so as to create a
nonconformity with this article;
      (7)   Where evidence of infestation exists, provide for the extermination
of vectors, rodents and other pests within the interior of an occupied dwelling
unit within a one- or two-family dwelling. It shall be a defense if the tenant
can show that the tenant had the dwelling unit treated to eliminate vectors,
rodents and other pests within the preceding 30 days;
      (8)   Securely bag all household garbage or loose trash and refuse in
fly-tight containers before depositing same inside a commercial solid waste
container or placing it for collection;
      (9)   Securely close the door or lid to a commercial solid waste
container after depositing solid waste therein;
      (10)   Not place or stack articles for disposal adjacent to, around or
near a commercial solid waste container; and
      (11)   Not use flexible cords, such as extension cords, that exceed six
feet in length when measured from end to end, or appliance cords that exceed
six feet in length when measured from end to end. The combined length of an
appliance cord and a flexible cord shall not exceed six feet in length.
   (b)   A person who is a tenant of a dwelling unit commits an offense if the
person knowingly violates this section.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
DIVISION 4: ADMINISTRATIVE AND CIVIL REMEDIES
§ 7-97 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, this article, the director may issue to such person a written notice
of violation.
   (b)   No later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice, the
person may submit to the director, a written response which describes a plan of
action to correct or abate violations identified in the notice of violation.
The plan shall include specific actions to be taken by the person and a
specific completion date in which violations will be corrected or abated.
   (c)   If the person denies that any violation is occurring, or contends that
no corrective action is necessary, the person shall submit to the director no
later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice, a written
explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention. The director shall
review the written explanation of denial or contention and provide either a
written or verbal response.
   (d)   Submission of an explanation and/or plan of action in no way relieves
the person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation.
   (e)   Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against taking
any other action against the person, nor shall issuance of a notice of
violation be a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person.
   (f)   A notice of violation may be served either by personally serving the
owner with written notice, or by mailing such notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested to the person’s last known address and shall be deemed to
have been served three calendar days after mailing.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-98 COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT.
   (a)   Where the owner demonstrates the ability, resources and a reasonable
action plan commensurate with the action necessary to comply with this article,
the director may enter into a compliance agreement with any owner, lienholder
or mortgagee of property that is not in compliance with this article.
   (b)   The compliance agreement shall include a specific corrective plan of
action to be taken by the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the property to
correct all violations of this article within a time period specified in the
compliance agreement.
   (c)   A compliance agreement shall not be a bar against taking any other
action against the person, nor shall a compliance agreement be a prerequisite
for taking any other action against the owner of property.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-99 RESERVED.
§ 7-100 PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COMMISSION.
   (a)   All cases to be heard by the commission shall be heard by a quorum of
not less than six members. No decision by the commission shall be deemed
rendered unless concurred in by a majority of those members in attendance, but
by no less than a minimum of five members.
   (b)   The commission shall select a chairperson who shall act as presiding
officer during the hearing of all cases.
   (c)   All owners, mortgagees and lienholders of the property shall be given
an opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. Interested parties shall
also be given an opportunity to present evidence. In a hearing to determine
whether a building, property or structure is substandard, the owner, mortgagee
or lienholder of the building or structure has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of work that may be required to bring the building or
structure into compliance with this article and the time it will reasonably
take to perform the work.
   (d)   The commission shall establish rules of procedure for the conduct of
hearings, but such rules shall be consistent with this article and applicable
state law.
   (e)   Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the director
and at other times as determined by the commission. All meetings of the
commission shall be open to the public. The chairperson, or in the
chairperson's absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses.
   (f)   The director shall appoint an appropriate municipal official from the
code compliance department to act as secretary for the commission. The
secretary shall prepare and be the custodian of minutes for all commission
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a
member is absent or fails to vote. The secretary shall keep records of the
commission's examinations and other official duties.
   (g)   The director may appoint an appropriate municipal official from the
code compliance department, to present all cases and evidence before the
commission.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 4, passed 3-19-2019;
Ord. 26383-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 7-100A PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The City of Fort Worth Municipal Court shall establish rules of procedure
for the municipal court proceedings conducted under §§
7-102A,
7-102B,
7-103, and
7-106 of this chapter, but such rules shall be consistent with this article and
applicable state law.
(Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 4, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-101 NOTICE OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   The director shall give notice of all proceedings before the
commission under §
7-102:
      (1)   By certified mail, return receipt requested, to:
         a.   The record owners of the affected property as shown by the
records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected
property is located; and
         b.   Each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as
shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which
the affected property is located, if the address of the lienholder can be
ascertained from such records.
      (2)   To all other persons by posting a copy of the notice on the front
door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the
front door as practicable.
      (3)   The notice shall be mailed and posted on or before the tenth
calendar day before the date of the hearing before the commission.
Additionally, the notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
city on one occasion on or before the tenth calendar day before the date fixed
for the hearing.
      (4)   The notice shall state the date, time and place of hearing, and
shall include a statement, that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, shall be
required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this article, and the time in calendar days in which it
will take to reasonably perform the work. The notice shall also inform the
owner of his or her right to hire an attorney to represent him or her at the
hearing; his or her right to inspect the file on the property at code
compliance headquarters prior to the hearing; his or her right to request the
presence of city staff for the purpose of questioning at the hearing; and shall
advise the owner of his or her right to cross-examine city staff at the
hearing.
   (b)   In a municipal court proceeding under §
7-102A, the city shall give notice of all proceedings before the municipal
court:
      (1)   By certified mail, return receipt requested, to:
         a.   The record owners of the affected property as shown by the
records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected
property is located; and
         b.   Each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as
shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which
the affected property is located, if the address of the lienholder can be
ascertained from such records.
      (2)   To all other persons by posting a copy of the notice on the front
door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the
front door as practicable.
      (3)   The notice shall be mailed on or before the tenth calendar day
before the date of the hearing before the municipal court.
      (4)   The notice shall state the date, time and place of hearing, and
shall include a statement, that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, shall be
required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this article, and the time in calendar days in which it
will take to reasonably perform the work. The notice shall also inform the
owner of his or her right to hire an attorney to represent him or her at the
hearing; his or her right to inspect the file on the property at code
compliance headquarters prior to the hearing; his or her right to request the
presence of city staff for the purpose of questioning at the hearing; and shall
advise the owner of his or her right to cross-examine city staff at the
hearing.
   (c)   The city may file a notice of a proceeding that is before the building
standards commission or municipal court in the official public records of real
property in the county in which the affected property is located.
      (1)   The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the
affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable
search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal
description of the property, and a description of the proceeding.
      (2)   The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees,
lienholders or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire
such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the
proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who
acquires such interest after the filing of the notice.
      (3)   When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section to a
property owner, lienholder, or registered agent and the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the
notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord.
23577-03-2019, § 5, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-102 HEARING BEFORE THE COMMISSION.
   (a)   The commission may, after notice and hearing as provided by this
chapter, declare a building or structure to be in violation of this article
only if the building or structure is proven by a preponderance of the evidence
to be:
      (1)   Substandard;
      (2)   Substandard and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or
welfare;
      (3)   Unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and unsecured
from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered
or used by children;
      (4)   Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner and;
         a.   Constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from
entry; or
         b.   The means used to secure the building or structure are inadequate
to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building or structure by children
or by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage.
      (5)   A construction site where there has been no significant
construction work done in the previous three months, and the site is not
secured by a fence or other means to prevent its use by children or by vagrants
or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage; or
      (6)   A construction site where there has been no significant
construction work done in the previous three months, and all building materials
and construction equipment and tools have neither been removed from the site
nor secured at the site to prevent their use by children, their theft, their
deterioration; their vandalism, or their harborage of rodents or insects.
   (b)   The commission may specify, in its written order:
      (1)   A reasonable time, in compliance with this section, for the
building or structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished
by the owner; and
      (2)   May specify a reasonable time for the owner to relocate the
occupants and an additional reasonable time for any of the mortgagees or
lienholders to take the ordered action in the event that the owner fails to
comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner.
   (c)   In the event that the owner fails to comply timely with the order of
the commission, the only notice the city needs to furnish to a mortgagee or
lienholder of the failure is a copy of the order.
   (d)   If the commission makes a finding under subsection (a) of this
section, the commission shall order the owners, lienholders or mortgagees of
the building or structure to within 30 calendar days:
      (1)   Secure the building or structure from unauthorized entry; and/or
      (2)   Repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, unless the
owner, mortgagee or lienholder establishes at the hearing, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30
calendar days.
   (e)   If the commission allows the owner, mortgagee or lienholder more than
30 calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, the
commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the
work is being performed.
   (f)   The commission shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more
than 90 calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure
or fully perform all work required to comply fully with the order of the
commission, unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
      (1)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
      (2)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
completed within 90 calendar days because of the scope and complexity of the
work.
   (g)   If the commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than
90 calendar days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or
demolish the building or structure, the municipality shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the
municipality to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has
complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance
of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
appear before the commission or the director to demonstrate compliance with the
time schedule.
   (h)   Within ten calendar days after the date that the order is issued, the
director shall:
      (1)   File a copy of the order with the city secretary;
      (2)   Publish in the official newspaper of the city a notice containing:
         a.   The street address or legal description of the property;
         b.   The date of the hearing;
         c.   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
         d.   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
      (3)   File a copy of the notice published pursuant to subsection (h)(2)
above in the official public records of real property for the county in which
the affected property is located.
   (i)   The order shall be deemed issued and effective on the date the
commission hears and decides the case.
   (j)   The order shall be reduced to writing and signed by the chairperson of
the commission.
   (k)   After the hearing, the director shall promptly mail by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the building or
structure, and to any known lienholder and mortgagee of the building or
structure.
   (l)   A hearing before the commission shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 6, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-102A HEARING BEFORE A MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (a)   A hearing under this section may be held before a municipal court.
   (b)   The court may, after notice and hearing, as provided by this chapter,
declare a building or structure to be in violation of this article only if the
building or structure is proven by a preponderance of the evidence to be:
      (1)   Substandard;
      (2)   Substandard and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or
welfare;
      (3)   Unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and unsecured
from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered
or used by children;
      (4)   Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner and;
         a.   Constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from
entry; or
         b.   The means used to secure the building or structure are inadequate
to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building or structure by children
or by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage.
      (5)   A construction site where there has been no significant
construction work done in the previous three months, and the site is not
secured by a fence or other means to prevent its use by children or by vagrants
or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage; or
      (6)   A construction site where there has been no significant
construction work done in the previous three months, and all building materials
and construction equipment and tools have neither been removed from the site
nor secured at the site to prevent their use by children, their theft, their
deterioration; their vandalism, or their harborage of rodents or insects.
   (c)   The court may specify, in its written order:
      (1)   A reasonable time, in compliance with this section, for the
building or structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished
by the owner; and
      (2)   May specify a reasonable time for the owner to relocate the
occupants and an additional reasonable time for any of the mortgagees or
lienholders to take the ordered action in the event that the owner fails to
comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner.
   (d)   In the event that the owner fails to comply timely with the order of
the court, the only notice the city needs to furnish to a mortgagee or
lienholder of the failure is a copy of the order.
   (e)   If the court makes a finding under subsection (a) of this section, the
court shall order the owners, lienholders or mortgagees of the building or
structure to within 30 calendar days:
      (1)   Secure the building or structure from unauthorized entry; and/or
      (2)   Repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, unless the
owner, mortgagee or lienholder establishes at the hearing, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30
calendar days.
   (f)   If the court allows the owner, mortgagee or lienholder more than 30
calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, the
court shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and
performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the
work is being performed.
   (g)   The court shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than
90 calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure or
fully perform all work required to comply fully with the order of the court,
unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
      (1)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
      (2)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
completed within 90 calendar days because of the scope and complexity of the
work.
   (h)   If the court allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90
calendar days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or
demolish the building or structure, the municipality shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the
municipality to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has
complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance
of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
appear before the court or the director to demonstrate compliance with the time
schedule.
   (i)   Within ten calendar days after the date that the order is issued, the
city shall:
      (1)   File a copy of the order with the city secretary;
      (2)   Publish in the official newspaper of the city a notice containing:
         a.   The street address or legal description of the property;
         b.   The date of the hearing;
         c.   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
         d.   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
      (3)   File a copy of the notice published pursuant to subsection (i)(2)
above in the official public records of real property for the county in which
the affected property is located.
   (j)   The order shall be deemed issued and effective on the date the court
hears and decides the case.
   (k)   The order shall be reduced to writing and signed by the court.
   (l)   After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the building or
structure, and to any known lienholder and mortgagee of the building or
structure.
   (m)   A hearing before the court shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 7, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-102B CIVIL ACTION IN MUNICIPAL COURT.
   Pursuant to Texas Government Code § 30.00005, the Fort Worth Municipal Court
has civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and
nuisance abatement ordinances under Subsection B, Chapter 54, Texas Local
Government Code.
(Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 7, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-103 CIVIL PENALTY.
   (a)   After the time to comply with an order of the commission or municipal
court issued pursuant to §§
7-102 or
7-102A has lapsed, the commission or municipal court may hold a hearing on
violations of the order and may assess a civil penalty against the property
owner, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per day per violation, or, if the
owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not
to exceed $10 per day per violation, if at the hearing the city proves:
      (1)   The property owner was notified of the requirements of this article
and the owner's need to comply with the requirements, and was notified of the
commission's or municipal court's order; and
      (2)   After notification, the property owner committed an act in
violation of this article or failed to take an action necessary to bring the
building or structure into compliance with this article and the order of the
commission or municipal court.
   (b)   In a proceeding under §
7-77.1 the building standards commission after notice and hearing may assess a
civil penalty against the property owner, in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per
day per violation, if at the hearing the city proves:
      (1)   The property owner had actual notification of the requirements of
the ordinance and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and
      (2)   After actual notification, the property owner committed an act in
violation of this article or failed to take an action necessary to bring the
property into compliance with the ordinance.
   (c)   A determination made by the commission panel or municipal court
constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court of competent
jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in
accordance with the established penalty.
   (d)   To enforce the civil penalty, the city secretary shall file with the
Tarrant County district clerk a certified copy of the order of the commission
panel or municipal court establishing the amount and duration of the civil
penalty.
   (e)   No other proof shall be required for a district court to enter final
judgment on the penalty.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord.
23577-03-2019, § 8, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-104 WORK PERFORMED BY CITY.
   (a)   If the commission's or municipal court's order to vacate, secure,
repair, remove or demolish the building or structure is not complied with
within the allotted time, the director may vacate, secure, remove or demolish
the building or structure, or relocate the occupants of the building or
structure, at the city's expense. This subsection (a) does not limit the
ability of a municipality to collect on a bond, letter of credit from a
financial institution or guaranty from a third party or other financial
guaranty.
   (b)   The director may repair the building or structure only to the extent
necessary to bring the building or structure into compliance with the minimum
standards of this article, and only if the building or structure is a
residential building or structure with ten or fewer dwelling units. The repairs
shall not improve the building or structure to the extent that the building or
structure exceeds minimum building standards.
   (c)   After securing a building or structure as provided in subsection (a)
above, the director may post a notice to vacate on or near the front door of
the building or structure. The notice to vacate must be in substantially the
following form:
   DO NOT OCCUPY
   This building or structure is in violation of the City Code of the City of
Fort Worth.
   Occupancy is suspended until such time as the violations are corrected and
approved by the Director of the City of Fort Worth code compliance department.
   It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or structure or to remove or
deface this notice.
   (d)   In a proceeding under §
7-77.1 if the commission's order is not complied with within the allotted time,
the director may act upon the order at the city's expense.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord.
23577-03-2019, § 9, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-105 ASSESSMENT OF LIEN.
   (a)   If the city incurs expenses under §
7-104 the city may assess the expense on, and the city has a lien against, the
property on which the building or structure was located.
   (b)   If the commission or municipal court assesses a civil penalty under §
7-103, the city has a lien against the property on which the building or
structure was located to secure payment of any civil penalty.
   (c)   A lien may not be made on property protected as a homestead under the
Texas Constitution except in a proceeding under §
7-77.1.
   (d)   The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of
the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the
county in which the property is located.
   (e)   The notice of the lien shall contain the name and address of the owner
if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal
description of the real property on which the building or structure was
located, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality, and the balance
due.
   (f)   Except as provided by subsection (g) below, the city's lien to secure
payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repairs, removal or demolition, is
inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the
real property, if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the
county clerk of the county in which the real property is located before the
civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal or demolition is begun by the
city. The city's lien is superior to all previously recorded judgment liens.
   (g)   If notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the occupants of
the building or structure or to repair, remove or demolish the building or
structure is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder, the lien is a
privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens.
   (h)   Any civil penalty or expenses assessed by the city under this article
shall accrue interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of the
assessment until paid in full. The lien is extinguished if the property owner
or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses and the civil penalty.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord.
23577-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-106 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO SECURE A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.
   (a)   Without a prior hearing before the commission or municipal court, the
director may secure a building or structure the director determines:
      (1)   Is substandard and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or
welfare;
      (2)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a
right of possession to the building or structure;
      (3)   Whether the building or structure is a construction site where
there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three
months, and the site is not secured by a fence or other means to prevent its
use by children or by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage; and
      (4)   Whether the building or structure is a construction site where
there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three
months, and all building materials and construction equipment and tools have
neither been removed from the site nor secured at the site to prevent their use
by children, their theft, their deterioration, their vandalism, or their
harborage of rodents or insects.
   (b)   After securing a building or structure as provided in subsection (a)
above, the director may post a notice to vacate on or near the front door of
the building or structure. The notice to vacate must be in substantially the
following form:
   DO NOT OCCUPY
   This building or structure is in violation of the City Code of the City of
Fort Worth.
   Occupancy is suspended until such time as the violations are corrected and
approved by the Director of the City of Fort Worth code compliance department.
   It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or structure or to remove or
deface this notice.
   (c)   Before the eleventh calendar day after the date the building or
structure is secured, the director must give notice to the owner by:
      (1)   Personally, serving the owner with written notice;
      (2)   Mailing such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to
the owner at the owner's last known post office address and shall be deemed to
have been served three calendar days after mailing;
      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-calendar day
period in the official newspaper of the city if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or
      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building or
structure if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office
address is unknown.
   (d)   The notice must contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the building or structure and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the standards established by this
article;
      (3)   A statement that the director has secured the building or
structure; and
      (4)   An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the director's securing of the building or
structure.
   (e)   The commission or municipal court shall conduct a hearing at which the
owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter
relating to the director's securing of the building or structure, if within 30
calendar days after the date the director's secures the building or structure,
the owner files a written request for a hearing with the director. The
commission or municipal court shall conduct the hearing within 20 calendar days
after the date the owner files a request for hearing.
   (f)   The commission or municipal court will conduct the hearing in the
manner provided for by this division. The issues to be determined in such
hearing are:
      (1)   Whether the building or structure was substandard, and a hazard to
the public health, safety and/or welfare at the time it was secured;
      (2)   Whether the building or structure, at the time it was secured, was
unoccupied or was occupied only by persons who did not have a right to
possession of the building or structure;
      (3)   Whether the building or structure is a construction site where
there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three
months, and the site is not secured by a fence or other means to prevent its
use by children or by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage;
      (4)   Whether the building or structure is a construction site where
there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three
months, and all building materials and construction equipment and tools have
neither been removed from the site nor secured at the site to prevent their use
by children, their theft, their deterioration, their vandalism, or their
harborage of rodents or insects; and
      (5)   Whether the expenses incurred by the city to secure the building or
structure were reasonable.
   (g)   The city may assess expenses for securing a building or structure in
the manner provided for in §
7-105 above. A lien is created under this section in the same manner as a lien
is created in §
7-105, and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under that
section.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 11, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-107 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 7-107 was added by Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; amended by
Ord. 15503, § 2, passed 4-1-2003; then reserved Ord. 21217-04-2014, § 2, passed
4-22-2014.
§ 7-108 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (a)   Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or
severally aggrieved by an order of the building standards commission or
municipal court issued under this article, may appeal the order by filing a
verified petition in a Tarrant County civil district court.
   (b)   The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder or mortgagee within
30 calendar days after the mailing of the building standards commission or
municipal court order.
   (c)   If not timely appealed, the order of the building standards commission
or municipal court becomes final as to the owners, lienholders and mortgagees
upon the expiration of 30 calendar days after the mailing of the order.
   (d)   If the building standards commission or municipal court ordered the
subject property to be demolished, then the appeal to the district court shall
be by trial de novo. Otherwise appeal to the district court shall be governed
by the procedures outlined in Tex. Local Government Code Chapters 54 or 214.
   (e)   Judicial review for proceedings under §
7-77.1.
      (1)   The city shall publish an abbreviated copy of the order in a
newspaper of general circulation within ten calendar days of the mailing of the
order. The order shall include the following:
         a.   The street address or legal description of the property;
         b.   The date of the hearing;
         c.   A brief statement indicating the content of the order; and
         d.   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
      (2)   A copy of the order shall be filed in the office of the city
secretary.
      (3)   If no appeal is taken from the decision of the building standards
commission within the required period, the decision of the building standards
commission is, in all things, final and binding.
      (4)   Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision of the building standards commission may appeal the
decision by filing a verified petition in Tarrant County civil district court.
      (5)   A lienholder does not have standing to bring a proceeding under
this subsection (e) on the grounds that the lienholder was not notified of the
proceedings before the building standards commission or was unaware of the
condition of the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the
building standards commission and entered an appearance in opposition to the
proceedings.
      (6)   The petition must be presented within 30 calendar days after the
date a copy of the final decision of the building standards commission is
mailed by first class mail, certified receipt requested, to all owners,
lienholders and mortgagees of record.
      (7)   The appeal to the district court shall be governed by the
procedures outlined in Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 54 or 214.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14629, § 1, passed 5-22-2001; Ord.
15503, § 3, passed 4-1-2003; Ord. 20104-03-2012, § 1, passed 3-20-2012; Ord.
21217-04-2014, § 3, passed 4-22-2014; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 12, passed 3-19-
2019)
§ 7-109 PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of notice for a hearing under §
7-102 or §
7-102A of this article, a hearing will be conducted before the Historic and
Cultural Landmarks Commission of the City of Fort Worth if the building or
structure that is the subject of the hearing:
      (1)   Meets either a. or b. and also c. below.
         a.   Individually designated or pending designation as:
            1.   Highly significant endangered;
            2.   Historic and cultural landmark; or
            3.   Demolition delay.
         b.   A contributing historic property located in an area designated or
pending designation as an historic and cultural landmarks district.
         c.   Is not a single-family dwelling occupied by the owner.
   (b)   The director may secure the structure from entrance until the
requirements in subsection (c) of this section are completed.
   (c)   The landmarks commission shall review the condition of the building or
structure to determine whether it can be reasonably rehabilitated and shall
submit a written report of its findings and recommendations to the director
within 60 calendar days from the date of the initial landmarks commission
hearing.
   (d)   If the landmarks commission determines that the building or structure
cannot be rehabilitated, the director may proceed as provided in §
7-102 or §
7-102A above, and the building standards commission or municipal court may
order its demolition.
   (e)   If the landmarks commission determines that the building or structure
can be reasonably rehabilitated, the city may not permit the building or
structure to be demolished for at least 90 calendar days after the date the
report is submitted to the director. During this 90-calendar day period, the
city's historic preservation officer, shall notify the building or structure's
owner to afford the owner an opportunity to attempt to identify a feasible
alternative use for the building or structure or to locate an alternative
purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building or structure.
   (f)   If the city is not able to locate the owner or if the owner does not
respond within the 90-calendar day period, the director may proceed as provided
by §
7-101, and the city may then file suit pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code §
214.003 for the appointment of a receiver. A receiver may not be appointed for
a building or structure that is an owner-occupied single-family residence or
that is zoned nonresidential and used in a nonresidential character.
   (g)   The director may proceed as provided in §
7-101, and the building standards commission or municipal court may order the
demolition of a building or structure, if after the expiration of the 90-
calendar day period the city is not able to:
      (1)   Identify a feasible alternative use for the building or structure;
      (2)   Locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the
building or structure; or
      (3)   Appoint a receiver for the building or structure as provided by
Texas Local Government Code § 214.003.
   (h)   An owner of a substandard building or structure declared to be in
violation of this article is not liable for penalties related to the building
or structure that accrue during the 90-calendar day period provided for
disposition of historic property under this section.
   (i)   In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for
the demolition of a non-contributing historic property, the city must follow
the processes and procedures set forth in the Historic Preservation Ordinance
for demolition requests by an applicant other than the city.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 13, passed 3-19-2019;
Ord. 23984-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 7-110 QUARTERLY REPORT TO CITY COUNCIL OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES ON THE
DEMOLITION/REHABILITATION LIST.
   (a)   The director shall make quarterly reports to the city council of all
buildings or structures on the city-funded demolition/rehabilitation list. The
report shall list each building or structure by its street address, owners of
record, city council district, length of time on the list, and its priority on
the list.
   (b)   The director shall list buildings or structures on the report as
priority one demolish, priority one rehabilitate, priority two demolish,
priority two rehabilitate, priority three demolish and priority three
rehabilitate, and shall develop criteria for determining a building or
structure’s placement in a category.
   (c)   The city council, by a majority vote, may remove a building or
structure from the list or may change its priority on the list.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-111 APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER.
   In accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 214.003, the city may bring
an action in district court against an owner of residential property that is
not in substantial compliance with the minimum standards of this article,
seeking an order from the court appointing a receiver to take control of and
restore the property.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-112 CIVIL ACTION WITHOUT COMMISSION HEARING.
   (a)   The city may bring suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties
against the owner of property in violation of this article, or to compel the
demolition or repair of buildings or structures, as provided for by Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter B.
   (b)   Filing a suit for civil penalties, injunctive relief or other remedies
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a violator.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§§ 7-113—7-120 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT
§ 7-121 MAINTAINING A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE IN VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE.
   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
building or structure that is in violation of this code.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-122 FAILURE TO SECURE A VACANT BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.
   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
building or structure, regardless of its condition, that is unoccupied by its
owners, lessees or invitees and knowingly fails to:
   (a)   Secure such building or structure from unauthorized entry; or
   (b)   Keep such building or structure secured from unauthorized entry.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999)
§ 7-123 OCCUPANCY OF A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE POSTED WITH A NOTICE TO VACATE.
   (a)   The director shall post a notice to vacate in a conspicuous place at
or upon any building or structure which he or she determines might from any
cause endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety and/or welfare of the
general public or any occupants of said building or structure. In addition, the
director shall issue a written notice of the violations to the owner and or
person in control of the building or structure, describing the violations of
this code that require correction.
   (b)   Every notice to vacate shall be in substantially the following form;
      DO NOT OCCUPY
      This building or structure is in violation of the City Code of the City
of Fort Worth.
      Occupancy is suspended until such time as the violations are corrected
and approved by the director of the City of Fort Worth code compliance
division.
      It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or structure or to remove or
deface this notice.
   (c)   Regardless of such notice being posted, it shall be unlawful for any
person to use, enter, remain in or occupy any building or structure nor shall
any owner or person in control of any building or structure permit any person
to use, enter, remain in or occupy such building or structure which the
director determines to be in violation of this article. It shall be a defense
to any prosecution occurring under this subsection (c) that entry was made for
the sole purpose of repairing, demolishing or removing such building or
structure.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface such notice
until either the required demolition or removal has been completed and approved
by the building official or until the required repairs have been completed and
a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the provisions of the
building code and suspension of the building or structure’s occupancy is
rescinded by the director of the code compliance division.
   (e)   For the purpose of prosecution under this section, it shall be
presumed that such notice was served and posted by the proper authority and
under the proper procedure if it is shown that such notice was conspicuously
posted on such building or structure on the offense date alleged in the
criminal complaint.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-124 REMOVING OR DEFACING A NOTICE TO VACATE.
   A person commits an offense if the person removes or defaces a notice to
vacate posted by the director without the permission of the director.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-125 PENALTY.
   (a)   An offense as defined under this article is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   The filing of criminal charges shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
      (1)   If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this article
that within three years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has
been once previously convicted of an offense under this article:
         a.   Except as provided by subsection (b)(1)b. below, upon conviction
the defendant shall be fined not less than $250; and
         b.   If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the
defendant was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time
of the alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less
than $1,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c).
      (2)   If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this article
that within three years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has
been previously convicted of two or more offenses under this article:
         a.   Except as provided by subsection (b)(2)b. below, upon conviction
the defendant shall be fined not less than $500; and
         b.   If is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the
defendant was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time
of the alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less
than $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c).
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 14404, § 1, passed 11-7-2000; Ord.
23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 7-126 CRIMINAL CITATION.
   The director or any other representative of the City of Fort Worth is
authorized to issue citations for violations of this article.
(Ord. 13743, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 23577-03-2019, § 1, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 7-127—7-165 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
Cross-reference:
   Minimum building standards code, see §§
7-66 et seq.
   International Building Code, see §§
7-46 et seq.
   National electrical code adopted, see §
11-1
   International Fire Code adopted, see §
13-1
   International Plumbing Code adopted, see §
26-1
§ 7-166 THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The Mechanical Code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2021
International Mechanical Code of the International Code Council (ICC), and the
same as amended is hereby adopted as the City's Mechanical Code. One copy of
the 2021 International Mechanical Code marked Exhibit "A", is incorporated
herein by reference and shall be filed in the Office of the City Secretary for
permanent record and inspection.
   (b)   The mechanical provisions of the International Residential Code, as
adopted elsewhere, shall be used as the mechanical provisions for buildings and
structures applicable to that code except as provided for in that code.
   (c)   Any Errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Mechanical Code, as they are discovered, are considered
as part of this code.
(Ord. 8907, § 1, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 11268, § 1, passed 3-26-1993; Ord.
13520, § 1, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 14647, § 1, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15950, §
1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19603-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22518-12-
2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1- 2017; Ord. 25384-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-
8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-167 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2021 edition of the International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   *IMC Chapter 1; “Part I - Scope and Application” and “Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement” are hereby deleted and Part 1- Scope and
Application and Part 2 - Administrative and Enforcement provisions of this Code
shall be governed by the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IMC SECTION 202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   *IMC Section 202; the following definitions are changed and new definitions
are added to read as follows:
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Any of the following shall be considered as a change of
occupancy where the current International Building Code requires a greater
degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of
egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
   1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.
   2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of activity
within, a building or structure.
   3.   A change of use.
   The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF USE. A change in the use of a building or a portion of a building,
within the same group classification, or from one zoning use category to
another, for which there is a change in application of the code requirements.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 and the ICC Electrical Code shall be assumed to mean the Electrical
Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Code as adopted
by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
   FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   HAZARDOUS LOCATION. As used in this code, any location considered to be a
fire hazard for flammable vapors, dust, combustible fibers or other highly
combustible substances. The location is not necessarily categorized in the
International Building Code as a high-hazard use group classification.
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes which regulate the
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REGULATIONS
IMC SECTION 303
EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCE LOCATION
   *IMC Section 303.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Access to equipment and appliances shall be provided through areas under the
control of the tenant, room or dwelling unit served, or provided in common
areas accessible without going through private tenant spaces, rooms or dwelling
units. The location shall not be such that permission from one occupant must be
obtained before another occupant can provide service to their equipment or
appliances.
IMC SECTION 306
ACCESS AND SERVICE SPACE
   *IMC Section 306.3; changed to read as follows:
   306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided
... {'{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... front side of the appliance. The
clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches
(508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to
allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, access to the attic space
shall be provided by one of the following:
   1.   A permanent stair.
   2.   A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
   3.   An access door from an upper floor level.
   4.   An access panel, only when the equipment is within 24" of the panel
opening.
   Exceptions:
      1.   The passageway and level service space are not required where the
appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required
opening.
      2.   Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829
mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway
shall be not greater than 50 feet (15 250 mm) in length.
   Solid flooring as specified for the passageway of this section shall be
flooring that complies with the provisions as required for a floor or shall not
be less than one layer of 3/4" plywood.
   Water heaters shall not be installed in residential attics.
   Exception: Tankless water heaters.
   *IMC Section 306.3.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
   *IMC Section 306.4.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
   *IMC Section 306.5; changed to read as follows:
   306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where
equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure
or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16
feet (4877 mm) above grade to access such equipment or appliance, an interior
or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders
providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (3658 mm) to the
finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment or
appliances' level service space. Such access shall ... {'{'}bulk of section to
read the same{'}'}... Where access involves climbing over parapet walls, the
height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall.
   Where an equipment or appliance has a serviceable area located at a height
exceeding 16 feet (4877 mm) above the access level, a permanent approved means
of access and a catwalk or working deck shall be provided on at least one side.
Such permanent exterior ladder need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to
the access level below.
   {'{'}Remainder of section unchanged{'}'}
   *IMC Section 306.5.1.1; added to read as follows:
   306.5.1.1 Catwalk. On roofs having slopes greater than 4 in 12, a catwalk at
least 24 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches
apart shall be provided from the roof access to the working platform at the
appliance.
   *IMC Section 306.5.2; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
IMC SECTION 307
CONDENSATE DISPOSAL
   *IMC Section 307.2.1; change to read as follows:
   307.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and
evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of
disposal. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the
direction of discharge of not less than one-eight unit vertical in 12 units
horizontal (1-percent slope). Condensate shall not discharge into a walking
surface such as a street, alley, sidewalk, or other areas so as to cause a
nuisance. Rooftop units may be piped to discharge into roof drains when such
drains do not discharge onto a walking surface as listed above.
   *IMC Section 307.2.2; change to read and add a second paragraph to read as
follows:
   307.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate
disposal system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper and copper alloy, CPVC, cross-
linked polyethylene, galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene, PVC
or PVDF pipe or tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure,
temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections
shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 of the
International Plumbing Code relative to the material type. Condensate waste and
drain line size shall be not less than the discharge size of the pan but not
less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) internal diameter and shall not ... {'{'}bulk of
paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... in accordance with Table 307.2.2. All horizontal
sections of drain piping shall be installed in uniform alignment at a uniform
slope.
   *IMC Section 307.2.3, item #2; add a sentence to read as follows:
   The conspicuous point of disposal shall not create a hazard such as dripping
over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance.
   *IMC Section 307.2.3, Add item #5; to read as follows:
   5.   A listed and labeled water detecting device shall be provided that will
shut off up-flow equipment in the event the primary drain is blocked. The
device shall be installed on all up flow equipment above the first floor and
shall be installed beneath and on the floor of the up-flow equipment it serves.
CHAPTER 4 - VENTILATION
IMC SECTION 403
MECHANICAL VENTILATION
   *IMC Section 403.2; add an exception #2 to read as follows:
   2.   Where the design professional demonstrates that an engineered
ventilation system is designed in accordance with ASHRAE 62.1, the minimum
required rate of outdoor air shall be permitted to be as specified in such
engineered system design.
   *IMC Section 403.2.1: change item 1 and add an item #5 to read as follows:
   1.   Ventilation air shall not be recirculated from one dwelling unit to
another or to dissimilar occupancies. See also Table 403.3, footnote b. When
dissimilar occupancies produce odors or smells that may infiltrate neighboring
tenant spaces through wall or ceiling openings, during positive or negative
pressures, efforts shall be taken to seal such openings and/or provide supply
air in a method that would prevent such infiltration.
   2.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   3.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   4.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   5.   Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet,
lavatory or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical
recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
CHAPTER 5 - EXHAUST SYSTEMS
IMC SECTION 501
GENERAL
   *IMC Section 501.3; add a fourth exception to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
      1.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
      2.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
      3.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
      4.   Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area
when infiltration of outside air is present.
IMC SECTION 504
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
   *IMC Section 504.5; changed to read as follows:
   504.5 Dryer exhaust power ventilators. Domestic dryer exhaust duct
ventilators shall be listed and labeled to UL 705 for use in dryer exhaust duct
systems. The dryer exhaust duct power ventilator (DEDPV) shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and interlocked to prevent the
clothes dryer from being energized if the DEDPV fails to operate as intended.
   *IMC Section 504.9.1; changed to read as follows:
   504.9.1 Material and Size. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth interior finish
and shall be construed of metal not less than 0.016-inch (0.4 mm) in thickness.
The exhaust duct size shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in diameter. The size
of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length nor at the point of
termination.
   *IMC Section 504.9,2; changed to read as follows:
   504.9.2 Duct Installation. Exhaust ducts shall be support at 4-foot (1219
mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend
into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Ducts shall not
be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude the inside of the
duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling cavities, such
cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without deformation.
IMC SECTION 506
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOOD VENTILATION
SYSTEM DUCTS AND EXHAUST EQUIPMENT
   *IMC Section 506.3.2.5; first paragraph changed and third paragraph added to
read as follows:
   506.3.2.5 Grease duct test. Prior to the use or concealment of any portion
of a grease duct system a leakage test shall be performed ... {'{'}bulk of
paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... A light test or smoke test shall be performed to
determine that all welded and brazed joints are liquid tight.
   {'{'}Second paragraph unchanged{'}'}
   A smoke test shall be performed through the use of a commercial smoke
machine intended for the purpose, smoke emitting cartridges, or smoke candles.
For smoke candles and cartridges, the top and bottom of the duct shall be
sealed with a suitable material. The bottom seal shall have a sealable opening
to permit the insertion of the smoke cartridge or candle and low volume low
pressure fan or other approved pressurization device. Duct pressurization shall
not exceed the rating of the ducts. Smoke candle duration shall be 30 seconds
for each 1000 cubic feet of duct. Smoke emitting cartridges shall provide twice
the volume of smoke of the duct being tested.
IMC SECTION 510
HAZARDOUS EXHAUST SYSTEMS
   *Section 510.2.1.1; added to read as follows:
   510.2.1.1 Woodworking (or cabinet) shop. Where more than three fixed or
table mounted pieces of dust producing equipment exists, each fixed or table
mounted piece shall be connected to a dust collection system, in accordance
with this section and Section 511, and interconnected such that the dust
collection is automatically activated whenever the equipment is on.
CHAPTER 6 - DUCT SYSTEMS
IMC SECTION 607
DUCT AND TRANSFER OPENINGS
   *IMC Section 607.1: add a sentence to read as follows:
   For outdoor air intakes and exhaust openings, dampers shall also comply with
the Energy Code.
   *IMC Section 607.2.2; changed to read as follows:
   607.2.2 Hazardous exhaust ducts. Hazardous exhaust duct systems shall extend
directly to the exterior of the building and shall not extend into or through
ducts and plenums. Fire dampers are not required at penetration of fire-rated
elements for hazardous exhaust duct systems. Penetration of fire-rated elements
shall comply with Section 510 and the Building Code.
   *IMC Section 607.5.5.3; added to read as follows:
   607.5.5.3 Installation requirements. Exhaust systems for Group B and R
kitchen, clothes dryer, bathroom and toilet room exhausts shall comply with the
following:
   1.   Kitchen systems, clothes dryer systems, and bathroom and toilet room
systems may share the same shaft but not the same duct. When multiple ducts are
in the same shaft, each system shall have its own fan providing continuous
upward flow.
   2.   Dryer ducts shall have a cleanout located near the shaft penetration to
permit cleaning of the 22" subduct. The subduct shall be considered in the
calculation of allowable duct length reduction.
   3.   Kitchen ducts shall be provided with some method for preventing grease
buildup and cleaning of the duct.
   4.   A secondary power source is required for the fan under both Section
504.10 and 513.11.
(Ord. 8907, § 1, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 9816, § 1, passed 2-10-1987; Ord. 9893,
§§ 1, 2, passed 6-16-1987; Ord. 9961, § 1, passed 9-22-1987; Ord. 10157, §§
1—3, passed 8-30-1988; Ord. 10275, §§ 1—3, passed 3-21-1989; Ord. 11268, § 1
(Exh. B), passed 3-26-1993; Ord. 13520, § 2, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 13722, § 1,
passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 13747, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 13812, § 1, passed 5-
25-1999; Ord. 13962, § 1, passed 10-5-1999; Ord. 14041, § 1, passed 1-4-2000;
Ord. 14486, § 1, passed 1-16-2001; Ord. 14647, § 2, passed 6-5-2001; Ord.
15533, § 3, passed 4-29-2002; Ord. 15784, § 1, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 15950, §
2, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 16163, § 1, passed 10-12-2004; Ord. 17202, § 1,
passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 19118-04-2010,
§ 1, passed 4-20-2010; Ord. 19603-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 20427-
09-2012, § 3, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 3, passed
9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 21189-04-2014, § 3, passed 4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-
2014; Ord. 22372-08-2016, § 3, passed 8-30- 2016; Ord. 22518-12-2016, § 2,
passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 5, passed 12- 6-2016,
eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-2017, § 5, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 25384-03-2022,
§ 2, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-168 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting mechanical code provisions,
as amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances,
except in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct
conflict with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 8907, § 2, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 9816, § 4, passed 2-10-1987; Ord.
11268, § 2, passed 3-26-1993; Ord. 13520, § 3, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 14647, §
3, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15950, § 3, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19603-03-2011, § 3,
passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 22518-12-2016, § 3, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017;
Ord. 25384-03-2022, § 3, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-169 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
herein provided.
(Ord. 13520, § 4, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 14647, § 4, passed 6-5-2001; Ord.
15950, § 4, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19603-03-2011, § 4, passed 3-22-2011; Ord.
22518-12-2016, § 4, passed 12-6- 2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2,
passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 25384-03-2022, § 4, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-170—7-185 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: FALLOUT SHELTERS
Cross-reference:
   Emergency reporting equipment and procedures, see
Ch. 12
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
§ 7-186 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   CIVIL DEFENSE FALLOUT SHELTER. Any building or structure which is designed
to be used primarily for the purposes of providing protection to the occupants
thereof from the effects of fire, heat and radiological fallout resulting from
a disaster.
   DISASTER. Actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire,
storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity. In the case
of a nuclear attack, the disaster situation will be anticipated to last for a
two-week period.
(1964 Code, § 10-1)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 7-187 CIVIL DEFENSE FALLOUT SHELTER BOARD—ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION;
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   There is established a civil defense fallout shelter board, which shall
consist of one representative each from the fire department, the building
division of the department of public works and the civil defense office. The
members of the civil defense fallout shelter board shall be appointed by the
city manager.
(1964 Code, § 10-2)
§ 7-188 SAME—POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The civil defense fallout shelter board is authorized to establish minimum
standards as specified by this article for the design and use of civil defense
fallout shelters and to promulgate such regulations as are reasonable and
necessary for the interpretation and enforcement of this article and of the
regulations and recommendations of the Office of Civil Defense, United States
Department of Defense, concerning fallout shelters.
(1964 Code, § 10-3)
§ 7-189 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or occupy or maintain any building or
structure which is designed primarily as a civil defense fallout shelter, or
cause or permit the same to be done, without wholly complying with the
provisions of this article and other applicable codes or ordinances of the
city.
(1964 Code, § 10-4)
§ 7-190 APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The applicant for a building permit for a civil defense fallout shelter
shall submit plans and specifications to the building inspection division of
the public works department for its approval under the building code of the
city and all applicable provisions of this code and any other ordinances of the
city prior to commencing construction thereon. For single- family shelters,
such plans may be those prepared by the Office of Civil Defense, United States
Department of Defense, or by manufacturers of shelters, and approved by the
civil defense fallout shelter board. The preparation of plans and
specifications for larger than standard single-family shelters conforming to
plans and specifications of the office of civil defense shall be subject to the
provisions of § 301(i) of the building code of the city.
(1964 Code, § 10-5)
§ 7-191 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Each civil defense fallout shelter constructed in the city shall be subject
to the following minimum standards and regulations.
   (a)   Any use of fallout shelters other than for disaster protection shall
be incidental to disaster protection, and shall not be allowed to interfere
with the primary protective function of the shelter.
   (b)   Civil defense fallout shelter sanitary facilities shall not be
connected directly to the city sanitary sewer system or to any septic tank
sewer system. Each civil defense fallout shelter shall have a chemical toilet
facility or an adequate supply of plastic bags or closed containers adequate to
serve the number of persons to be housed in the civil defense fallout shelter
during a disaster situation.
   (c)   Storage of fresh water within the civil defense fallout shelter shall
be provided on a basis of one-half gallon per person per day.
   (d)   Civil defense fallout shelters having a manually or mechanically
operated ventilation system shall provide a flow of three cubic feet of fresh
filtered air per minute for each person occupying the civil defense fallout
shelter. Civil defense fallout shelters without forced ventilation systems
(either manually or mechanically operated) shall provide 500 cubic feet of
space per occupant. Any civil defense fallout shelter using a mechanical
ventilating system shall have an auxiliary power source, and such auxiliary
power source shall meet all requirements of the fire and electrical codes of
the city. Each civil defense fallout shelter shall have a filtering system for
its ventilating equipment. Reasonable protection shall be provided aboveground
for the air filter vent so as to reduce the possibility of damage to the air
filter vent. The air filter vent shall extend at least 36 inches above the
ground.
   (e)   Civil defense fallout shelters shall conform to the requirements of
the zoning ordinance of the city and such shelters shall be so located on a lot
as to meet the minimum yard requirements of the zoning ordinance for the
district in which a civil defense fallout shelter is located. For the purposes
of this article, a civil defense fallout shelter not attached to the residence
shall be treated as an accessory building.
   (f)   Civil defense fallout shelters shall be posted with an appropriate
sign showing the capacity thereof as determined by the civil defense shelter
board.
   (g)   Civil defense fallout shelters shall be maintained in a safe and
sanitary manner and shall not be used for the storage of material other than
those considered desirable equipment or provisions for use as a civil defense
fallout shelter.
   (h)   Civil defense fallout shelters shall have a minimum amount of floor
space as follows:
 
Rated capacity in Sq. Ft. living area per Sq. ft. storage space Minimum sq. ft.
persons           person (based on        per person            required
                  stacked bunks)
1                 24                      2                     26
2                 12                      2                     28
3                 10                      2                     36
4 (or more)       10                      2                     -
 
   (i)   Single-family civil defense fallout shelters shall have at least one
means of access and egress which may be entered from within the main dwelling
if constructed as an addition to the main dwelling or from the outside of the
shelter if treated as an accessory structure. Stairs and exits for civil
defense fallout shelters shall meet all exit requirements of municipal and
state fire codes. Placement of the stairway shaft or entranceway for single-
family or community civil defense fallout shelters shall provide at least one
90 degree turn in the stairway shaft or entranceway before an entrance is made
into the main shelter.
   (j)   The walls and floor slabs of all aboveground civil defense fallout
shelters shall be waterproofed, and the roof, walls and floors and slabs of all
underground shelters shall be waterproofed, using either a plastic membrane,
mopped on asphaltum or integral mixed water-proofing.
   (k)   Civil defense fallout shelters and all parts thereof shall be of
sufficient strength to support the estimated or actual dead and live loads to
which subjected, in addition to their own proper dead load, without exceeding
the maximum stresses allowed for various materials by the applicable provisions
of the building code of the city; provided that, no part thereof shall be
designed for live loads less than the following:
      (1)   For an aboveground shelter with a roof elevation including
shielding material of more than six feet above the highest elevation of the
adjacent yard, the roof shall be designed for a minimum live load of 25 pounds
per square foot;
      (2)   For aboveground shelters with a roof elevation including shielding
materials of less than six feet above the highest elevation of the adjacent
yard, the roof shall be designed for a minimum live load of 100 pounds per
square foot; provided, that special provisions shall be made for possible
concentrated loads, such as those which would be imposed by loaded trucks;
      (3)   The walls of shelters constructed partially or wholly below the
adjacent ground grade shall be designed to resist the lateral pressure of the
retained adjacent earth in accordance with good engineering practice. Where the
walls retain only well-drained earth, they may be designed for pressure
equivalent to that exerted by fluid weighing not less than 50 pounds per cubic
foot and having a depth of that of the retained material, including surcharge;
      (4)   Floors of civil defense fallout shelters shall be designed to
withstand the hydrostatic pressure to which they may be subjected, without
exceeding allowable maximum stresses as specified for various materials in the
building code of the city;
      (5)   Civil defense fallout shelters shall be designed to withstand
displacement which might be caused by buoyancy produced by the surrounding
fluid materials; and
      (6)   Family civil defense fallout shelters or group civil defense
fallout shelters may be constructed of masonry, reinforced concrete, steel,
plastic or other approved materials. The following table shows in inches
materials sufficient to give a radiation reduction factor of one to 1,000 if
constructed below ground level:
Concrete (inches)  Earth (inches)
Concrete (inches)      Earth (inches)
18                plus 0
15                plus 5
12                plus 9
10                plus 12
8                 plus 15
6                 plus 18
4                 plus 21
0                 plus 27
 
(1964 Code, § 10-6)
§ 7-192 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   Representatives of the office of civil defense, of the building inspection
division, of the fire department and of the civil defense shelter board may
enter, upon presentation of proper credentials and between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., any building, structure or premises for the purpose of
inspecting any civil defense fallout shelter erected, constructed and
maintained under the provisions of this article.
(1964 Code, § 10-7)
§ 7-193 APPEALS.
   Any person affected by a decision of the building official in the
enforcement of the various provisions of the building code of the city as
applied to shelter construction may appeal such decision to the building code
board of appeals of the city under the applicable rules and regulations of such
appeal board.
(1964 Code, § 10-8)
§ 7-194—7-215 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: MOVEMENT AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 7-216 PERMITS—REQUIRED.
   Except as specifically provided for in this article, no person shall move,
remove, raze or demolish any building or structure within the city without
first obtaining from the building official a moving permit and/or demolition
permit; required, however, that, a moving permit is not required when a
building or structure is being moved pursuant to a permit issued by the state
and when the route of movement is confined to state or federal highways. In
addition, no moving permit is required when a newly constructed building or
structure is to be moved outside the corporate limits of the city if the
building or structure does not exceed eight feet in width, 45 feet in length or
13 feet six inches in height when loaded on a transporting vehicle and if the
moving route has been approved by the Texas Highway Department.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(1), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-217 SAME—EXPIRATION AND INVALIDITY.
   A permit for moving or demolition work shall expire and be invalid if the
moving or demolition work has neither commenced within ten days nor has been
completed within 60 days; provided, however, that, nothing contained herein
shall prohibit the building official from extending the expiration date of a
moving or demolition permit upon a showing by the applicant that a completion
date greater than 60 days is required.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(7), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-218 SAME—REVOCATION.
   The director of public works of the city or his or her authorized agent may
revoke any permit required by this article when the conditions of such permit
have been violated. The director or his or her agent may reinstate the permit
at any time within one year after the revocation.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(11), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-219 VEHICLE ESCORT.
   Authorized emergency vehicles shall escort any building or structure being
moved over the streets of the city when the loaded height exceeds 16 feet and
the loaded width exceeds 12 feet.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(2), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-220 UTILITY COMPANY REVIEW.
   The appropriate utility company shall be permitted to review the proposed
route of movement of any building or structure over the streets of the city
when the loaded height of such structure exceeds 18 feet. The appropriate
utility company shall provide workers and equipment to remove and replace any
overhead service lines when necessary for the completion of the move. The cost
of removal and replacement of any overhead service lines shall be paid by the
person granted a moving permit.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(3), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-221 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   Any person applying for a moving or demolition permit shall be required to
furnish to the building official a sufficient amount of collateral in the form
of a cash bond, cashier’s check, letter of credit from a bank or cash in favor
of the city of not less than $150 or not less than the expenses of the moving
or demolition work, whichever amount is greater, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the moving or demolition. The building official shall
determine whether the minimum amount is sufficient to complete the performance
of moving or demolition work. If the building official determines that the
minimum deposit is insufficient he or she shall require an additional deposit
to complete the expense of the moving or demolition work. When a person fails
to meet the terms of this article the deposit shall be forfeited and the
building official shall use said deposit to complete the moving or demolition.
Any portion of the deposit remaining after the moving or demolition work shall
be returned to the applicant; provided, however, that no performance bond shall
be required for the demolition of any building accessory to one- and two-family
residences when such demolition work is to be performed by the owner of such
residence.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(4), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-222 COMPLETION OF WORK.
   Completion of the work pursuant to a moving or demolition permit shall
include the removal of any debris caused by such moving or demolition. Moreover
the applicant shall repair at his or her own expense any and all damage to
public property.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(5), passed 3-17-1976; Ord. 20104-03-2012, § 2, passed 3-20-
2012)
§ 7-223 INSPECTION FEE.
   An inspection fee shall be paid to the office of the building official for
any moving or demolition work performed within the city. Such fee shall be in
an amount as specified in the building code of the city.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(6), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-224 LICENSE—REQUIRED.
   All moving and demolition contractors shall obtain from the city a license
to conduct their business within the corporate limits of the city; provided,
however, that, no license shall be required for the demolition of one- and two-
family residences and buildings accessory thereto when such demolition work is
to be performed by the owner of such property.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(8), passed 3-17-1976)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 7-225 SAME—REVOCATION.
   The director of public works of the city may revoke any license required by
this article when the conditions of any permit or license have been violated.
The director may reinstate such revoked license at any time within one year of
such revocation; provided that, the basis for the revocation no longer exists.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(10), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-226 BUSINESS REGISTRATION.
   Every firm, business or organization consisting of moving and demolition
contractors required to be licensed under the provisions of this Code, shall
register with the city's Planning and Development Department. The fee for such
business registration shall be as specified in the building code of the city.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(8.1), passed 3-17-1976; Ord. 8804, § 1, passed 5-10-1983; Ord.
17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 5, passed 3-22-2011; Ord.
22517-12-2016, § 5, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25382-03-2022, § 5,
passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-227 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Any license required by this article shall not be issued until the
certificate of insurance required by this article has been filed with the
building official.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(9), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-228 EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
   When it is determined that any work is being performed under a license or
permit required by this article in a reckless or careless manner, or in
violation of any ordinance of the city, or in such a manner as to endanger life
and/or property, the director of public works of the city or his or her
authorized agent is hereby authorized to revoke such permit and to order work
to be halted. When such work has been halted by the director it shall not be
resumed until said director or his or her agent has approved precautionary
measures to be taken for the protection of life and/or property; provided,
however, that, nothing herein contained shall preclude the director of public
works or his or her authorized agent from enforcing any provision of this code,
as amended.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(12), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-229 CITY LIABILITY.
   The approval of any application and issuance of any permit shall in no way
be construed as an assumption of responsibility or liability for any damages or
injuries to persons or property arising out of or incident to the moving of any
building or structure.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(13), passed 3-17-1976)
§§ 7-230—7-240 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES GOVERNED BY
BUILDING CODE AND MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
§ 7-241 MOVING APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   The building official shall not approve any application for the moving of
buildings and structures governed by the building code of the city, as amended,
and the minimum building standards code of the city, as amended, unless he or
she first finds that:
   (a)   (1)   The applicant has filed in the city secretary’s office a
certificate showing that the applicant has secured and agrees to keep in force
during the term of the permit or license a policy providing for bodily injury
and property damage insurance in the amounts as follows:
 
Property damage, per accident          $100,000
Personal injury or death, per person   $100,000
Personal injury or death, per accident $300,000
 
      (2)   Such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or
amended without at least 30 days’ notice to the city secretary.
   (b)   The applicant has covenanted and agreed in writing to indemnify, hold
harmless and defend at its own expense, city, its officers, agents and
employees from and against any and all claims or suits for property damage and/
or personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or character, whether
real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the execution,
performance or attempted performance of moving of such buildings and structures
governed herein whether or not causes, in whole or in part, by alleged
negligence of officers, agents or employees of city; and the applicant thereby
assumes all liability and responsibility for any and all claims or suits for
property damage and/or personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or in connection with, the
execution, performance or attempted performance of such moving of such
building, whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of
officers, agents or employees of city. The applicant likewise shall covenant
and agree and does thereby indemnify and hold harmless the city from and
against any and all injuries, damage or destruction of city property arising
out of, or in connection with, directly or indirectly, all acts or omissions of
applicant, his or her officers, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors
or invitees, or caused by alleged negligence in whole or in part, of officers,
agents or employees of city.
   (c)   The applicant has stated the route to be followed and the height and
weight of the load to be moved.
   (d)   The applicant has recently surveyed the route to be followed and has
certified to the building official that the move can be accomplished over such
route without causing damage to public or private property.
§ 7-242 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE PREREQUISITE TO APPLICATION APPROVAL AND
ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The building official shall approve the application and issue the permit
only if he or she finds that the applicant has complied with the applicable
provisions of this article.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(15), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-243 NOTIFICATION.
   The building official shall notify in writing all agencies having
jurisdiction in the moving of oversize and overweight loads over the streets of
the city. The notification shall contain the approved application and statement
of the route to be followed.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(16), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-244 INSPECTION.
   No moving permit shall be issued until the building official has inspected
the building or structure to be moved and is satisfied that the information
contained in the application is true and correct.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(17), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-245 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The building official shall issue the moving permit when the applicant has
complied with the provisions of this article and all agencies having
jurisdiction or interest in the proposed move have been notified and have
raised no objection to the proposed route of the move.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(18), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-246 APPLICANT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The applicant shall be held responsible for all actions on the part of any
person or agent, servant or employee engaged by the applicant to perform work
covered in the application for a moving permit. The applicant shall take the
following precautionary actions.
   (a)   The moving of a building or structure shall proceed in a careful
manner. The applicant shall exercise diligence and caution so as to avoid the
injury or destruction of trees, signs, curbing, sidewalks, traffic-control
devices and any other public or private property.
   (b)   Prior to entrance on public property, the applicant shall notify the
traffic division of the city’s police department and any county, state or
federal agency having jurisdiction over the proposed route of the proposed
move. The applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations and
instructions concerning the date, time and precautionary measures necessary to
insure public safety and protect property.
   (c)   The applicant shall furnish and maintain at all times all necessary
warning lights, workers, equipment and flaggers necessary to ensure public
safety and protect property.
   (d)   The applicant shall obtain permission from railroad company officials
before crossing any railroad tracks.
   (e)   The applicant shall post the permit on an obvious and conspicuous
place on the building or structure being moved.
   (f)   The applicant shall report to the chief dispatcher of the fire
department on the day prior to the move the time at which the move will start,
the route to be followed, and the estimated time of use of the public streets.
   (g)   The move shall be continuous during all hours of the day or night
unless it is stopped by conditions beyond the control of the applicant. When a
building or structure must be stopped on public property for more than one
hour, the applicant shall immediately notify the chief dispatcher of the police
and fire departments and take all precautionary measures necessary to insure
public safety.
   (h)   The route shall not be changed until the traffic division of the
city’s police department and any county, state or federal agency having
jurisdiction over the proposed route have been notified of the change.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(19), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-247 NOTIFICATION AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   As soon as possible after the building or structure has reached its
destination, the applicant shall notify the building official and report any
damage that has occurred to public or private property. The applicant at the
direction of the building official shall repair and/or replace or cause to be
repaired and/or replaced damaged or destroyed public property. Within ten days
after receipt of notification from the building official, the applicant shall
start all required repairs and/or replacement of damaged or destroyed public
property and shall complete such repairs or replacements within ten calendar
days.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(20), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-248 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR REPLACE.
   When the provisions of this article are not complied with, the city is
authorized to proceed with the required repairs and/or replacements. The city
may then institute legal action to reclaim any expenses incurred by reason of
such repairs and/or replacements. At the request of the public works director
the building official is hereby invested with authority to withhold future
moving permits requested by any person because of failure of that person to
make proper repairs and/or replacements of public property. The building
official may withhold any future permits because of any failure to comply with
the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(21), passed 3-17-1976)
§§ 7-249—7-260 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES NOT GOVERNED BY
BUILDING CODE AND MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
§ 7-261 SPECIFIC MOVING REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING WEIGHT LOAD.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle when loaded shall be required to have a permit
issued by the building official if the total single axle load exceeds:
      (1)   Twelve thousand pounds per square foot for a motor vehicle to be
driven on residential streets;
      (2)   Eighteen thousand pounds per square foot for a motor vehicle to be
driven on business streets; and
      (3)   Twenty-four thousand pounds per square foot for a motor vehicle to
be driven on public thoroughfares.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Motor vehicles used exclusively to transport redi-mix concrete if
the tandem axle load of such motor vehicle does not exceed 36,000 pounds, the
single axle load of such motor vehicle does not exceed 12,000 pounds, and the
gross weight does not exceed 48,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle
pursuant to a valid permit for the operation of overweight or oversize
equipment for transportation on the highways of the state for which the state
has issued a permit;
      (3)   Any emergency vehicle operating in response to any emergency call;
and
      (4)   Any vehicle operating for the purpose of constructing or
maintaining any public utility in the city.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(22), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-262 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   The application for a permit to operate an overweight and/or oversize load
or loads on the streets of the city shall contain:
   (a)   The weight, kind and complete description of the equipment to be
operated;
   (b)   The kind of commodity to be transported and the certification of the
commodity’s weight;
   (c)   The name of the street or streets over which the equipment is to be
operated, the date or dates of such operation, the time of the operation and
the number of trips to be made; and
   (d)   The date and signature of the applicant.
§ 7-263 APPROVAL OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An application shall not be approved unless:
   (a)   (1)   The applicant has filed in the city secretary’s office a
certificate showing that the applicant has secured and agrees to keep in force
during the term of the permit or license a policy providing for bodily injury
and property damage insurance in the amounts as follows:
 
Property damage, per accident          $100,000
Personal injury or death, per person   $100,000
Personal injury or death, per accident $300,000
 
      (2)   Such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or
amended without at least 30 days’ notice to the city secretary.
   (b)   It is found that the applicant has covenanted and agreed in writing to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend at its own expense, the city, its officers,
agents and employees from and against any and all claims or suits for property
damage and/or personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the
execution, performance or attempted performance of moving of such structures
governed herein whether or not caused in whole or in part, by alleged
negligence of officers, agents or employees of the city; and the applicant
thereby assumes all liability and responsibility for any and all claims or
suits for property damage and/or personal injury, including death, of
whatsoever kind or character, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or in
connection with, the execution, performance or attempted performance of such
moving of such structure, whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by
alleged negligence of officers, agents or employees of city, that the applicant
likewise has covenanted and agreed and does thereby indemnify and hold harmless
the city from and against any and all injuries, damage or destruction of city
property arising out of, or in connection with, directly or indirectly, all
acts or omissions of applicant, his or her officers, agents, employees,
contractors, subcontractors or invitees, or caused by alleged negligence in
whole or in part, of officers, agents of employees of city; and
   (c)   A permit fee according to the following table has been paid:
Permit Fees
Overweight Vehicles
Time Period Fee
Permit Fees
Overweight Vehicles
Time Period            Fee
Single trip            $5
Not exceeding 30 days  $10
Not exceeding 60 days  $15
Not exceeding 90 days  $20
Not exceeding one year $50
Permit fee shall be returned if the application is denied.
 
(Ord. 7314, § 1(24), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-264 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF WEIGHT AND SIZE OF LOAD.
   The building official may adopt as evidence of the weight and/or size of any
load to be driven on the streets of the city any document issued by a state or
federal agency if such document states the weight and/or size of the load.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(25), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-265 PERMIT FORM.
   Any permit issued under this division shall include the following:
   (a)   The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the equipment to
be operated and a description of the commodity to be transported;
   (b)   The period of time for which the permit is issued; and
   (c)   The street or streets over which the equipment is to be operated.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(26), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-266 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The building official shall approve the permit to operate an overweight and/
or oversize load on the streets of the city when he or she has determined that
the application satisfies all requirements of this article.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(27), passed 3-17-1976)
§§ 7-267—7-280 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: DEMOLITION
§ 7-281 APPLICATION APPROVAL.
   The building official shall not approve an application for demolition until:
   (a)   (1)   The applicant has filed in the city secretary’s office a
certificate showing that he or she has secured and paid for a policy providing
for bodily injury and property damage insurance in the amounts as follows:
 
Property damage, per accident          $50,000
Personal injury or death, per person   $100,000
Personal injury or death, per accident $300,000
with an insurance company satisfactory to the building official
 
      (2)   Such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or
amended without 30 days’ written notice to the city secretary of the City of
Fort Worth. No certification of insurance shall be required for the demolition
of one- and two-family residences and accessory buildings thereto when such
demolition is to be performed by the property owner.
   (b)   It is found that the applicant has covenanted and agreed in writing to
indemnify, hold harmless from and against any and all claims or suits for
property damage and/or personal injury, including death of whatsoever kind or
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the
execution, performance or attempted performance of such demolition governed
herein whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of
officers, agents or employees of city; and that the applicant has thereby
assumed all liability and responsibility for any and all claims or suits for
property damage and/or personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or in connection with, the
execution, performance or attempted performance of said demolition, whether or
not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of officers, agents or
employees of city. The applicant shall likewise covenant and agree, and does
thereby indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any and all
injuries, damage or destruction of city property arising out of, or in
connection with, directly or indirectly, all acts or omissions of applicant,
his or her officers, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors or
invitees, or caused by alleged negligence in whole or in part, of officers,
agents or employees of city;
   (c)   An additional permit is secured from the fire marshal of the city if
the demolition is to be performed by the use of explosives; and
   (d)   The provisions of chapter 44 of the building code of the city have
been complied with, if such application requires such compliance.
§ 7-282 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.
   No material shall be thrown from a building on to a public sidewalk or
street, but shall be conveyed to the ground by a chute approved by the building
official. All demolition projects located within 100 feet of a public street,
alley or adjoining property shall be performed in such a manner as not to
constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(29), passed 3-17-1976)
§ 7-283 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Commission of any of the following acts shall result in revocation of the
demolition permit:
   (a)   Placing any materials and/or equipment in the structure to be
demolished when such materials and/or equipment exceed the designed load limit
of any floor of the structure;
   (b)   Blasting, pulling or throwing of walls without the special approval of
the building official; or
   (c)   Violation of any provision of the building code of the city.
(Ord. 7314, § 1(30), passed 3-17-1976)
§§ 7-284—7-300 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS
DIVISION 1: PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND DEFINITIONS
Cross-reference:
   Planning and development department, see §§
2-310 et seq.
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations, see App. A
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 11998, adopted June 13, 1995, amended Ch. 7, Art. VIII, §§
7-301 through
7-304,
7-316 through
7-318,
7-331 through
7-334,
7-346 through
7-354,
7-371 through
7-384 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 7, Art. VIII pertained to similar
subject matter and derived from Ord. 10056, § 1, adopted February 9, 1988 and
Ord. 10182, § 1, adopted October 11, 1988.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt flood-control regulations, see V.T.C.A. Water Code §
16.315
§ 7-301 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (a)   The flood hazard areas of Fort Worth are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (b)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-302 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas, by the provisions provided herein to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize the need for future expenditures of public funds for costly
flood control projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and that are generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, that are
located in floodplains;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize potential
future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that property owners, occupants, and potential property owners
are aware of property located in flood hazard areas; and
   (h)   Require that persons who knowingly occupy flood-prone areas assume
full responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-303 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish reduction of flood loss, this article uses the
following methods:
   (a)   Restrictions or prohibitions to uses that are dangerous to health,
safety or property in times of flood, or cause increases in erosion, flood
heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (d)   Control filling, grading, dredging, excavation and other development
which may increase flood damage;
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood- hazards to other
lands;
   (f)   Controlling development which would cause greater erosion or potential
flood damage such as grading, dredging, excavation, and filling;
   (g)   Imposing a regulatory l% annual chance floodplain that requires using
the ultimate development of the watershed to determine the fully developed base
flood elevation. New developments must be constructed above this elevation.
   (h)   Using any other method reasonably calculated to accomplish the purpose
of this article and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-304 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this article its most reasonable application. The following definitions
apply only to this article:
   1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOODPLAIN (also referred to as the BASE FLOOD or 100-YEAR
FLOODPLAIN). The land within a community subject to a 1% percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. These areas are typically designated as a
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Zone A, AE, AH, or AO on FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Maps FIRM Panels).
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
a principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principle structure. For example a residential structure may have a detached
garage or storage shed for garden tools as accessory structures. Other examples
of accessory structures include gazebos, picnic pavilions, boathouses, small
pole barns, storage sheds, and similar buildings. National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) regulation for new construction generally apply to new and
substantially improved accessory structures.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar  landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and
disposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL. A request for a review by the boards or commissions specified herein
of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
article or a request for a variance.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in a floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/
AO, AR/A1-A30, V1-V30, VE or V on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or a
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD and 1% ANNUAL
CHANCE FLOOD.
   BASE FLOOD DEPTH (BFD). The depth shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Zone AO that indicates the depth of water above the highest adjacent
grade resulting from a flood that has a 1% percent chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in a given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 or VE that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1%
chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the
BASE FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CITY or COMMUNITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). FEMA's comment on a proposed
project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic
characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the
existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or
the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The letter does not revise an effective
NFIP map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be
recognized by FEMA.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Those buildings and facilities that are essential for the
delivery of vital services or protection of a community, especially during or
after a disaster. When constructed, these facilities must be protected from
flooding to the higher of 2.0 feet above the FEMA 0.2% chance ("500-year")
storm or the city 1% chance ("100-year") storm occurring on fully-developed
basin conditions. Examples of Critical Facilities include but are not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
      (2)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood;
      (3)   Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response
activities before, during, and after a flood; and
      (4)   Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining
or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after a
flood.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction or alteration of buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which
has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS
effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION is used interchangeably in
this article with the term EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation  of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i. e., mudflow) and/ or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A
FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance
Rate Map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface
elevations or the base flood, as well as data tables. Also see FLOOD ELEVATION
STUDY.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOODPRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOOD or FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (FDP). An authorization issued by the city for
any work or development to be performed within areas of the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard as described in §
7-301 herein and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system
typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes,
storm drain systems and detention/ retention systems. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed to conform to sound engineering
standards.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FULLY DEVELOPED. For watershed hydrology, all existing developed areas shall
reflect current land use or current zoning, whichever yields the greatest
runoff. All existing undeveloped areas shall reflect anticipated future land
use, by the city's comprehensive plan, or by an approved concept plan, or as
defined in the City of Fort Worth Stormwater Management Design Manual.
   FULLY DEVELOPED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from the flood based upon Fully Developed hydrology
that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   FUTURE CONDITIONS HYDROLOGY. See FULLY DEVELOPED.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing, maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a register historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         a.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         b.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE IMPACT ZONE. An area within 250 feet of the toe of a levee, levee
system component or associated structure, where additional review is required
to determine the impacts of the proposed development on the safety or
performance of the levee system. Projects with potential levee system impacts
must obtain approval from the levee system owner.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement and finished garage). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non- elevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. Part
60, § 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term"
manufactured home" does not include a" recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD) or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth for
the National Flood Insurance Program in Title 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM, June 4, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, or any other entity including state and local
governments and agencies.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, exceeds $1,000 for each.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc. in a natural or improved condition.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barriers Resources Act (CRBA), this is the date
the building permit was issued, and pertains to substantial improvement to an
existing structure as well as construction of a new structure, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvements was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
   ULTIMATE DEVELOPMENT. See FULLY DEVELOPED.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this article. For full requirements see 44 C.F.R. Part 60, § 60.6
of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
permits or other evidence of compliance required in said 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)
(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the NAVD of 1988 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18816, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-15-2009; Ord.
25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§§ 7-305—7-315 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-316 LANDS TO WHICH THIS ARTICLE APPLIES.
   Division 1 through 6 of this article shall apply to all special flood hazard
areas within the City of Fort Worth or otherwise under its jurisdiction and
control. Division 7 of this article shall apply to all city flood risk areas
within the City of Fort Worth or otherwise under its jurisdiction and control.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022; Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-317 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard, as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the current scientific and engineering report
entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas", dated March 19, 2019, with accompanying FIRMS dated
September 25, 2009 and March 19, 2019; current scientific and engineering
report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas", dated June 19, 2020, with accompanying FIRMS dated April
18, 2011, and June 19, 2020; current scientific and engineering report
entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Parker County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas", dated April 5, 2019, with accompanying FIRMS dated
September 26, 2008 and April 5, 2019; and current scientific and engineering
report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Wise County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas", dated December 16, 2011, with accompanying FIRMS dated
December 16, 2011; and all subsequent amendments and revisions thereto are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. Those
areas, which have not yet been delineated on the FEMA FIRMs, but are known to
constitute a special flood hazard are also included.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 14298, § 1, passed 8-15-2000; Ord.
18816, § 3, passed 9-15-2009; Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 1, passed 4-12-2011; Ord.
25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-318 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this article. No structure or land in an area of special
flood hazard shall hereafter be located, altered, have its use changed, or
otherwise be developed unless a floodplain development permit has been issued,
pursuant to the terms of this floodplain article. Proposed work must be started
within six months of the date of approval of a floodplain development permit,
otherwise the permit will become null and void. The floodplain development
permit shall expire and have no further effect 24 months from the date of the
approval of the floodplain development permit unless an extension is approved
by the floodplain administrator. Extensions shall be requested in writing to
the floodplain administrator with justifiable cause demonstrated. If the
extension is not approved then the applicant must apply for a new floodplain
development permit before beginning or continuing development within the
floodplain.
   (b)   When issued, the floodplain permit shall be valid only as to the
applicant (i.e. property owner and/or engineer) to whom it was originally
issued and shall not be transferred to another applicant. A new floodplain
development permit must be obtained by the new applicant. Any significant
revisions to the approved development covered by the floodplain development
permit will require additional review for approval. The determination that
revisions are significant are within the discretion of the floodplain
administrator.
   (c)   Building permits, floodplain permits or plat approvals shall not be
issued for properties with unresolved floodplain violations unless the
aforementioned permits will remedy the violation.
   (d)   The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a
permit issued under these regulations whenever the permit is issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any article or code of the city.
   (e)   Procedures to obtain floodplain development permit are set forth in §
7-333 of this article.
(Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 2, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-
8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§§ 7-319—7-330 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: ADMINISTRATION
§ 7-331 DESIGNATION OF THE LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Director of Transportation and Public Works or designee is hereby
appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R.
(Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 4, passed 9-30-2008;
Ord. 18816, § 4, passed 9-15-2009; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-332 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (a)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this article;
   (b)   Review permit applications for sites located in, or adjacent to, the
regulatory floodplain, including the placement of manufactured homes, to
determine if the proposed development site will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
   (c)   Review and approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this article;
   (d)   Review permits for proposed development within a floodplain to provide
reasonable assurance that all other necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including § 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from
which prior approval is required;
   (e)   Review all applications for permits for development within a
floodplain to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway.
If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of §
7-350(a) are met;
   (f)   Interpret, as needed, the exact location of the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazards. For example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the floodplain
administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The floodplain
administrator shall make such determinations in a reasonably prudent manner.
When any such interpretation results in a determination that an area is not a
special flood hazard, the issuance of any building permits for any part of the
area subsequent thereto shall be subject to the applicant's agreement to
indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City of Fort Worth and the floodplain
administrator for any adverse consequences resulting from or related to such a
determination;
   (g)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Texas
Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
   (h)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained or increased;
   (i)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
this article, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize, any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other reliable source, in order to administer
Division 4 of this article;
   (j)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including the placement of fill) shall be permitted
within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community;
   (k)   Grant variances in conformance with the provisions of §
7-334, Variance procedures.
   (l)   Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and
information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps when the
analyses propose to change discharges, cross sections, base flood elevations,
flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall
be made within six months of such data becoming available.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18816, § 5, passed 9-15-2009; Ord.
25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-333 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Application requirements.
      (1)   No person shall proceed with development of property within the
floodplain until an application is submitted and a Floodplain Development
Permit (FDP) is issued.
      (2)   Prior to issuance of the Floodplain Development Permit (FDP), or
authorization to excavate or fill in the floodplain, all required permits must
be obtained by the owner from all state and federal regulatory bodies with
jurisdiction in such matters. A copy of the appropriate agency's approved
permit must be provided to the city with the FDP application.
      (3)   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit (FDP) must be
presented to the floodplain administrator on forms provided on the city's
website. The permit application must include, but not be limited to, plans to
scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   An Elevation Certificate for structures on property located in or
abutting the floodplain. The certificate must be completed by a registered
public land surveyor or professional engineer and include the elevation in
relation, to mean sea level, of the lowest floor including basement, finished
garage and lowest elevation of machinery or equipment servicing the building,
of all new and substantially improved structures. The certificate must be
submitted within 60 days of completion of construction or substantial
improvement;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non
residential structure shall be floodproofed (floodproofing requirements are set
forth in §
7-347(b));
         c.   Certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structures shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of §
7-347(b);
         d.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         e.   Valley storage evaluation for sites located within a sump area
associated with the Trinity River levee system. The determination of valley
storage impacts consists of a comparison of pre-project (existing) conditions
and post-project conditions. The maximum allowable valley storage decrease for
the 1% annual chance flood is 0.0%; and
            f.   For existing structures within the floodplain that do not
conform to current floodplain management standards, the Substantial Improvement
or Substantial Damage Review Package must be submitted to obtain the
substantial improvement or substantial damage determination.
               1.   If the proposed work is determined to be a substantial
improvement then the entire structure must be brought into compliance with this
article.
               2.   If the proposed work does not constitute a substantial
improvement then the existing structure may be improved (remodeled) without
conforming to requirements in this article. Once a property has been issued a
floodplain development permit using the 50% rule, any additional improvements
thereafter will be tracked over a total of five years. These improvements
within the five-year period cannot exceed 50% of the fair market value of the
existing structure at the time of issuance of said first floodplain development
permit.
      (4)   No application shall be accepted for review until the application
meets the requirements of this article, including all necessary documents and
supporting information. Applications that do not include all necessary
documentation and supporting information shall be deemed not complete.
   (b)   Permit evaluation. Approval or denial of a floodplain development
permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions
of this article and the following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands to the
injury of other persons or property;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
developments;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area; and
      (11)   The cumulative effects of development and the associated loss of
stormwater storage and/or detention; and
      (12)   The impact the development may have on the overall function of the
stormwater facilities and the impact on properties in its own and connecting
watersheds. This may include but not be limited to changes in discharges as a
result of changes in impervious cover, velocity, storage, creek roughness, etc.
   (c)   If a floodplain development permit application is disapproved, the
floodplain administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the section
and specific requirement of this article with which the proposed development
does not comply and the nature of such noncompliance.
   (d)   No building permits, inspections, or certificates of occupancy to
structures will be issued unless the terms and conditions of this article are
met.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-334 VARIANCE AND APPEAL OF INTERPRETATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Variances. Variances may be issued for new construction, and
substantial improvements, and for other development necessary for the conduct
of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in
subsections (1) through (8) below are met, and the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
      (1)   A request for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the
floodplain administrator. The administrator may issue a variance consistent
with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Prior to the request being considered, at minimum, the following
supporting information shall be forwarded to the floodplain administrator for
review and recommendations.
         a.   Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the property, existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, floodproofing measures and the relationship of the above to the
location of the channel and floodway and the minimum building elevation.
         b.   Furnish the following additional information as is deemed
necessary by the floodplain administrator for the evaluation of the effects of
the proposed use upon flood flows and other factors necessary to render an
opinion on the suitability of the proposed use:
            1.    Cross-sections showing the channel of the stream, elevation
of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, and cross-sectional areas to
be occupied by the proposed development.
            2.   A site plan showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing streets, water supply, sanitary
facilities, soil types and other pertinent information.
            3.   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream.
            4.   Hydraulic information including water surface profiles for a
minimum of the 1% annual chance event for existing and proposed improvements.
            5.    Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
            6.   Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream
and downstream.
      (3)   Denial of a variance by the floodplain administrator concerning
design standards for floodproofing which have been set forth in a nationally
recognized standard acceptable to the city, shall be made to the construction
and fire prevention board of appeals. The board may only approve alternate
methods and shall not approve the omission thereof.
      (4)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided the relevant factors in §
7-333(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
      (6)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of
this article, the floodplain administrator or appropriate appeal board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as deemed necessary to
further the purposes and objectives of this article.
      (7)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increases in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (8)   A variance shall only be issued upon a determination that:
         a.   The variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood
hazard to accord relief;
         b.   A showing of good and sufficient cause is made;
         c.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         d.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, the creation of nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the
public (including future owners) or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      (9)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide a determination to grant
or deny a variance within 30 days from submittal of the variance request,
unless additional information was requested to support the variance request
which delays the completion of the review.
      (10)   The Floodplain Administrator shall provide signed, written notice
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to an applicant prior to
the granting of a variance stating that should a structure be permitted to be
built with the lowest floor elevation below the standard minimum floor
elevation, the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
Such notice shall be effective upon deposit in United States mail.
   (b)   Interpretation. If there is an alleged error in an interpretation of
any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this article, other than that set forth
in §
7-333 may be appealed to the construction and fire prevention board of appeals.
      (1)   An appeal of an interpretation must be in writing and filed with
the flood administrator and appeal board and specifically allege the error in
the decision or determination of the floodplain administrator for the property
in question. All such appeals to the appeal board must be made 30 days from the
date of the floodplain administrator's official written decision or
determination.
      (2)   Applicants shall provide any additional information upon request of
the appeal board that is deemed necessary to review the request for variance.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18816, § 6, passed 9-15-2009; Ord.
25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§§ 7-335—7-345 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 7-346 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required.
   (a)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (b)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (c)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (d)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed or located at least two feet
above the fully developed base flood elevation so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
   (e)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (f)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (g)   All new and replacement on-site waste disposal systems shall be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (h)   All new parking lots shall be designed to not exceed 12 inches of
water depth during the fully developed base flood unless provisions have been
made to remove motor vehicles during flood events.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-347 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided, the following provisions are required.
   (a)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement,
finished garage, and machinery or equipment servicing the building), elevated
at least two feet above the fully developed base flood elevation or the FEMA
regulatory base flood elevation, whichever is greater. A registered public land
surveyor or professional engineer shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standards of this subsection (a) and §
7-333(a)(3) are satisfied.
   (b)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have either:
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement, finished garage, and
machinery or equipment servicing the building), elevated two feet above the
fully developed base flood elevation or the FEMA regulatory base flood
elevations, whichever is greater; or
      (2)   The lowest floor (including basement, finished garage, and
machinery or equipment servicing the building) together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed and shall:
         a.   Be designed so that below the level of two feet above the fully
developed base flood elevation or the FEMA regulatory base flood elevation,
whichever is greater, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy;
         b.   Have a registered professional engineer or architect develop and/
or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and
certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection (b) and adhere to
FEMA standards; and
         c.   Provide a record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed. The record shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   (c)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect and meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided;
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (d)   Manufactured homes. For new or existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions located within areas of special flood hazard the following shall
apply.
      (1)   All new and replacement manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within an area of special flood hazard must be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured
home is elevated two feet above the fully developed base flood elevation or the
FEMA regulatory base flood elevation, whichever is higher.
      (2)   All new and replacement manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within areas of special flood hazard, shall be installed
using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. The manufactured home
must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement with certification by a registered
professional engineer that the improvements will not increase flood flows,
heights, or damages. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (a)
of this section.
      (4)   Fully enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply
with the requirements of subsection (c) of this section.
      (5)   Mechanical equipment and outside appliances shall be elevated two
feet above the fully developed base flood elevation or the FEMA regulatory base
flood elevation, whichever is higher.
      (6)   No manufactured home will be allowed to be placed within a
floodway.
   (e)   Recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All recreational vehicles to be placed on sites within areas of
special flood hazard must either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of §
7-333, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
subsection (d) of this section.
      (2)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (f)   Temporary structures and temporary storage.
      (1)   Temporary structures placed in areas of special flood hazard.
Temporary structures shall be erected for a period of less than 180 days.
Temporary structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. Fully enclosed temporary
structures shall have flood openings that are in accordance with subsection (c)
of this section to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
      (2)   Temporary storage in areas of special flood hazard. Temporary
storage includes storage of goods and materials for a period of less than 180
days. Stored materials shall not include hazardous materials.
      (3)   Floodway encroachment. Temporary structures and temporary storage
in floodways shall meet the requirements of §
7-350 of this article.
   (h)   Critical facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside of the limits of the area of special
flood hazard. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible
within the area of special flood hazard area if no feasible alternative site is
available. Access routes elevated to or above the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities to the maximum extent possible.
   (i)   Tanks.
      (1)   New and replacement tanks in flood hazard areas shall either be
elevated above the base flood elevation on a supporting structure designed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the base
flood, or be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of 1.5 times the
buoyant forces assuming the tank is empty, during conditions of the base flood.
      (2)   New and replacement tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents
shall be placed a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tank during conditions of the base flood.
   (j)   Fences and walls.
      (1)   Fences are a form of development and require a floodplain
development permit. Evaluation of floodplain development permit applications
for proposed fences will be based on the following criteria:
         a.   Fencing that consists of solid walls, creates a barrier
impervious to stream flow or fencing that greatly restricts the passage of
water will not be allowed. These include masonry walls, retaining walls, chain
link fencing, space board-type fencing or similar fencing that creates a solid
wall either by design or the accumulation of debris.
         b.   Fencing outside of the floodway but within the special flood
hazard area will be restricted to the least flow-restrictive types of open
fencing that allows the passage of water.
      (2)   New and replacement fencing shall be designed to collapse under
conditions of the base flood or to allow the passage or water and debris. The
following provisions shall apply to all fences permitted in the special flood
hazard area:
         a.   Fences in the regulatory floodway are prohibited;
         b.   Fences must be setback a minimum of five feet from the top-of-
bank;
         c.   Fencing must be built in removable sections;
         d.   Fencing that consists of solid walls, creates a barrier
impervious to stream flow or fencing that greatly restricts the flow of water
is prohibited; and
         e.   Fences that are significantly damaged or destroyed by a flood
shall require a floodplain development permit to ensure that reconstruction
methods are consistent with the need to minimize future flood damages.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-348 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (a)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
7-301,
7-302 and
7-303 of this article.
   (b)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development
permit requirements of §§
7-318,
7-333 and the provisions of Division 4 of this article.
   (c)   Base flood elevation data for FEMA regulatory and fully developed
conditions shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development, including the placement of manufactured home parks, and
subdivisions which are greater than one acre, if not otherwise provided
pursuant to this article.
   (d)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (e)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
   (f)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering
study for all Zone A areas, within 100 feet of the contour lines of Zone A
areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's
FIRM.
   (g)   FEMA floodplains and the city's fully developed floodplains must be
mapped anywhere that the contributing drainage area is 64 acres or greater.
Post-project FEMA floodplain delineations must be submitted to FEMA through the
Letter of Map Change (LOMC) process, and compliant with all applicable Federal
regulations. FEMA floodplains must be based upon either the FEMA current
effective hydrologic model for the basin, or a new hydrologic model that
reflects existing land uses with the proposed project in place. The city's
fully developed floodplains must be based upon fully developed basin conditions
from either a hydrologic model previously accepted by the city, or from a new
hydrologic model compliant with criteria in the most current Stormwater
Criteria Manual.
   (h)   Existing channels must not be increased or decreased from their
natural state until engineering data meeting the requirements of Stormwater
Management has been approved.
   (i)   When development is proposed in areas that do not indicate an
established floodway (Zones A and AE), a licensed professional engineer shall
define the regulatory floodway through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. The
Floodplain Administrator can make the determination to not require
establishment of a floodway for sites where it might not be possible to
designate a typical one foot flood rise floodway using the standard FEMA
approved models or where one would make little practical sense.
   (j)   If building permits are requested for the individual lots which are
shown located within the effective FEMA floodplain (not including floodway)
before the LOMR to revise the FEMA floodplain to reflect the subdivision has
become effective then separate Floodplain Development Permits will be required
for each lot. For lots located within the effective FEMA floodway, FDPs cannot
be issued until the LOMR to revise the floodway has become effective. As a
condition of approval for the FDPs, an elevation certificate for the individual
lot must be submitted to the city within 60 days upon completion of
construction. In addition, the following conditions must be met to obtain
approval of the permit:
      (1)   Either, the LOMR flood study must be reviewed and approved by the
City and submitted to FEMA for review with the FEMA case number provided to the
city; or,
      (2)   A preconstruction elevation certificate for the individual lot must
be provided to verify the grading matches the approved plans and to confirm the
structure will be built to the correct minimum finished floor elevation.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18816, § 7, passed 9-15-2009; Ord.
25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-349 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Areas of shallow flooding are designated as AO or AH Zones within areas of
special flood hazard. These shallow flooding areas have special flood hazards
with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by pond or sheet flow; therefore, in these areas the following
provisions shall apply:
   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures must have the lowest floor (including basement, finished garage, and
machinery or equipment servicing the building) elevated two feet above the
fully developed base flood elevation or the FEMA regulatory base flood
elevation, or two feet above the highest adjacent grade, or two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified), whichever is higher controls.
   (b)   All new construction and substantial improvement of nonresidential
structures shall comply with either (b)(1) or (b)(2) below.
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement, finished garage, and
machinery or equipment servicing the building) must be elevated two feet above
the fully developed base flood elevation or the FEMA regulatory base flood
elevation, or two feet above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified), whichever is higher controls; or
      (2)   The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be
floodproofed to or above the controlling elevation described in subsection (b)
(1) above, so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below
the base blood elevation in an AH Zone, and any space below that elevation is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
   (c)   A registered professional engineer, or architect, as applicable, shall
submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of
this article are satisfied.
   (d)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes
within Zones AH or AO to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-350 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways are areas located within areas of special flood hazard. The
floodway can be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters
which can carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion concerns. Therefore,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (a)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements of non-conforming structures, and other development
within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the floodplain administrator by a professional registered
engineer through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the encroachment, individually or
collectively, shall not result in any increase in flood flows or damages and
shall not increase the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the 1%
annual chance storm event for fully developed conditions. The registered
professional engineer must submit a no-rise certificate with supporting
documentation to the floodplain administrator if a no-rise analysis is
completed.
   (b)   If the provisions of the foregoing subsection (a) are satisfied, all
new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
   (c)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.2, of the National
Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions
required by § 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   (d)   Exemptions for minor projects. Small projects that are not an
obstruction to floodwaters, do not increase the natural grade, and will not
increase flood stages can be permitted without requiring a no-rise
certification per the discretion of the floodplain administrator. Minor project
examples include paving of a driveway or parking area at the existing grade,
and small isolated obstructions such as a mailbox, a pitcher's mound, or a
single telephone pole.
   (e)   No person shall proceed with development of property within the
floodway until a Floodplain Development Permit has been issued and the
development is in compliance with this section.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-351 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $2,000 for each violation in accordance with §
1-6(b), and each and every day the violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation. Nothing herein contained in this section or any other section of
this article shall prevent the City of Fort Worth from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including but not
limited to refusal to approve a plat or to issue a building permit, or to
obtain injunctive relief against the violator pursuant to Tex. Local Government
Code § 54.016 or any other statute, or any other legal remedy available to the
city.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 18816, passed 9-15-2009; Ord. 23569-
02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed
3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-352 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This article is designed to be cumulative and in no way abrogate other
provisions of the state law, the city code, ordinances, rules, approved
policies of various City of Fort Worth and other governmental commissions and
departments dealing with flooding, or any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. If there exists any apparent conflict or overlap between
provisions of this article and other ordinances, rules or regulations, or any
easements, covenants or deed restrictions affecting the property in question,
the more stringent provision shall apply. All procedures and permits mandated
by other provisions of the city's laws shall remain in full force and effect
and are incorporated as if reproduced in full herein. Some examples of these
other materials include the subdivision ordinance, as amended, and the zoning
ordinance, as amended. There are federal and state laws that are and remain
applicable to this subject matter.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-353 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall
be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the City of Fort Worth; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-354 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Fort Worth, or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that results from reliance on
this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. In no
case shall responsibility or liability arise from the design or operation of
drainage facilities dedicated to the city.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§§ 7-355—7-370 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: ABATEMENT
§ 7-371 ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   Whenever the floodplain administrator, or designee, or any code compliance
officer finds, that a violation of the provisions of this article has occurred,
he or she shall advise the property owner of this violation in writing and
direct said owner to abate the violation. For purposes of this article, said
notice shall be mailed by certified mail and shall be effective when deposited
in the mail addressed to the person or entity listed as the owner on the tax
rolls of the City of Fort Worth, regardless of whether such person or entity
owns record title to the property or is otherwise the legal owner of the
property. The notice shall detail the nature of the violation and shall
establish a reasonable abatement period.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-372 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   Whenever an order has been given by the floodplain administrator, or
designee, or code compliance officer to abate any violation of this article
under the provisions of §
7-371 the owner thereof shall have the right, within the period of time given
in the order for abatement, to appear at the office of the floodplain
administrator with a written explanation to show cause why such order should
not or cannot be complied with, and the floodplain administrator may, at his or
her discretion, give such extension of time for the abatement or removal of
such violation as may be necessary, provided that there is no immediate danger
to the public health, safety or general welfare.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-373 VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT.
   The owner of any property found to be in violation under the provisions of
this article may abate the violation at any time within the abatement period by
repair or removal. The floodplain administrator shall be advised in writing by
the owner of the property that the abatement has occurred and may inspect the
premises to ensure that the violation has been abated. Should any of the items
which constitute a violation be placed on other public or private property
without consent from the owner or person in control of such property, this will
constitute a separate violation of this article and appropriate enforcement
action shall be taken by the floodplain administrator or his or her designee or
any code compliance officer.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-374 FAILURE TO VOLUNTARILY ABATE A VIOLATION.
   If a violation is not properly abated within the period established under
the provisions of §
7-371, the city council shall hold a public hearing to determine if the
violation should be abated under the police powers of the city.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-375 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   A written notice of the public hearing before the city council shall be
served on the property owner at least ten days prior to the date set for the
public hearing. Service shall be made upon the owner by personal service, or by
certified or registered mail. If made by certified mail, services shall be
effective on the date the notice is deposited in the United States mail. If
there is no known address for the owner, the notice of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten
calendar days before the hearing. The failure of any person to receive such
notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-376 HEARING BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   At the public hearing, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant
evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from owners,
witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged
violation and to proposed abatement measures. The hearing may be continued from
time to time.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-377 DECISION OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider all evidence
and determine whether the property, or any part thereof, constitutes a
violation of this article as alleged. If the council finds that a violation
does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the violation, the city
council shall make a written order setting forth the findings and ordering the
owner or other person having charge or control of the property to abate the
violation by repair or removal in the manner and by the means specifically set
forth in that order. The order shall set forth the time within which the
abatement shall be completed.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-378 LIMITATION ON FILING JUDICIAL ACTIONS.
   Any owner or other person with a vested interest who is aggrieved by the
decision of the city council ordering the abatement of any violation under the
provisions of this article may contest such decision by filing a petition in
court within ten days of the date of the decision of the city council.
Otherwise, the decision of the city council shall be deemed final and
conclusive, and all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-379 SERVICE OF ABATEMENT ORDER.
   Within five days following the decision of the city council, the property
owner and/or the person having charge or control of the premises shall be
served with a copy of the written order in the manner provided in §
7-375.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-380 ABATEMENT BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   The property owner, or person having charge or control of the property, may
at his or her own expense abate the violation as prescribed by the order of the
city council prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in
order. If the violation has been inspected by a representative of the
transportation and public works department and has been abated in accordance
with the order, the proceedings shall be terminated.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-381 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If a violation is not completely abated within the time prescribed in the
city council order, the floodplain administrator, or other designated city
official, is authorized and directed to cause the violation to be abated by
city forces or private contract. In furtherance of this section, the floodplain
administrator or duly authorized agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors
or other representatives of the City of Fort Worth are expressly authorized to
enter upon the property to abate the violation.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-382 RECORD OF ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (a)   The floodplain administrator, or such other city official as the
administrator may designate, shall keep an account of the costs (including
incidental expenses) of abating the violation on each separate lot or parcel of
land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to
the city council showing the cost of abatement of said, violation including any
salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted
to the city council a copy of the same shall be served on the property owner in
the manner provided in §
7-375, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by
the city council for confirmation.
   (b)   The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the
correctness and reasonableness of the abatement costs.
   (c)   Written proof of the service of such report shall be made under oath
and filed with the city secretary.
   (d)   The term INCIDENTAL EXPENSES shall include, but not be limited to, the
actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices,
specifications and contracts, inspection of work (including survey if
necessary), and costs of printing, mailing and publication required hereunder.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-383 REPORT; HEARING AND PROCEEDINGS.
   The city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the abatement costs,
together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may make
such revision, correction or modification in the report, as it may deem just,
after which, the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified,
shall be confirmed by the council. The decision of the city council on the
correctness and reasonableness of abatement costs shall be final and
conclusive.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-384 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST PROPERTY; LIEN.
   (a)   The total cost of abating such violation, as confirmed by the city
council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or
parcel of land to which it relates, and, upon recordation in the office of the
county clerk of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a
lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.
   (b)   After such confirmation and recordation, a copy of the notice of lien
may be turned over to the city tax department, whereupon it shall be the duty
of the tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the
next regular city tax bills for said respective lots and parcels of land, and
thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale as in the case of
delinquent ad valorem taxes.
   (c)   At any time after recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial
or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.
   (d)   The foregoing remedy shall not preclude a suit against any person
violating this article who may be held personally liable for the cost incurred
by the City of Fort Worth in connection with such abatement procedures. The
costs of abating any such violation shall constitute a personal liability of
the person causing such abatement procedures to be necessary. In addition, the
foregoing remedy shall not constitute the exclusive remedy available to the
City of Fort Worth to abate a violation of or otherwise enforce the provisions
of this article, and the City of Fort Worth may elect any other legal remedy or
remedies available to it to obtain compliance with this article. The abatement
provisions set forth above shall operate as an enlargement and not a limitation
of the power of the City of Fort Worth, and such provisions shall not prevent
said city from using any means legally available to it, with or without notice
to the landowner, in the event of an emergency or other situation posing a
serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 11998, § 1, passed 6-13-1995; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
DIVISION 6: DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE TRINITY RIVER CORRIDOR
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 11517, adopted Mar. 22, 1994, provided for the addition of
Div. 5 to this Art. VIII. Inasmuch as provisions designated as Div. 5 existed
in this Art. VIII, said new provisions have been included herein as Div. 6 at
the editor’s discretion.
§ 7-385 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The City of Fort Worth participates in the Trinity River Corridor
Development Certificate (CDC) process that is coordinated through the North
Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) to stabilize flood risk along the
Trinity River. The CDC process allows for development within the Trinity River
Corridor while ensuring that the development does not raise flood water levels
or reduce flood storage capacity. The City of Fort Worth retains ultimate
control over floodplain permitting decisions within our jurisdiction while
allowing our neighboring communities and agencies the opportunity to review and
comment on projects along the Trinity River Corridor.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-386 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following words, phrases and terms
shall have these meanings:
   CDC MODEL. The official CDC HEC-RAS computer model of the Upper Trinity
River study area. The CDC Model includes constructed projects and several
projects that are permitted but no constructed.
   CDC REGULATORY ZONE. The area where the CDC Process and requirements apply.
This area is FEMA 100-year floodplain (also known as the special flood hazard
area) minus areas of Specific Prior Development.
   CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATE (CDC). Permission for development activity
within the Regulatory Zone of the Trinity River Corridor. The CDC is issued by
the city as part of the floodplain permitting process prior to development.
   CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATE MANUAL (CDC MANUAL). The document published
by NCTCOG that provides information on the CDC process, including the CDC
application.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, the construction or alteration of buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, clearing, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. This also
includes any levee or other improvement defined by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
   NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS (NCTCOG). Voluntary association
of, by and for local governments, established to assist local governments in
planning for common needs, cooperating for mutual benefit, and coordinating for
sound regional development.
   STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD (SPF). The flood that may be expected from the most
severe combination of meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are
considered to be reasonably characteristic of the geographical region involved,
excluding extremely rare combinations. In practical terms, a SPF usually has a
0.30 to 0.08 percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, and is usually between 40 and 60 percent of the Probably Maximum Flood
(PMF). The SPF represents a "standard" against which the degree of protection
selected for a project may be judged and compared with protection provided for
similar projects in other localities. In general terms, the SPF for the Trinity
River Corridor is commonly equated to an 800-year storm frequency.
   TRINITY RIVER CORRIDOR. Within the City of Fort Worth, the Trinity River
Corridor is defined as the bed and banks of the Trinity River from the dams of
Lake Worth and Benbrook Lake, downstream to the eastern corporate limit, and
all of the adjacent land area and all watercourses within the boundaries of the
river floodplain within the Fort Worth city limits.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 3, passed 4-12-2011;
Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-387 CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATE MANUAL ADOPTED STANDARDS.
   The current edition of the Corridor Development Certificate Manual, and all
subsequent amendments and revisions thereto are hereby adopted as the standard
for development within the Trinity River Corridor and is incorporated herein by
reference. The current manual and application can be downloaded from the NCTCOG
website.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 4, passed 4-12-2011;
Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-388 CDC ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Violations. A person commits a violation by commencing development
within the Trinity River Corridor without first submitting a CDC application
and obtaining documentation from the City granting a Corridor Development
Certificate unless an exemption has been obtained in accordance with §
7-391.
   (b)   Penalties. A person who commits a violation of any provision of the
CDC process shall be required to return the property to its previous or
original condition or to go through the CDC process and make any required
accommodations that result from the CDC process.
   (c)   Enforcement. Any code compliance officer, the floodplain administrator
or designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
division.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-389 CDC APPLICATION.
   The owner or representative of any proposed public or private development
located in the vicinity of the CDC Regulatory Zone must contact the floodplain
administrator to determine if a Corridor Development Certificate is required.
If required, the owner or representative must follow the CDC process as
described in the CDC Manual. The current manual and application can be
downloaded from the NCTCOG website. The City will not approve and development
activity in the floodplain until the CDC and FDP applications have been
reviewed and signed by the City.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 5, passed 9-30-2008;
Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 5, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-
2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-390 REVIEW OF APPLICATION; APPROVAL; DENIAL OF APPROVAL.
   The floodplain administrator shall deny any application for a Corridor
Development Certificate, unless it complies with the standards contained in the
CDC Manual or unless an exemption from or variance of those standards is
obtained. The process for the review of the CDC application and the subsequent
approval or denial of approval can be found in the CDC Manual.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 6, passed 4-12-2011;
Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-391 CDC EXEMPTIONS AND VARIANCES.
   A property owner may request an exemption or variance to the CDC process as
described in the CDC Manual. The process for the review of the exemption or
variance and the subsequent approval or denial of approval can be found in the
CDC Manual. Exemptions and variances are still reviewed by the CDC
participating communities.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 5, passed 9-30-2008;
Ord. 19658-04-2011, § 7, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-
2022, eff. 3-23-2022)
§ 7-392 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   Sections
7-331 through
7-334 are made a part of this
Division 6.
(Ord. 11517, § 1, passed 3-22-1994; Ord. 25350-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022,
eff. 3-23-2022)
DIVISION 7: DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE CITY FLOOD RISK AREAS
§ 7-392.1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   Although the City of Fort Worth participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program which provides separate regulations designed to protect against public
and private losses due to flooding within FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas,
there is currently no additional regulations that deter, protect, and prevent
against flood risks for areas outside of the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas.
It is for that reason that Division 7 has been created, to promote and protect
the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of
Fort Worth by establishing provisions that minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions within the identified City Flood Risk Areas that are
not addressed by the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following words, phrases and terms
shall have these meanings:
   CITY FLOOD RISK AREAS (CFRA). Areas designated by the city, located
generally upstream of the FEMA regulatory floodplains, where detailed
engineering studies were prepared for specific watersheds indicate that storm
water runoff accumulates due to concentration of flow, storm drain capacity
limitations, and obstructions based on topography.
   CFRA CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate required by the city for
development with a land disturbance of less than one acre within a CFRA.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in
the Stormwater Criteria Manual.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION (DFE). Within the CFRAs, this means, water surface
elevations of the 1% annual chance flood event (also known as 100-year) plus
two feet of freeboard.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real property,
including but not limited to, the construction or alteration of buildings or
other structures such as residential structures, non-residential structures,
fences, sheds, garages, and retaining walls, or the filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
   MINOR PROJECT. A Development of less than one acre within a CFRA that does
not cause an obstruction to floodwaters, does not increase the natural grade of
the property, and will not increase floodwater elevations such as, but not
limited to, paving a driveway or parking area at the existing grade, small
isolated obstructions such as mailboxes or single telephone poles, and interior
remodels with no revisions to the existing footprint of the structure.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.3 ESTABLISHMENT OF CFRA CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   A CFRA Certificate of Compliance is required for developments with
less than one acre of land disturbance to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this division. A development with areas of land disturbance of one acre or
more will not require a CFRA Certificate of Compliance, but must comply with
the city's Stormwater Criteria Manual. No development shall occur on any land
within a CFRA unless a CFRA Certificate of Compliance or a Stormwater Drainage
Study has been approved by the city.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued for any property that docs not have
a CFRA Certificate of Compliance or a Stormwater Drainage Study approved by the
city, unless the city has determined that the development is a minor project or
grants a variance to the requirements of this division.
   (c)   Exemptions for minor projects. Minor projects can be permitted without
requiring a CFRA Certificate of Compliance per the discretion of the Floodplain
Administrator or their designee. The Floodplain Administrator, or their
designee, will make the determination, in their sole discretion, as to whether
a project will receive an exemption as a minor project.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.4 CFRA DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The owner or representative of any proposed public or private
development shall verify if the proposed development is located inside a CFRA
prior to submitting an application to the city for a building permit.
   (b)   A proposed development in a CFRA with a land disturbance of one acre
or more, or that is less than one acre but is part of a Common Plan of
development shall comply with the Stormwater Criteria Manual and submit and
obtain the city's approval of a Stormwater Drainage Study.
   (c)   A proposed development in a CFRA with a land disturbance of less than
one acre that is not a minor project, and is not part of a Common Plan of
Development, shall comply with the following:
      (1)   A licensed professional engineer registered with the State of Texas
must fully complete and place their engineering seal on a CFRA Certificate of
Compliance; and
      (2)   The completed and sealed CFRA Certificate of Compliance must be
submitted to the city with the building permit application for review.
   (d)   Unless a variance has been granted by the city or a development
activity has been determined by the Floodplain Administrator, or their
designee, to be a minor project, the city will not approve any development
activity in a CFRA until either a CFRA Certificate of Compliance or a
Stormwater Drainage Study has been reviewed and approved by the city.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.5 STORMWATER CRITERIA MANUAL ADOPTED STANDARDS.
   The current edition of the Stormwater Criteria Manual, and all subsequent
amendments and revisions thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. All development within a CFRA shall comply with the Stormwater
Criteria Manual and the provisions of this division.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.6 CFRA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   The finished floor elevation of any proposed structure, any addition
to an existing structure, or the relocation of an existing structure in a CFRA,
must be at or above the DFE, or the structure shall be either wet or dry
floodproofed to at or above the DFE.
   (b)   For all structures mitigated by elevation, a post-construction
elevation certificate must be submitted to the city within 60 days of
completion of construction in the form required by the Floodplain
Administrator. The elevation certificate must be completed by a registered
public land surveyor or licensed professional engineer. The elevation
certificate must indicate the elevation of the structure in relation to mean
sea level of the lowest floor, including a basement, finished garage, and the
lowest elevation of machinery or equipment servicing the building.
   (c)   For all structures mitigated by floodproofing, the floodproofing
method must be shown on the construction plans. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary sewer facilities must be floodproofed to at or above the
DFE. All wet or dry floodproofing shall be completed in accordance with Federal
Emergency Management Agency's floodproofing requirements and guidelines which
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. A person commits an
offense if the person fails to establish the finished floor elevation of a
structure in a CFRA at or above the DFE, or fails to wet or dry floodproof a
structure in a CFRA at or above the DFE, as required by this section.
   (d)   If a development or proposed development is part of a Common Plan of
Development, then the development or proposed development must comply with the
Stormwater Criteria Manual.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.7 REVIEW OF CFRA DEVELOPMENT; APPROVAL; DENIAL OF APPROVAL.
   The Floodplain Administrator, or their designee, shall deny any application
for a building permit located in a CFRA unless it complies with the provisions
of this Division 7 or the Stormwater Criteria Manual, as applicable, unless a
variance is approved by the city or the development is determined by the
Floodplain Administrator to be a minor project. The process for the review,
approval and denial of the CFRA Certificate of Compliance and the Stormwater
Drainage Study shall be in accordance with this division and the Stormwater
Criteria Manual.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.8 CFRA VARIANCES.
   A property owner may request a variance to the CFRA Development Procedures
in accordance with the Stormwater Criteria Manual.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 7-392.9 CFRA ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Violations. A person commits an offense by commencing Development
within a CFRA without a CFRA Certificate of Compliance or a Stormwater Drainage
Study that is approved by the city.
   (b)   Penalties. A person who commits a violation of any provision of this
division shall return the property to its previous condition, or comply with
this division.
   (c)   Enforcement. The Floodplain Administrator, or their designee, or any
code compliance officer, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this division.
   (e)   A violation of any provision of this division shall be enforceable in
accordance with §
7-351 of the City Code and state law.
(Ord. 26962-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
ARTICLE IX: STANDARDS, REGISTRATION, AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
FOR MULTIFAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 1, adopted December 6, 2011, amended the title of Art.
IX to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IX was
titled, “Registration and Inspection of Multifamily Dwelling Complexes.” See
also the Code Comparative Table.
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-393 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the “multifamily inspections code.”
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 7-394 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A structure or building, the use of which
is incidental to that of the main building(s), and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
   BOARDING HOUSE. See LODGING HOUSE.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the building code, or the building
official’s duly authorized representative.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief of the police department or the chief’s duly
authorized representative.
   CONDOMINIUM. A complex of individually owned residential units with
undivided co-ownership of common elements, established by a declaration under
the Condominium Act of the State of Texas, Tex. Property Code Chapter 81 of
the, and governed under a set of bylaws as a Texas non-profit corporation
composed of all unit owners with a board of directors elected by the
association membership.
   CONGREGATE RESIDENCE. Any building or portion thereof which contains
facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, and may include facilities for
cooking and eating, for occupancy by other than a family. A CONGREGATE
RESIDENCE may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or
lodging houses.
   CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM. A form to be made a part of a lease agreement
between a landlord and a resident in which the resident agrees and acknowledges
the resident’s legal obligation to refrain from committing or permitting the
commission of certain enumerated criminal acts or categories of criminal acts
on the leased premises.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the code compliance department and the director’s
authorized representatives.
   EXISTING BUILDING. A building constructed in compliance with all codes at
the time of construction, or one for which a legal building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
   FAMILY. The same meaning as that term is defined in the comprehensive zoning
ordinance.
   LANDLORD. The traditional meaning of owner or lessor, and additionally
includes management company, or managing agent, including on-site manager, of a
multifamily dwelling complex.
   LEASE. A contract or rental agreement granting use or occupation of property
at a multifamily dwelling complex during a specified period, subject to various
terms and conditions, in exchange for a specified rent.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT HOUSING AUTHORITY. An entity authorized by Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 392.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single
housekeeping unit, where lodging or meals are provided for five or more persons
for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or
transients.
   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING COMPLEX.
      (1)   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING COMPLEX means:
         a.   Three or more dwelling units that are under common ownership or
that are managed by the same person, and that are on the same lot or tract or
on adjoining lots or tracts; and/or
         b.   A lodging house or boarding house.
      (2)   The term also includes any accessory structures and facilities
incidental to the use thereof, including, but not limited to, yards, courts,
parking areas, storage buildings, offices, maintenance buildings, equipment
buildings, mail rooms, laundry facilities, swimming pools, spas, ponds, wells,
cabanas, play rooms and play yards, recreational and picnic facilities, public
assembly rooms, garages, carports, fences, walls and all other similar
buildings, structures and facilities on the premises.
      (3)   The term shall not include hotels, motels or congregate residences.
The term shall not include dwelling units, which are owner occupied.
   OWNER. Any person holding title to a multifamily dwelling complex, according
to the deed records in the county clerk’s office of the county in which the
complex is situated.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   UNIT. A dwelling unit as defined by the minimum building standards code.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Fort
Worth as adopted and amended from time to time.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
14929, § 1, passed 1-15-2002; Ord. 17827, § 1, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 19998-12-
2011, § 2, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 21105-01-2014, § 1, passed 2-28-2014; eff. 2-
4-2014)
§ 7-395 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to safeguard the life, health, safety,
welfare and property of the occupants of multifamily dwelling complexes and the
general public by developing a process to enforce the minimum building
standards, and to provide equitable and practical criminal, administrative, and
civil remedies for the violation of minimum building standards.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 7-396 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   This article shall apply to all multifamily dwelling complexes located
in the city which are now in existence or which may hereafter be constructed or
converted from other uses.
   (b)   The code compliance director and the director’s authorized
representatives are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this
article and the minimum building standards code.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
14929, § 1, passed 1-15-2002)
§§ 7-397—7-399 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: REGISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS
§ 7-400 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   No multifamily dwelling complex shall be used or occupied, and no
change in the existing occupancy classification as defined by § 111 of the
International Building Code or ownership of a multifamily dwelling complex, or
any portion thereof, shall be made until the landlord has obtained a
certificate of occupancy.
   (b)   Change of ownership or any event causing a certificate of occupancy to
be revoked. Within 30 days after the change of ownership of a multifamily
dwelling complex or the revocation of the certificate of occupancy of the
complex, the landlord must obtain a new certificate of occupancy in order to
continue operating. The complex, including all occupied and all vacant dwelling
units, shall be subject to a complete ordinance inspection by the building
official and the director before a new certificate of occupancy will be issued.
If a certificate of occupancy is not obtained for all buildings in the complex
within 30 days, the complex shall be vacated until such time as a certificate
of occupancy is issued.
   (c)   Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an
approval of a violation of the provisions of the minimum building standards
code, this article, or of other ordinances of the city. Certificates presuming
to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code and
other applicable ordinances shall not be valid. Changes in the character or use
of a building shall not be made except as provided in the building code.
   (d)   The certificate of occupancy for all multifamily dwelling complexes
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the complex, and
shall not be removed except by the building official.
   (e)   A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly operates a
multifamily dwelling complex in violation of this section.
   (f)   If the building official determines that the complex fails the
ordinance inspection, all vacant units within the complex shall be posted for
non-occupancy, and the landlord shall not allow the occupancy of such units
until the complex passes final inspection and is issued a certificate of
occupancy.
   (g)   The director may grant an extension if the landlord can demonstrate
that no condition constituting an immediate fire or safety hazard exists and
that the owner is working toward obtaining a certificate of occupancy in a
timely fashion. A request for an extension of time must be made in writing to
the director. The director must respond within ten days of receiving the
request for an extension. Should the request be denied the landlord may within
ten days file an appeal to the Fort Worth appeals board.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 17827, § 2, passed 10-9-2007; Ord.
19998-12-2011, § 3, passed 12-6-2011)
§ 7-401 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall annually register
the complex with the director.
   (b)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex which is constructed
after the effective date of this ordinance shall register the complex within 30
days after the complex receives its certificate of occupancy, and annually
thereafter.
   (c)   A registration is valid for one year from the date the completed
registration form is filed in the office of the director, and payment of the
registration fee has been made, unless the ownership of the complex changes.
   (d)   If a change of ownership of the complex occurs during the period that
a registration is otherwise valid, the landlord of the complex shall have 30
days from the date the change of ownership occurred to file a new registration
with the director, and pay a new registration fee.
   (e)   The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the director, and
shall at a minimum contain the following information about the complex:
      (1)   The trade name, physical address and business address;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, property
manager, resident manager, registered agent, and all federal, state and local
funding agencies; and the type of business entity which owns the complex;
      (3)   The names and physical addresses of designated employees or
authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency
conditions, and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during
any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster,
flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard and violent crime. A post office box shall
not suffice for the address requirements of this subsection (e);
      (4)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any mortgagees;
      (5)   A copy of a site plan depicting the total number of all buildings
within the complex, including a description of the use of each building and the
location of each building within the complex;
      (6)   The total number of dwelling units;
      (7)   The number of dwelling units per category, with the categories
based on the number of sleeping rooms in a unit;
      (8)   The number and type of security systems and fire alarm systems
maintained on the premises and the names and telephone numbers of the alarm
companies which respond to alarms or relay alarms to emergency services;
      (9)   If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment
trust, the name and physical address of any of the following:
         a.   For a corporation, a corporate officer;
         b.   For a partnership, a general partner;
         c.   For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative
member;
         d.   For a limited partnership, a general partner;
         e.   For a limited liability partnership, a general partner;
         f.   For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner;
         g.   For a trust, a trustee;
         h.   For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an
officer; or
         i.   For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized
agent.
      (10)   If the property is owned by a person, other than an individual,
who lives outside the State of Texas, the owner shall designate a registered
agent, in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the
owner. If the property is owned by a person who is an individual and who lives
outside the State of Texas, the individual shall either designate a registered
agent, in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the
owner or provide a physical address where the owner may receive legal service.
A designation of a registered agent under this section shall include the name
and address of the agent; and
      (11)   If any change in the information required by this section occurs,
the owner shall notify the director within 30 days of the change, in a manner
prescribed by the director.
   (f)   A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly operates a
multifamily dwelling complex which is not currently registered with the
director.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
14929, § 1, passed 1-15-2002; Ord. 17827, § 3, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 19998-12-
2011, § 4, passed 12-6-2011)
§ 7-402 FEES.
   (a)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall pay the city fees
to offset the city’s cost of administration, registration and inspection.
   (b)   Fees shall be in accordance with a schedule approved by the city
council to include:
      (1)   A registration fee based upon the number of housing units which
shall be:
         a.   Submitted annually with the registration form required by §
7-401; and
         b.   Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of
the complex.
      (2)   A re-inspection fee shall be assessed for each follow up
inspection; and
      (3)   An administrative fee for a complex on probationary status or
suspension or revocation which shall be assessed on a monthly basis, however no
separate fee shall be charged for re-inspections as long as the complex remains
in probationary status or suspension.
   (c)   The fee requirements described above shall not include a dwelling unit
on a college, university, or seminary occupied by a student or a student and
the student’s family and in which the dwelling unit is owned by the respective
college, university or seminary, nor to a dwelling unit operated by a local
government housing authority.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
14929, §§ 1, 2, passed 1-15-2002; Ord. 17827, § 4, passed 10-9-2007; Ord.
19697-05-2011, § 1, passed 5-24-2011; Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 5, passed 12-6-
2011; Ord. 21105-01-2014, § 2, passed 2-28-2014; eff. 2-4-2014; Ord. 25772-09-
2022, § 1, passed 9-27-2022, eff. 10-1-2022)
§ 7-403 INSPECTION BY DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The director may conduct:
      (1)   Inspections for issuance of certificate of occupancy in conjunction
with the development department;
      (2)   Inspections based on indications of code violations, including
complaints filed with the director;
      (3)   Periodic inspections; and
      (4)   Follow-up inspections.
   (b)   The following areas of a multifamily dwelling complex shall be subject
to inspection by the director:
      (1)   All building exteriors;
      (2)   All exterior and interior public areas;
      (3)   Vacant dwelling units; and
      (4)   Occupied dwelling units upon the consent of the tenant or when
subject to a valid warrant issued by the court.
   (c)   The director may inspect portions of a multifamily dwelling complex as
frequently as the director deems necessary. The director shall schedule
periodic inspections no less frequently than once every two years. Multifamily
dwelling complexes operated by a local government housing authority are exempt
from periodic inspections.
   (d)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall make all
exteriors, all exterior and interior public areas, and all vacant dwelling
units of the complex available to the director for inspections at all
reasonable times.
   (e)   A multifamily dwelling complex fails inspection if it does not score
at least 100 points, out of a possible 125 points, according to the periodic
inspection report scale as promulgated by the director. The landlord of a
multifamily dwelling complex that fails the periodic inspection as provided for
in this section shall correct all violations identified in the periodic
inspection report within 30 days unless a longer period of time or an extension
has been granted by the director.
   (f)   The director is authorized to make follow-up inspections of a
multifamily dwelling complex to inspect all areas included in the periodic
inspection as well as occupied dwelling units, in such frequency and scope as
the director deems necessary to determine compliance with this article and with
the minimum building standards code.
   (g)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex must correct all
violations identified in an inspection report.
   (h)   In addition to the other authority granted by this section, the
director is authorized to inspect a multifamily dwelling complex with greater
frequency than provided above if the director has cause to believe that the
complex is not in compliance with the minimum building standards code or this
article.
   (i)   In addition to other authority granted by this section, the director
has all rights and authority granted by Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article
18.05. Inspections shall comply with all federal, state and local laws,
regulations and ordinances.
   (j)   When considering a violation created by a tenant the director may
consider the timeliness of the landlord’s response to the violation, actions
taken by the landlord to address a tenant’s activities that may have caused the
condition that was a violation, and actions taken by the landlord to prevent or
reduce similar violations in the future.
   (k)   The director is authorized to publish the results of inspections.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 14929, §§ 1, 3, passed 1-15-2002; Ord.
17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17827, § 5, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 19998-12-
2011, § 6, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 21105-01-2014, § 3, passed 2-28-2014; eff. 2-
4-2014)
§ 7-404 LANDLORD/TENANT INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall inspect each
dwelling unit prior to leasing and shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The inspection of a dwelling unit shall be conducted by the
landlord and the unit’s tenant:
         a.   A minimum of once annually; and
         b.   When the occupancy of the unit changes.
      (2)   The landlord shall sign each inspection report, and shall require a
tenant to sign the report for the tenant’s dwelling unit. If the tenant
disagrees with any notation made by the landlord on the report, the landlord
shall permit the tenant to make written comments on the report prior to signing
it. The tenant shall also note any discrepancies they have identified with the
unit upon move in and the landlord shall initial those noted items. The
landlord shall provide the tenant with a copy of the report after it is signed.
      (3)   The director shall determine which standards established by the
minimum building standards code shall be covered by the inspection.
      (4)   The failure of a landlord to make inspections as required by this
subsection (a), to maintain records of the inspections, and to permit
inspection of those records pursuant to subsection (b) below shall cause the
complex to fail inspection.
   (b)   A landlord shall maintain reports of the inspections conducted
pursuant to subsection (a) above for all dwelling units within the multifamily
dwelling complex.
      (1)   The reports shall either be on a form provided by the director or
on a form that complies with the requirements of the director.
      (2)   A report shall include places for marking whether the dwelling unit
complies with the standards set by the director to be included within the scope
of the inspection, and shall include the names of all persons occupying the
dwelling unit (other than overnight guests).
      (3)   A report shall also include:
         a.   The names of designated employees or other authorized persons who
shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions; and
         b.   A telephone number where said employees can be contacted during
any 24-hour period. The telephone number may be for an answering service that
has the capability to contact the designated employee immediately. Emergency
conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, collapse hazard, burst
pipes or violent crime.
   (c)   The director shall develop and maintain a rental handbook and shall
provide each multifamily dwelling complex with a copy of the handbook upon
registration.
      (1)   The handbook shall be entitled, “The Fort Worth Rental Handbook.”
      (2)   The handbook shall include:
         a.   Grounds for eviction of a tenant;
         b.   Who may issue and who may deliver an eviction notice;
         c.   A tenant’s rights to challenge an eviction notice;
         d.   The name and phone number of any agencies a tenant may contact
for information or assistance to challenge an eviction notice; and
         e.   The telephone number of the code compliance department.
      (3)   A landlord shall duplicate the handbook and shall provide a copy to
each tenant, either at the time the tenant signs the lease or at the time the
landlord conducts an inspection of the tenant’s dwelling unit as provided by
this section.
      (4)   A landlord may provide a tenant with an alternative publication
upon prior written approval issued to the landlord by the director.
   (d)   A landlord commits an offense if the landlord knowingly violates this
section.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
14929, § 1, passed 1-15-2002; Ord. 17827, § 6, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 19998-12-
2011, § 7, passed 12-6-2011)
§ 7-405 PROBATIONARY STATUS, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Probationary status.
      (1)   In addition to any other authority granted by this section or any
other provision of the code of the City of Fort Worth, the director may place
the registration of a multifamily dwelling complex on a probationary status if:
         a.   A landlord fails to correct a violation of the city code or
applicable state statute within the time specified in a notice of violation; or
         b.   Any inspection reveals a repeat violation of the same provision
of the city code or applicable state statute which had been identified within
the preceding 12-month period.
      (2)   a.   The duration of the probationary status shall begin upon the
mailing of a notice by the director of the initiation of the probationary
status and shall continue until both of the following conditions have been met:
            1.   All previously identified code violations at the complex have
been corrected by the landlord and noted and approved by the director; and
            2.   No additional code or statutory violations are identified at
the complex for 90 days after correction of the last violations as approved by
the director.
         b.   The director shall impose a monthly administrative fee on the
landlord for as long as the complex remains on probationary status.
   (b)   Suspension of registration.
      (1)   In addition to other authority granted by this section or any other
provision of the code of the City of Fort Worth, if a complex fails to complete
its probationary status within 180 days, the director may place the
registration of such complex on suspended status. While under suspension, no
unoccupied unit in the complex may be occupied and no occupied unit shall be
occupied by new tenants until the complex has been in full compliance with the
city code and all applicable laws for a minimum of 30 days. The registration
shall remain suspended until the complex has been in full compliance with the
city code and all applicable laws for a minimum of 180 days.
      (2)   If a complex has been on a suspended status at a previous time
within the previous 36 months, no unit in the complex may be occupied by new
tenants until it has been in full compliance for 90 days. The complex shall
remain on suspension until it has been in full compliance with the city code
and all applicable laws for 180 consecutive days.
      (3)   The director shall impose a monthly administrative fee on the
landlord for as long as the complex remains on suspension status.
   (c)   Revocation of registration.
      (1)   In addition to other authority granted by this section or any other
provision of the code of the City of Fort Worth, the director may revoke the
registration of a multifamily dwelling complex if:
         a.   The complex is found to have one or more violations that
constitute a danger to the health or safety of its tenants or the public at
large and the landlord fails to correct such violation(s) within the time
specified in a notice of violation; or
         b.   The complex has more than one fire, life and/or safety violation
during any a 12-month period.
      (2)   A complex whose registration has been revoked may not do business
until such registration has been reinstated. A complex whose registration has
been revoked must be vacated within 30 days of such revocation. A landlord
commits an offense each day or portion of a day the complex continues to offer
a unit for rent while its registration is revoked and each day any unit remains
occupied after the expiration of 30 days from the date of revocation.
   (d)   Appeal of probationary status, suspension or revocation of
registration. A landlord may appeal the probationary status, suspension or
revocation of registration to a designated hearing officer by filing a written
request for appeal with the city secretary not later than 5:00 p.m. on the
fifth business day following the date of notice. The appeal shall be heard by
any designated hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the city council for
a term of two years. Hearing officers shall report to and be under the
administrative oversight of the director of municipal court services. The city
council shall be authorized to remove hearing officers. The director of
municipal court services shall be authorized to take disciplinary action
against hearing officers other than removal. Hearing officers shall be exempt
from the dismissal, suspension, and demotion provisions of
Chapter 2, Article V of the code of the city. The appeal shall be by trial de
novo and the director shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that, on the date of revocation, that the complex had one or more
code violations that constituted a danger to the health and safety of its
tenants or the public at large and the landlord had failed to correct such
violation(s) within a reasonable time after receiving written notice of such
violations. The decision of the hearing officer can be appealed to a civil
district court of Tarrant County within 30 days of the decision of the hearing
officer; the review shall be by trial de novo. The requirement that the complex
be vacated shall be suspended during the pendency of the appeal to the hearing
officer, for 30 days after the hearing officer’s order, and during any appeal
to the district court, court of appeals, or the Texas Supreme Court, and for 15
days after the exhaustion of all appeals.
(Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 8, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 21491-10-2014, § 2, passed 10-
14-2014)
§§ 7-406—7-409 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MULTIFAMILY DWELLING COMPLEXES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 9, adopted December 6, 2011, amended the title of Div.
3 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 3 was
titled, “Crime Prevention Standards.” See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 7-410 CRIME PREVENTION STANDARDS.
   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex shall provide the following
crime prevention measures.
   (a)   Signs for emergencies and code violations. A landlord of a multifamily
dwelling complex shall post and maintain signs on the premises of the complex
which include the following:
      (1)   Emergency numbers. The names of designated employees or other
authorized persons who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions,
and a telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour
period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood,
collapse hazard, burst pipes or violent crime; and
      (2)   Notice for reporting code violations. A sign for reporting code
violations to the city in a form approved by the director.
   (b)   Sign requirements. The sign required by this section shall be a
minimum of 12 inches by 24 inches. Sign facings shall be fabricated out of
weather-proof material. The signs shall have a white background, with letters
and numbers in a contrasting color. At each multifamily dwelling complex there
shall be at least one sign posted, and an additional sign for each 50 dwelling
units in excess of 50. The signs shall be prominently displayed in exterior,
publicly accessible areas of the complex. If the complex has an on-site
management office, one sign shall be on the exterior of the office.
   (c)   Lighting.
      (1)   Exterior illumination shall be provided at appropriate points
adjacent to all building entrances, including individual dwelling units.
Lighting shall be sufficient to illuminate areas where hazards may reasonably
exist, and shall be operable between a half hour before sunset and a half hour
after sunrise.
      (2)   Control mechanisms for such illumination shall be activated and
deactivated by a photo cell or seasonally-adjusted timer switch, not operable
by individual tenants of the complex except at individual dwelling units.
      (3)   A landlord shall repair all inoperable exterior lighting fixtures
within a reasonable period of time after being notified that the fixture is not
working. In no instance shall a reasonable period of time be deemed to mean
more than seven days.
   (d)   Vacant buildings.
      (1)   All openings in vacant buildings and dwellings shall be closed and
secured from unlawful entry by the installation and maintenance of appropriate
locking devices and intact doors and windows which are proportioned to securely
and completely fit the openings.
      (2)   Alternatively, with the approval of the director openings may be
temporarily secured by means of the installation of proportioned wood materials
in good condition. The surfaces of such materials exposed to the weather shall
be protected with the application of exterior grade paint, or a similar weather
resistant finish, which blends with the background color of the building.
   (e)   Security gate access.
      (1)   A landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex which has unstaffed
security gates which restrict vehicle access onto the premises shall provide
the chief of police with master codes to the gates so that police vehicles and
personnel and ambulance and ambulance personnel are allowed unrestricted entry
onto the premises when responding to emergencies and calls for service and
routine patrols.
      (2)   Prior to changing the master codes, the landlord shall notify the
chief of police of the new codes.
      (3)   All security gates shall be equipped with a manual override to be
used in the event of a power outage or system failure. The landlord shall
notify the chief of police of the location of the override.
      (4)   Access through such security gates by fire trucks and fire
personnel shall be provided as required by the fire code.
         a.   Fire lanes shall be maintained in good condition with clearly
visible markings.
         b.   Fire lanes shall be marked by a four-inch red line with “No
Parking—Fire Lane” stenciled with white paint every 25 feet.
         c.   Fire lanes shall be signed with approved traffic signs 12 inches
wide and 18 inches tall which state, “No Parking—Fire Lane.” A sign stating
“Tow-Away Zone,” produced on a white background with red lettering shall
accompany each of these. Signs shall be mounted so that the bottom of the sign
is six feet six inches from the grade.
         d.   Fire lanes shall be kept clear of obstructions such as motor
vehicles, solid waste collection bins, equipment or other similar items.
   (f)   Graffiti abatement. A landlord shall remove graffiti from the
landlord’s multifamily dwelling complex as required by
Appendix B of the city code.
   (g)   Occupancy limits. A landlord shall not permit a dwelling unit within
the complex to be occupied other than by a family, as that term is defined
within this code, and shall not permit the number of persons occupying a
dwelling unit to exceed the occupancy load of the unit based on the standards
set in the minimum building standards code.
   (h)   Tenant responsibility. Even the best security plans, devices and
systems cannot completely prevent crime. The best safety measures a tenant of a
multifamily dwelling complex can utilize are those performed out of common
sense and habit. Such measures include locking doors and windows, not opening
doors to strangers, and promptly reporting malfunctioning security devices and
exterior lighting to the landlord.
   (i)   Multifamily dwelling complex of eight or more units. The landlord of
each multifamily dwelling complex consisting of eight or more units shall
ensure that, within six months of hire, each on-site manager and each employee
authorized to show an apartment or execute a lease with prospective tenants
attends an eight-hour training course which is approved by the chief of police
on the subject of crime free multi-housing. Each calendar year the landlord or
at least one employee for the complex shall attend a refresher training course.
This provision shall become effective January 1, 2014.
   (j)   Multifamily dwelling complex consisting of three or more units. The
landlord at a multifamily dwelling complex consisting of three or more units
shall require the prospective tenant to execute a lease. The lease shall
include one of the following provisions for each new lease or lease renewal for
a unit which is executed after January 1, 2012:
      (1)   A standardized lease promulgated by the Texas Apartment Association
containing a prohibition of criminal conduct on or about the premises;
      (2)   A standardized lease promulgated by the Texas Association of
Realtors containing a prohibition of criminal conduct on or about the premises;
      (3)   A lease with an equivalent provision to (j)(1) or (j)(2) above
containing a prohibition of criminal conduct on or about the premises; or
      (4)   A crime free lease addendum to read as follows: In consideration of
the execution or renewal of a lease of the dwelling unit identified in the
lease, owner and resident agree as follows:
         a.   Resident shall not engage in any activity on or near the dwelling
unit premises that would subject the resident to a penalty of a Class C
misdemeanor that involves possession of drug paraphernalia, assault or
disorderly conduct; Texas Penal Code Class A or B misdemeanors; Texas Penal
Code Felony or Texas Health and Safety Code violation or engage in any
hazardous conduct that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of
the landlord, his or her agent or other tenant or involving imminent or actual
serious property damage. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as
requiring or encouraging the eviction or termination of a lease of a victim of
domestic violence.
         b.   1.   Resident shall not permit any household member or guest to
engage in any activity on or near the dwelling unit premises that would subject
the resident to a penalty of a Class C misdemeanor that involves possession of
drug paraphernalia, assault or disorderly conduct; Texas Penal Code Class A or
B misdemeanors; Texas Penal Code Felony or Texas Health and Safety Code
violation or engage in any hazardous conduct that otherwise jeopardizes the
health, safety and welfare of the landlord, his or her agent or other tenant or
involving imminent or actual serious property damage. Nothing in this provision
shall be construed as requiring or encouraging the eviction or termination of a
lease of a victim of domestic violence.
            2.   VIOLATION OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL BE A MATERIAL
VIOLATION OF THE LEASE AND GOOD CAUSE FOR IMMEDIATE TERMINATION OF THE TENANCY.
A single violation of any provisions of this addendum shall be deemed a serious
violation and a material noncompliance with the terms of this lease. It is
understood that a single violation shall be good cause for the immediate
termination of the lease. Unless otherwise provided by law, proof of a
violation of law prohibited by this addendum shall not require a criminal
conviction, but shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum
and any other provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall
govern.
            4.   This lease addendum is incorporated into the lease executed or
renewed this day between owner and resident.
   (k)   Crime prevention. Each multifamily dwelling complex consisting of
eight or more units shall be subject to a crime prevention through
environmental design (CPTED) inspection conducted by the chief of police who
shall advise the landlord of the findings.
   (l)   Landlord; offense. A landlord commits an offense if the landlord
knowingly violates any provision of this section or fails to comply with any
provision of this section.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 13181, § 1, passed 10-2-1997; Ord.
17827, § 7, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 10, passed 12-6-2011)
§ 7-411 BUILDING, COMMON AREA AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MULTIFAMILY
DWELLING COMPLEXES.
   (a)   Requirements generally. It is a violation of the city code for a
landlord to fail to comply with any of the requirements required by
Chapter 7 of the city code, including but not limited to the requirements
imposed by
Article IV that are specific to multifamily dwelling complexes.
   (b)   Pet requirements.
      (1)   The landlord of a multifamily dwelling complex in which tenants or
guests are allowed to own, keep or harbor cats or dogs must require that each
allowed animal, at the time of leasing and upon each renewal of a lease, is in
compliance with
Chapter 6 of this code, including that each animal over four months of age has
a registered microchip or license in compliance with §
6-19; and that each animal over six months of age is spayed, neutered or
subject to an intact pet permit in compliance with §
6-22.
      (2)   Nothing in the pet requirements is intended nor shall be construed
as requiring or encouraging a landlord to restrict service animals or impairing
the right of a tenant, resident or guest to keep a service animal consistent
with the Americans with Disability Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
   (c)   Recycling.
      (1)   Requirement to submit a recycling plan. The landlord of each
multifamily dwelling complex with eight or more units must submit a recycling
plan in accordance with the following provisions.
         a.   The plan must describe the materials to be recycled, the method
of collection and storage of recyclables, and the frequency of pick-ups by an
approved waste hauler. The plan shall also include a diagram of the property
showing the location(s) where containers for the collection of recyclable
materials will be placed.
         b.   For each multifamily dwelling complex with eight or more units
which is in operation on or prior to October 31, 2013 the recycling plan must
be submitted no later than January 1, 2014.
         c.   For each multifamily dwelling complex with eight or more units
which comes into operation after November 1, 2013 the recycling plan must be
submitted no later than 60 days after a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the complex.
      (2)   Implementation of a recycling plan.
         a.   The landlord of each multifamily dwelling complex with eight or
more units must implement the approved recycling plan within 30 days of
approval of the plan by the director. It shall be a violation for a landlord to
fail to implement or comply with the specifications of the approved recycling
plan for the complex.
         b.   A waiver of the requirement to implement a recycling plan may be
granted at the discretion of the director if the landlord can demonstrate that
implementation of a recycling plan is impossible or impractical or if the
landlord can demonstrate that none of the tenants at the complex wish to
participate in recycling.
   (d)   Electric service. At a multifamily dwelling complex consisting of
eight or more units on a property with one county appraisal district account
number:
      (1)   A tenant must provide to the landlord, within 30 days of the
earlier of executing a lease or taking occupancy of a rental unit,
documentation of a current account to provide electric service to the tenant’s
unit, excepting however when electric service is provided by the landlord.
      (2)   The landlord must maintain a copy of the documentation of the
tenant having opened an account for electric service on file and available for
inspection by the director during normal business hours.
      (3)   A landlord has a duty to regularly conduct visual inspections of
the above ground electrical feed and meters at the complex to detect tampering
or vandalism. Any tampering or vandalism must be reported to both the utility
provider and to the director as soon as practicable but no later than 24 hours
after detection. If an inspection by the city reveals two or more instances in
which the electrical feed or meters have been tampered with or vandalized
within a 12-month period, or any single instance in which five or more meters
have been tampered with or vandalized, and such vandalism or tampering was not
reported to the electric provider and the director, the landlord shall be
presumed to have failed to report as required herein and additionally the
landlord must thereafter securely lock or enclose the meters, in compliance
with all applicable building standards, so as to effectively prevent future
vandalism or tampering.
(Ord. 19998-12-2011, § 10, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 2, passed 6-
26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§§ 7-412—7-415 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: ENFORCEMENT
§ 7-416 CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT.
   A violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The failure to perform an act
required by this article is a violation of this article.
(Ord. 12791, § 1, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. 17827, § 8, passed 10-9-2007; Ord.
19998-12-2011, § 11, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-
2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 7-417 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.012 through
54.019, as amended, and petition the state district court or the applicable
county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief,
civil penalties or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it
appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter.
   (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, as amended, the city
may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
      (1)   Prohibits specific conduct that violates the ordinance; or
      (2)   Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the
ordinance.
   (c)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, the city
may recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation
of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
subsection (a) above, if the city proves that:
      (1)   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
chapter; and
      (2)   After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the ordinances or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the ordinance.
   (d)   The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement
and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or
at common law.
   (e)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other
factors as justice requires.
(Ord. 17827, § 9, passed 10-9-2007)
ARTICLE X: REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF
ONE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 7-418 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meaning hereinafter
designated. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings.
   CODE COMPLIANCE DIRECTOR. The director of the code compliance department, or
the director’s duly authorized representative.
   DIRECTOR. The code compliance director and the director’s authorized
representatives.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more habitable rooms, including an efficiency unit,
which is intended to be occupied by one or more persons for living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitation purposes.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit with one habitable room that contains
facilities used for combined sleeping, living, cooking, eating and sanitation
purposes.
   EXISTING BUILDING. A building constructed in compliance with all codes at
the time of construction, or one for which a legal building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this division (October 22, 2007).
   OWNER. Any person holding title to a one-family, two-family dwelling or unit
of a two-family dwelling, according to the deed records in the county clerk’s
office of the county in which the complex is situated, or the duly authorized
agent of the person holding title to a one-family, two-family dwelling, or unit
of a two-family dwelling, according to the deed records in the county clerk’s
office of the county in which the complex is situated.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by not more than one family, including a community-based residential
home as defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex.
Human Resources Code Chapter 123.001. One-family dwelling shall not include a
two-family dwelling as defined by this section or a multifamily dwelling as
defined by §
7-394 of
Article IX.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by two families, including a community-based residential home as
defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex. Human
Resources Code Chapter 123.001. Two-family dwelling shall not include a one-
family dwelling as defined by this section or a multifamily dwelling as defined
by §
7-394 of
Article IX.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 7-419 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to safeguard the life, health, safety,
welfare and property of individuals who, by rent, lease or permission, occupy
one-family and dwelling units of two-family dwellings and the general public by
developing a process to enforce the minimum building standards, and to provide
equitable and practical criminal, administrative and civil penalties for the
violation of minimum building standards.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 7-420 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   This division shall apply to all one-family dwellings and dwelling
units of two-family dwellings, as defined herein, which are now in existence or
which may hereafter be constructed or converted from other uses.
   (b)   The code compliance director and the director’s authorized
representatives are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this
division and the minimum building standards code.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 7-421 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   An owner of a one-family dwelling or a dwelling unit of a two-family
dwelling shall be required to register a minimum of two consecutive years if:
      (1)   It does not score at least 100 points, out of a possible one
hundred 125 points, according to the periodic inspection report scale attached
as Exhibit “B;”
      (2)   It has an inspection score of 100 to 120 points, according to the
periodic inspection report scale attached as Exhibit “B,” and violations are
not corrected within 30 calendar days; or
      (3)   An inspection uncovers a fire safety and/or public health and
sanitation violation including, but not limited to:
         a.   Non-working doors, windows or escape routes required for
emergency exit;
         b.   Non-working smoke detectors;
         c.   Inadequate heated air as required by city code;
         d.   Inadequate heated water as required by city code;
         e.   Unsafe or hazardous plumbing systems;
         f.   Unsafe or hazardous electrical systems; or
         g.   Hazardous structural conditions that could cause serious bodily
injury due to collapse or partial collapse of a dwelling unit’s structural
member.
   (b)   If during the period in which a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit
of a two-family dwelling is registered, a subsequent condition that would
require registration under subsection (a) above occurs, then the one-family
dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling shall be subject to all
registration requirements of this division and fee requirements as set out in §
7-423(a) of this division for an additional year. The additional registration
year shall commence from the date the current period of registration expires.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “B” is not set out herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the offices of the city.
§ 7-422 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   An owner who rents, leases to or allows another person to occupy a
one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling, and is required
to register by this division, shall file with the city a written registration
application, on the form provided for that purpose, and signed by the owner of
the dwelling to be registered.
   (b)   The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the code compliance
director, and shall at a minimum contain the following information:
      (1)   The trade name, physical address and business address;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, property
manager and resident manager; and the type of business entity which owns the
complex;
      (3)   The name and physical address of designated employees or authorized
representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions, and a
telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour
period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst
pipes, collapse hazard and violent crime. A post office box shall not suffice
for the address requirements of this section;
      (4)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any mortgagees;
      (5)   If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment
trust, the name and address of any of the following:
         a.   For a corporation, a corporate officer;
         b.   For a partnership, a general partner;
         c.   For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative
member;
         d.   For a limited partnership, a general partner;
         e.   For a limited liability partnership, a general partner;
         f.   For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner;
         g.   For a trust, a trustee;
         h.   For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an
officer; and
         i.   For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized
agent.
      (6)   If the property is owned by a person, other than an individual, who
lives outside the State of Texas, the owner shall designate a registered agent,
in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. If
the property is owned by a person who is an individual and who lives outside
the State of Texas, the individual shall either designate a registered agent,
in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner or
provide a physical address where the owner may receive legal service. A
designation of a registered agent under this section shall include the name and
address of the agent; and
      (7)   If any change in the information required by this section occurs
the owner shall notify the code compliance director within 30 days of the
change, in a manner prescribed by the code compliance director.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 7-423 FEES.
   (a)   A first year fee of $200 for each one-family dwelling or dwelling unit
of a two-family dwelling required to register shall be:
      (1)   Submitted with the registration form required by this division; and
      (2)   Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of the
one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling.
   (b)   Unless an additional year has been added under §
7-421(b), a second year fee of $100 for each one-family dwelling or dwelling
unit of a two-family dwelling required to register shall be:
      (1)   Submitted with the registration form required by this division; and
      (2)   Submitted with a new registration upon a change of ownership of the
one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling.
   (c)   A registration is valid for one year from the date the completed
registration form is filed in the office of the code compliance director, and
payment of the registration fee for that year has been made, unless the
ownership of the complex changes.
   (d)   A registration is not assigned or transferable. If a change of
ownership of the complex occurs during the period that a registration is
otherwise valid, the landlord of the complex shall have 30 days from the date
the change of ownership occurred to file a new registration with the code
compliance director, and pay a new registration fee.
   (e)   If a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling
fails a follow-up inspection, the city shall assess the owner a follow-up
inspection fee of $25. Written notice of the assessed follow-up inspection fee
shall be sent by the code compliance director via United States mail to the
owner.
   (f)   The owner of a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family
dwelling must file with the code compliance director a written request for an
administrative hearing not later than the thirtieth day after the fee is
assessed under subsection (e) above. The fee shall be considered assessed on
the date the notice is mailed by the city to the landlord.
   (g)   An administrative hearing shall be conducted by the code compliance
director on the assessment of a fee under subsection (e) of this section not
later than the twentieth day after the date the hearing request is filed.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 7-424 INSPECTION AND REPORTING.
   (a)   An owner shall inspect each dwelling for compliance with the standards
set forth in the attached Exhibit “A” of this division. Inspections shall be
recorded on a form approved by the code compliance director.
   (b)   The inspection of a dwelling shall be conducted a minimum of once
annually and at any time when the occupancy changes.
   (c)   The owner shall sign each inspection report, and shall require a
tenant to sign the report for the tenant’s dwelling. If the tenant disagrees
with any notation made by the owner on the report, the owner shall permit the
tenant to make written comments on the report prior to signing it. The owner
shall provide the tenant with a copy of the report after it is signed.
   (d)   An owner shall maintain a copy of the report of every inspection
conducted pursuant to this section for a minimum of three years. A copy of the
reports maintained by an owner pursuant to this subsection (d) shall be
provided to the code compliance director upon request.
   (e)   A notice for reporting code violations to the city shall be provided
to the tenants once annually and at any time when the occupancy changes. The
notice shall be in a form provided by the code compliance director.
   (f)   The code compliance director may conduct:
      (1)   Inspections based on indication of code violations;
      (2)   Periodic inspections; and
      (3)   Follow-up inspections.
   (g)   The following areas shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
code compliance director:
      (1)   All building exteriors;
      (2)   Vacant dwelling units, with the owner’s consent; and
      (3)   Occupied dwelling units upon receipt of complaint by the unit’s
tenant during a periodic inspection.
   (h)   The code compliance director is authorized to make follow-up
inspections of a one-family dwelling or dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling
which fails an initial inspection or a periodic inspection.
   (i)   In addition to other authority granted by this division, the code
compliance director has all rights and authority granted by Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure Article 18.05. Inspections shall comply with all federal,
state and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “A” is not set out herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the offices of the city.
§ 7-425 CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT.
   A violation of this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019,
eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 7-426 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.012 through
54.019, as amended, and petition the state district court or the applicable
county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief,
civil penalties, or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it
appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter.
   (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, as amended, the city
may obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
      (1)   Prohibits specific conduct that violates the ordinance; or
      (2)   Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the
ordinance.
   (c)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017, as amended, the city
may recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation
of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
subsection (a) above, if the city proves that:
      (1)   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
chapter; and
      (2)   After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the ordinances or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the ordinance.
   (d)   The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement
and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or
at common law.
   (e)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other
factors as justice requires.
(Ord. 17827, § 10, passed 10-9-2007)
§§ 7-427—7-429   RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: TCU RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT REGISTRATION OF ONE-FAMILY AND
TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
Editor's note:
   When originally enacted by Ord. 21548-12-2014, the sections of this Division
were numbered 7-429 through 7-436. In order to avoid conflicting with
previously existing material, and upon consultation with the Office of the City
Secretary, the codifier has renumbered the sections of this Division as 7-429.1
through 7-429.8.
§ 7-429.1 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meaning hereinafter
designated. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings.
   CODE COMPLIANCE DIRECTOR. The director of the code compliance department, or
the director's duly authorized representative.
   DIRECTOR. The code compliance director and the director's authorized
representatives.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building, or any portion thereof, containing a complete set
of independent living facilities for occupancy and use by one family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, sanitation and cooking
within a kitchen for the exclusive use of the occupants whose intent is to
habitat the dwelling unit.
   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by not more than one family, including a community-based residential
home as defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex.
Human Resources Code, Chapter 123.001. One-family dwelling shall not include a
two-family dwelling as defined by this section or a multi-family dwelling as
defined by section
7-394 of
Article IX.
   OWNER. Any person holding title to a one-family or two-family dwelling,
according to the deed records in the county clerk's office of the county in
which the property is situated, or the duly authorized agent of the person
holding title to a one-family or two-family dwelling, according to the deed
records in the county clerk's office of the county in which the property is
situated.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. Any one-family or any portion of a two-family dwelling unit
that is not owner occupied, whether or not rent is charged. RENTAL PROPERTY
includes, but is not limited to: properties rented to students, families, or
any other persons; properties in which a family member of the owner resides in
the home but the owner does not (regardless of whether additional persons also
reside in the home); and properties where a property caretaker lives in the
home but the owner does not.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by two families, including a community-based residential home as
defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex. Human
Resources Code, Chapter 123.001. Two-family dwelling shall not include a one-
family dwelling as defined by this section or a multi-family dwelling as
defined by section
7-394 of
Article IX.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014; Ord. 26005-02-2023,
§ 2, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-429.2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to establish a registration requirement for
owners of rental properties in the TCU residential overlay district so that the
city may expeditiously identify and contact the owner, if local, or owner's
local contact person to obtain tenant information in the event of an emergency
or when disproportionate number of city, state or federal violations have
occurred on or in the property. It is not the intent of this division to
determine the rights and liabilities of persons under agreements to which the
city is not a party. This division shall not be construed to alter the terms of
any lease or other agreement between the landlord and a tenant or others
relating to the property that is the subject of this division; provided that no
provision of any lease or other agreement shall be construed to excuse non-
compliance with this division.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.3 APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   This division shall apply to all one-family dwellings and dwelling
units of two-family dwellings, as defined herein, which are now in existence or
which may hereafter be constructed or converted from other uses and used for
rental property within the TCU residential overlay district, see this Code:
Appendix A - "Zoning Regulations"; Chapter 9, "Definitions" - Appendix B "Maps"
- Exhibit B.32.
   (b)   The code compliance director and the director's authorized
representatives are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this
division.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.4 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)    An owner who rents, leases to, or allows another person to occupy a
one-family dwelling unit or of a two-family dwelling unit within the TCU
residential overlay district shall be required to register no later than March
31, 2015.
   (b)   A new registration is required upon any change in ownership of a one-
family dwelling unit or of a two-family dwelling unit where it is leased,
rented or another person is allowed to occupy the dwelling within the TCU
residential overlay district within ten days after the date of acquiring
ownership.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.5 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   An owner who rents, leases to, or allows another person to occupy a
one-family dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit shall file with the city
a written registration application, on the form provided for that purpose, and
signed by the owner of the dwelling to be registered. A post office box shall
not suffice for the address requirements of this section.
   (b)   The registration shall be on a form prescribed by the code compliance
director, and shall at a minimum contain the following information:
      (1)   The names, addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of the
owner, and resident manager; and the type of business entity which owns the
property;
      (2)   The name, e-mail address and physical address of designated
employees or authorized representatives of the owner who shall be assigned to
respond to emergency conditions and a telephone number where designated
employees or authorized representatives can be contacted by the city during any
24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster,
flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard, and violent crime;
      (3)   If the owner does not live within fifty (50) miles of the TCU
residential overlay district, then in addition to the information in subsection
(1) above, the same information shall be provided for a local contact, who does
reside within 50 miles of the TCU residential overlay district, that has the
same authority to represent the owner in all matters relating to the one-family
or two-family dwelling unit;
      (4)   If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment
trust, the name and address of any of the following:
         a.   For a corporation, a corporate officer;
         b.   For a partnership, a general partner;
         c.   For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative
member;
         d.   For a limited partnership, a general partner;
         e.   For a limited liability partnership, a general partner;
         f.   For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner;
         g.   For a trust, a trustee;
         h.   For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an
officer;
         i.   For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized
agent;
      (5)   Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the property
manager; and
      (6)   Street address of the one-family dwelling unit or two-family
dwelling unit;
      (7)   Total square feet of living area and number of bedrooms;
      (8)   Number of persons occupying the one-family dwelling unit or two-
family dwelling unit;
   (c)   If any change in the information required by this section occurs the
owner shall notify the code compliance director within 30 days of the change,
in a manner prescribed by the code compliance director.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.6 FEES.
   There shall be no fees associated with registering a one-family or two-
family dwelling in the TCU residential overlay district.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.7 VIOLATIONS.
   It is a violation of this division to:
   (a)   Fail to register as a rental property when required by §§
7-429.4 and
7-429.5;
   (b)   Fail to present and/or provide documents requested pursuant to this
division;
   (c)   Provide false information to the code compliance director under this
division; or
   (d)   Continue non-compliance with this division, following either an
administrative or judicial finding of non-compliance, plea of guilty or a plea
of no contest.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-429.8 ENFORCEMENT.
   The code compliance director or designee shall have the authority to
investigate and issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this
division. Owner or person authorized to represent the owner in all matters
relating to the one-family or two-family dwelling unit shall produce lease
agreements requested by the code compliance director or designee in the course
of the investigation. A violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 21548-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014)
§ 7-430 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: EXISTING BUILDING CODE
§ 7-431 THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The existing building code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised
and amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2021
edition of the International Existing Building Code of the International Code
Council (ICC), and the same as amended is hereby adopted as the City's Existing
Building Code.
   (b)   One copy of the 2021 edition of the International Existing Building
Code, marked Exhibit "A", is incorporated herein by reference and shall be
filed in the Office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection.
   (c)   The provisions of the Building Code, Residential Code, Electrical
Code, Mechanical Code, Fire Code, and Plumbing Code, as adopted elsewhere,
shall be used as part of this code for any provision, requirement or method
that does not exist in this code.
   (d)   Any errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Existing Building Code, as they are discovered, are
considered as part of this code.
(Ord. 20532-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-11-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 22522-12-
2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25386-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-
8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-432 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The 2021 edition of the International Existing Building Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   *IEBC Chapter 1; Chapter 1, "Part I - Scope and Application'' and "Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement" are hereby deleted and Part 1-Scope and
Application and Part 2 -Administrative and Enforcement provisions of this Code
shall be governed by the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
   (b)   The remaining sections of the 2021 International Existing Building
Code are hereby amended as follows:
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IEBC SECTION 202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   *IEBC Section 202; definitions are changed and new definitions are added to
read as follows:
BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Any of the following shall be considered as a change of
occupancy where the current International Building Code requires a greater
degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of
egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or
structure:
   1.   Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.
   2.   Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of activity
within, a building or structure.
   3.   A change of use.
The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and access
to and from the building structure or site, as necessary to achieve the purpose
of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
CHANGE OF USE. A change in the use of a building or a portion of a building,
within the same group classification, or from one zoning use category to
another, for which there is a change in application of the code requirements.
ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction.
FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
EXISTING BUILDING. A building or space constructed under a code edition which
is at least two code adoption cycles preceding the currently adopted Fort Worth
Building Code (prior to April 1, 2011), or
A building or space that had its most recent permit application submitted to
and approved by the authority having jurisdiction under a code edition which is
at least two code adoption cycles preceding the currently adopted Fort Worth
Building Code (prior to April 1, 2011), or
A building or space that is undergoing a change of occupancy or purpose.
EXISTING STRUCTURE. A structure constructed under a code edition which is at
least two code adoption cycles preceding the currently adopted Fort Worth
Building Code (prior to April 1, 2011), or
A structure that had its most recent permit application submitted to and
approved by the authority having jurisdiction under a code edition which is at
least two code adoption cycles preceding the currently adopted Fort Worth
Building Code (prior to April 1, 2011), or
A structure that is undergoing a change of occupancy or purpose.
FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and the
International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term "Plumbing
Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
PLUMBING SYSTEM. For the purpose of using this code, as adopted, shall mean:
Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and traps,
supports and appurtenances; water-treating or water-using equipment; soil,
waste and vent pipes; sanitary drains, storm sewers and building sewers to an
approved point of disposal, in addition to their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential,, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign, and Existing Building codes which regulate the
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
CHAPTER 3 - PROVISIONS FOR ALL COMPLIANCE METHODS
SECTION 306
ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   *IEBC Section 306.1; add exception to read as follows:
   306.1 Scope. The provisions of Section 306.1 through 306.7.16 apply to
maintenance and repair, change of occupancy, additions and alterations to
existing building, including those identified as historic buildings.
   Exceptions: Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with
State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the
State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this
section.
CHAPTER 4 - REPAIRS
SECTION 401
REPAIRS
   *IEBC Section 401.3; change to read as follows:
   401.3 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII, Floodplain Provisions of the City of Fort Worth Code
of Ordinances, all new construction of buildings, structures and portions of
buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, and restorations
of substantial damage to buildings and structures, shall be designed and
constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads in
accordance with the provisions specified by the Department of Transportation
and Public Works.
SECTION 405
STRUCTURAL
   *IEBC Section 405.2.6; change to read as follows:
   405.2.6 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII, Floodplain Provisions of the City of Fort Worth Code
of Ordinances, all new construction of buildings, structures and portions of
buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, and restorations
of substantial damage to buildings and structures, shall be designed and
constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads in
accordance with the provisions specified by the Department of Transportation
and Public Works.
SECTION 406
ELECTRICAL
   *IEBC Section 607.1; add a code reference to read as follows:
   406.1 Material. Existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair
shall be allowed to be repaired or replaced with like material, in accordance
with the requirements of NFPA 70.
CHAPTER 5 - PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE METHOD
IEBC SECTION 502
ADDITIONS
   *IEBC Section 502.3; change to read as follows:
   502.3 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
SECTION 503
ALTERATIONS
   *IEBC Section 503.2; change to read as follows:
   503.2 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
SECTION 504
FIRE ESCAPES
   *IEBC Section 504.1.2; change to read as follows:
   504.1.2 Existing fire escapes. Existing fire escapes shall continue to be
accepted as a component in the means of egress in existing buildings only.
Existing fire escapes shall be permitted to be repaired or replaced.
   *IEBC Section 504.1.3; deleted:
SECTION 507
HISTORIC BUILDINGS
   *IEBC Section 507.3; change to read as follows:
   507.3 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
CHAPTER 7 - ALTERATIONS - LEVEL 1
SECTION 701
GENERAL
   *IEBC Section 701.3; delete and replace with the following:
   701.3 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
SECTION 702
BUILDING ELEMENTS AND MATERIALS
   *IEBC Section 702.4; add exception #2 to read as follows:
   702.4 Window opening control devices on replacement windows. In Group R-2 or
R-3 buildings containing dwelling units and one- and two-family dwellings and
townhouses regulated by the International Residential Code, window opening
control devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be installed where an existing
window is replaced and where all of the following apply to the replacement
window:
   1.   The window is operable.
   2.   One of the following applies:
      2.1.   The window replacement includes replacement of the sash and frame.
      2.2.   The window replacement includes the sash only where the existing
frame remains.
   3.   One of the following applies:
      3.1.   In Group R-2 or R-3 buildings containing dwelling units, the
bottom of the clear opening of the window opening is at a height less than 36
inches (915 mm) above the finished floor.
      3.2.   In one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the
International Residential Code, the bottom of the clear opening of the window
opening is at a height less than 24 inches (610 mm) above the finished floor.
   4.   The window will permit openings that will allow passage of a 4-inch-
diameter(102mm) sphere when the window is in its largest opened position.
   5.   The vertical distance from the bottom of the clear opening of the
window opening to the finished grade or other surface below, on the exterior of
the building, is greater than 72 inches (1829 mm).
   Exception:
   1.   Operable windows where the bottom of the clear opening of the window
opening is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the finished grade or
other surface below, on the exterior of the room, space or building, and that
are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2006.
   2.   Operable windows with openings that are provided with window fall
prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2090.
   *IEBC Section 702.7; change to read as follows:
   702.7 Materials and methods. New work shall comply with the materials and
methods requirements in the International Building Code, International Energy
Conservation Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code
and National Electrical Code... {'{'}remainder of section unchanged{'}'}
SECTION 705
REROOFING
   *IEBC Sections 705.6 and 705.7; added to read as follows:
   705.6 Maintain existing provisions. When reroofing, or repairing existing
roofing, the installer is required to insure the following items are
maintained:
   1.   Existing roof drains and drainage systems are maintained clear an
unobstructed. When in the opinion of the Building Official the existing
drainage system appears inadequate, the system shall be re-evaluated and when
necessary required to comply with the provisions for new construction.
   2.   Fire-retardant requirements are maintained.
   705.7 Attic space. Construction of a sloped or flat roof over an existing
roof in a manner that creates an attic or a concealed space shall require the
removal of any existing roofing material, composed of tar, asphalt or roof
insulation, from the newly created attic space.
CHAPTER 8 - ALTERATIONS - LEVEL 2
SECTION 802
BUILDING ELEMENTS AND MATERIALS
   *IEBC Section 802.5.1; change to read as follows:
   802.5.1 Minimum Requirements. Every portion of open-sided walking surfaces,
including mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps, and landings,
that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below and is not
provided with guards, or those in which the exiting guards are judged to be in
danger of collapsing, shall be provided with guards.
SECTION 803
FIRE PROTECTION
   *IEBC Section 803.1; add a sentence at the end to read as follows:
   For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements
included in this section, the work area shall be extended to include at least
the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls capable of resisting the
passage of smoke containing the subject work area, and if the work area
includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit access, then such corridor,
hallway, or other exit access shall be protected in its entirety on that
particular floor level.
   *IEBC Section 803.2: change to read as follows:
   803.2 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 11 of the Fort Worth
Fire Code.
   *IEBC Section 803.2.1 through 803.2.6; delete
   *IEBC Section 803.3; change to read as follows:
   803.3 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be required as specified in Chapter 11 of
the Fort Worth Fire Code.
   Exceptions: {'{'}deleted{'}'}
   *IEBC Section 803.4; change to read as follows:
   803.4 Fire alarm and detection. Fire alarm systems shall be required as
specified in Chapter 11 of the Fort Worth Fire Code.
   *IEBC Sections 803.4.1 through 803.4.2; delete
SECTION 804
MEANS OF EGRESS
   *IEBC Section 804.2; delete Exception # 1 and change to read as follows:
   804.2 General. The means of egress shall comply with the requirements of
this section.
   Exception:
      1.   Means of egress conforming to the requirements of the building code
under which the building was constructed shall be considered compliant means of
egress if, in the opinion of the code official, they do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life.
   *IEBC Section 804.4.1.2; changed to read as follows:
   804.4.1.2 Fire escapes required. For other than Group I-2, where more than
one exit is required an existing fire escape complying with section 804.4.1.2.1
shall be accepted as providing one of the required means of egress.
   *IEBC Section 804.4.1.2.1; delete exception #3 and change to read as
follows:
   804.4.1.2.1 Fire escape access and details. Fire escapes shall comply with
all of the following requirements:
   1.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   2.   Access to fire escapes shall be through a door... {'{'}remainder
unchanged{'}'}
   3.   Delete
   4.   {'{'}remainder unchanged{'}'}
   5.   In all building of Group E occupancy up to and including the 12th
grade, buildings of Group I occupancy, boarding houses, and childcare centers,
ladders of any type are prohibited on fire escapes used as a required means of
egress.
   *IEBC Section 804.4.1.2.2 and 804.4.1.2.3; delete
   *IEBC Section 804.6.2; changed to read as follows:
   804.6.2 Transoms. In all building of Group E, ... {'{'}Remainder of section
to remain unchanged{'}'}
CHAPTER 9 - ALTERATIONS - LEVEL 3
SECTION 904
FIRE PROTECTION
   *IEBC Section 904.1; changed to read as follows:
   904.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
provided in-as required in Chapter 11 of the Fort Worth Fire Code.
   *IEBC Sections 904.1.1, through 904.1.7; Delete
   *IEBC Section 904.2; changed to read as follows:
   904.2 Fire alarm and detection systems. Fire alarm and detections shall be
provided as specified in Chapter 11 of the Fort Worth Fire Code.
   *IEBC Sections 904.2.1 and 904.2.2; Delete
CHAPTER 10 - CHANGE OF USE
SECTION 1001
GENERAL
   *IEBC Section 1001.2.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   1001.2.2.1 Partial change of occupancy classification. Where the occupancy
classification or group of a portion of an existing building is changed,
sections 1007, 1008, 1009 and 1011 shall apply.
   *IEBC Section 1004.1; changed to read as follows:
   1004.1 General. Fire protection requirements of Section 1011 shall apply
where a building or portions thereof undergo a change of occupancy
classification, a change to another group within an occupancy classification
group, or where there is a change of occupancy within a space where there is a
different fire protection system threshold requirement in Chapter 9 of the
International Building Code.
SECTION 1008
MECHANICAL
   *IEBC Section 1009.1; changed to read as follows:
   1009.1 Mechanical Requirements. Where the occupancy of an existing building
or part of an existing building is changed to a use which includes areas for
Food or Beverage Preparations and/or Services, Beauty or Nail Salons,
Commercial Laundry or Dry-cleaning, Animal Care or Sales, Assembly Occupancies,
where there occupancy classification is changed from an F or S occupancy to any
other occupancy category, or where a shell building is changed to any occupancy
the new occupancy shall comply with the ventilation requirements of the
International Mechanical Code.
SECTION 1011
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
   *IEBC Section 1011.1; add exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Changes from a B to an M occupancy classification shall not be
considered a change in occupancy where all of the following exist:
   1.   Two remote exits are provided;
   2.   Food preparation does not take place; and
   3.   The total gross square footage of the space is less than 5,000 feet.
   *IEBC Section 1011.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   1011.2.1 Fire sprinkler system. Where a change in occupancy classification
occurs or where there is a change of occupancy within a space where there is a
different fire protection system threshold requirement in Chapter 9 of the
International Building Code that requires an automatic fire sprinkler system to
be provided based on the new occupancy in accordance with Chapter 9 of the
International Building Code. The installation of the automatic sprinkler system
shall be required within the area of the change of occupancy and areas of the
building not separated horizontally and vertically from the change of occupancy
by one or more of the following:
   1.   Rated horizontal assemblies.
   2.   Fire barrier.
   3.   Fire wall.
   Exceptions:
      1.   An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in a one- or
two-family dwelling constructed in accordance with the International
Residential Code.
      2.   Automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in a townhouse
constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code.
      3.   The townhouse shall be separated from adjoining units in accordance
with Section R302.2 of the International Residential Code.
   *IEBC Section 1012.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   1012.2.1 Fire sprinkler system. Where a change in occupancy classification
or group occurs that requires an automatic fire sprinkler system to be provided
based on the new occupancy's increased hazard to life safety or fire risk and
in accordance with Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, such system shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 903 of the
International Fire Code.
   *IEBC Section 1012.2.2; changed to read as follows:
   1012.2.2 Fire alarm and detection system. Where a change in occupancy
purpose occurs that requires a fire alarm and detection system to be provided
based on the new occupancy's increased hazard to life safety or fire risk and
in accordance with Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, such system shall
be provided throughout the area where the change of occupancy occurs in
accordance with the requirements of Section 907 of the International Fire Code.
   *IEBC Section 1012.8.2; Add item # 7 to the list of features to read as
follows:
   7.   At least one accessible family or assisted use toilet room shall be
provided in accordance with Chapter 11 of the International Building Code.
CHAPTER 11 - ADDITIONS
SECTION 1103
STRUCTURAL
   *IEBC Section 1003.5; changed to read as follows:
   1103.5 Flood Hazard Areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
CHAPTER 12 - HISTORIC BUILDINGS
   *IEBC Section 1201.4: changed to read as follows:
   1201.4 Flood Hazard Areas. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Chapter 7, Article VIII of the City of Fort Worth Code of Ordinances, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures,
including substantial improvements, and restorations of substantial damage to
buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the
effects of flood hazards and flood loads in accordance with the provisions
specified by the Department of Transportation and Public Works.
CHAPTER 13 - RELOCATED OR MOVED BUILDINGS
SECTION 1301
GENERAL
   *IEBC Section 1301.1; changed to read as follows:
   1301.1 Scope. Movement and demolition of buildings and structures shall
comply with Chapter 7, Article VII of the City Code and with the provisions of
this code. Before a moving permit is issued, the following steps must be
completed:
   1.   Obtain an Ordinance Inspection on the structure to be moved. (See City
Code Section 7-244)
      Exception: Independent School Districts (ISD) do not need the Ordinance
Inspection for portable classroom buildings within their existing stock when
being moved from one ISD property to another ISD property for ISD use.
   2.   Obtain a Building Permit for installation of the structure at its
proposed final site location.
SECTION 1302
REQUIREMENTS
   *IEBC Section 1302; delete
CHAPTER 14 - PERFORMANCE COMPLIANCE METHODS
SECTION 1401
GENERAL
   *IEBC Section [B] 1401.2; Delete
   *IEBC Section 1401.3.2; add Exception and changed to read as follows:
   [B] 1401.3.2 Compliance with other codes. Buildings that are evaluated in
accordance with this section shall comply with the International Fire Code,
International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code and the National
Electrical Code.
   Exception: Fresh air ventilation requirements listed within the
International Mechanical Code shall apply only where the occupancy of an
existing building or part of an existing building is changed to a use which
includes areas for Food or Beverage Services, Beauty or Nail Salons, Commercial
Laundry or Dry-cleaning, Animal Care or Sales, Assembly Occupancies, or where
there occupancy classification is changed from  an F or S occupancy to any
other occupancy category.
   *IEBC Section 1301.3.3; changed to read as follows:
   [B] 1401.3.3 Compliance with flood hazard provisions. In flood hazard areas,
buildings that are evaluated in accordance with this section shall be designed
and constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads in
accordance with the provisions specified by the Department of Transportation
and Public Works if the work covered by this section constitutes substantial
improvement.
CHAPTER 15 - CONSTRUCTION SAFEGUARDS
   *IEBC Section [B] 1401.1; changed to read as follows.
   [BG] 1501.1 Scope. The provisions of Chapter 33 of the International
Building Code shall govern safety during construction that is under the
jurisdiction of this code and the protection of adjacent public and private
properties.
   *IEBC Section 1501.2 through 1509; delete
(Ord. 20532-12-2012, § 3, passed 12-11-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 22522-12-
2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 3, passed 12-
6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-2017, § 3, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 25386-
03-2022, § 2, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-433 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting building code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 20532-12-2012, § 3, passed 12-11-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 22522-12-
2016, § 3, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 25386-03-2022, § 3, passed 3-
8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 7-434 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
herein provided.
(Ord. 20532-12-2012, § 4, passed 12-11-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 22522-12-
2016, § 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-
12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 25386-03-2022, § 4, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-
2022)
§§ 7-435—7-439 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
§ 7-440 THE 2018 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
ADOPTED.
   (a)   The Building Code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to include, the 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code of the International Code Council (ICC), and the same as amended is hereby
adopted as the city's swimming pool and spa code.
   (b)   Any Errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as they are discovered, are
considered as part of this code.
(Ord. 24340-08-2020, § 2, passed 8-25-2020, eff. 9-1-2020)
§ 7-441 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   *ISPSC Chapter 1; "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby deleted and replaced
with the Fort Worth Administrative Code;
   CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
ISPSC SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
   *ISPSC Section 202; definitions are added to read as follows:
   CODE COMPLIANCE DEPARTMENT.  Code Compliance Department regulates the
operation of public pools. Routine inspections on pools and spas open to the
public are conducted to document compliance with the standards set forth in
State law.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL COMPLIANCE
ISPSC SECTION 305
BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
   *ISPSC Section 305.1; change to read as follows:
   305.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of
barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. In one-and
two-family dwellings and townhouses, where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a
lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped
with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where
those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with
Sections 305.2 through 305.7.
   *ISPSC Section 305.2; change to read as follows:
   305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Outdoor pools and spas and indoor
swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with Sections
305.2.1 through 305.7 and in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code,
Texas Health and Safety Code 757 for public pools.
   *ISPSC Section 305.2.7.1; add to read as follows:
   305.2.7.1 Chain link fencing prohibited. Chain link fencing is not permitted
as a barrier in public pools built after January 1, 1994.
   *ISPSC Section 305.4; add a second paragraph and change to read as follows:
   305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a one and two family
dwelling or townhouse or its accessory structure serves as part of a barrier
and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through
that wall, one of the following shall be required:
   1.   Remainder Unchanged.
   2.   Remainder Unchanged.
   3.   Remainder Unchanged .
   The wall of a building with windows in accordance with 2015 International
Building Code, Section 1030 in Group R2 occupancies shall not be used as part
of pool enclosure. Other windows that are part of a pool yard enclosure shall
be permanently closed and unable to be opened for public pools.
   *ISPSC Section 305.6; change to read as follows:
   305.6 Natural barriers used in a one and two family dwelling or townhouse.
In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other
natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the
shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge a
minimum of eighteen (18) inches, a barrier is not required between the natural
body of water shoreline and the pool or spa.
ISPSC SECTION 307
GENERAL DESIGN
   *ISPSC Section 307.1.4; add exception as follows:
   Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with
Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation
shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
ISPSC SECTION 310
SUCTION ENTRAPMENT AVOIDANCE
   *ISPSC Section 310; change to read as follows:
   310.1 General. Suction entrapment avoidance for pools and spas shall be
provided in accordance with APSP 7 or for public swimming pools in accordance
with State of Texas Rules for Public Swimming Pools and Spas, Title 25 TAC
Chapter 265 Subchapter L, Rule §265.190.
   [Remainder unchanged]
ISPSC SECTION 313
PUMPS AND MOTORS
   *ISPSC Section 313.7; change to read as follows:
   313.7 Emergency shutoff switch for spas and hot tubs. A clearly labeled
emergency shutoff or control switch for the purpose of stopping the motor(s)
that provide power to the recirculation system and jet system shall be
installed at a point readily accessible to the users and not less than 1.5 m (5
ft.) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the spa or hot tub. This
requirement shall not apply to one and two family dwellings and townhouses.
CHAPTER 4 - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
ISPSC SECTION 402
DIVING
   *ISPSC Section 402.12; change to read as follows:
   402.12 Water envelopes. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in
accordance with Texas department of State Health services, Administrative Code
Title 25, Chapter 265, Section 186 (e) and Figure: 25 TAC 256.186 (e) (6).
   *ISPSC Table 402.12 and Figure 402.12; delete and replace as follows:
   Figure: 25 TAC §265.186 (e) (6)
Maximum Diving Board Height Over Water ¾ Meter1 Meter 3 Meters
Maximum Diving Board Height Over  ¾ Meter      1 Meter       3 Meters
Water
Max. Diving Board Length          12 ft.        16 ft.        16 ft.
Minimum Diving Board Overhang     2 ft. 6 in.   5 ft.         5 ft.
D1 Minimum                        8 ft. 6 in.   11 ft. 2 in.  12 ft. 2 in.
D2 Minimum                        9 ft.         10 ft. 10 in. 11 ft. 10 in.
D3 Minimum                        4 ft.         6 ft.         6 ft.
L1 Minimum                        4 ft.         5 ft.         5 ft.
L2 Minimum                        12 ft.        16 ft. 5 in.  19 ft. 9 in.
L3 Minimum                        14 ft. 10 in. 13 ft. 2 in.  13 ft. 11 in.
L4 Minimum                        30 ft. 10 in. 34 ft. 7 in.  38 ft. 8 in.
L5 Minimum                        8 ft.         10 ft.        13 ft.
H Minimum                         16 ft.        16 ft.        16 ft.
From Plummet to Pool Wall at Side 9 ft.         10 ft.        11 ft. 6 in.
From Plummet to Adjacent Plummet  10 ft.        10 ft.        10 ft.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9358.png]
   *ISPSC Section 402.13; change to read as follows:
   402.13 Ladders for diving equipment. Ladders shall be provided with two grab
rails or two handrails. There shall be a uniform distance between ladder
treads, with a 7 inch (178 mm) minimum distance and 12 inch (305 mm) maximum
distance. Supports, platforms, steps, and ladders for diving equipment shall be
designed to carry the anticipated loads. Steps and ladders shall be of
corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and with slip-resistant tread.
ISPSC SECTION 411
SPECIAL FEATURES
   *ISPSC Section 411.2.1; change to read as follows:
   411.2.1 Tread dimensions and area. Treads shall have a minimum unobstructed
horizontal depth (i.e., horizontal run) of 12 inches and a minimum width of 20
inches.
   *ISPSC Section 411.2.2; change to read as follows:
   411.2.2 Risers. Risers for steps shall have a maximum uniform height of 10
inches, with the bottom riser height allowed to taper to zero.
   *ISPSC Section 411.5.1; change to read as follows:
   411.5.1 Swimouts. Swimouts, located in either the deep or shallow area of a
pool, shall comply with all of the following:
   1.   Unchanged.
   2.   Unchanged.
   3.   Unchanged.
   4.   The leading edge shall be visibly set apart and provided with a
horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along
the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to
persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the
background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature
and shall be a slip-resistant surface.
   *ISPSC Section 411.5.2; change to read as follows:
   411.5.2 Underwater seats and benches. Underwater seats and benches, whether
used alone or in conjunction with pool stairs, shall comply with all of the
following:
   1.   Unchanged.
   2.   Unchanged.
   3.   Unchanged.
   4.   Unchanged.
   5.   The leading edge shall be visually set apart and provided with a
horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along
the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to
persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the
background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature
and shall be a slip-resistant surface.
   6.   Unchanged.
   7.   Unchanged.
CHAPTER 6 - AQUATIC RECREATION FACILITIES
ISPSC SECTION 603
MARKINGS AND INDICATORS
   *ISPSC Section 603.2; change to read as follows:
   603.2 Class D-2 pools. Where a Class D-2 pool has a bather- accessible depth
greater than 4 1/2 feet (1372 mm), the floor shall have a distinctive marking
at the 4 1/2 feet (1372 mm) water depth. Class A and B pools.  Class A and B
pools over 5 feet deep: the transition point of the pool from the shallow area
to the deep area of the pool shall be visually set apart with a 4-inch minimum
width row of floor tile, a painted line, or similar means using a color
contrasting with the bottom; and a rope and float line shall be provided
between 1 foot and 2 feet on the shallow side of the 5-foot depth along and
parallel to this depth from one side of the pool to the other side. The floats
shall be spaced at not greater than 7-foot intervals; and the floats shall be
secured so they will not slide or bunch up. The stretched float line shall be
of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads
normally imposed by users. If the owner or operator of the pool knows or should
have known in the exercise of ordinary care that a rope or float is missing,
broken, or defective, the problem shall be promptly remedied.
ISPSC SECTION 610
SPECIAL FEATURES
   *ISPSC Section 610.5.1; Change to read:
   610.5.1 Uniform height of 10 inches. Except for the bottom riser, risers at
the centerline shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches (254 mm). The
bottom riser height shall be permitted to vary from the other risers.
CHAPTER 8 - PERMANENT INGROUND RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS
ISPSC SECTION 804
DIVING WATER ENVELOPES
   *ISPSC Section 804; Change to read as follows:
   Section 804.1 General. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in
accordance with Table 804.1 and Figure 804.1, or the manufacturer's
specifications, whichever is greater. Negative construction tolerances shall
not be applied to the dimensions of the minimum diving water envelopes given in
Table 804.1.
(Ord. 24340-08-2020, § 3, passed 8-25-2020, eff. 9-1-2020)
§ 7-442 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting Building Code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 24340-08-2020, § 4, passed 8-25-2020, eff. 9-1-2020)
§ 7-443 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this article. Each day or any portion thereof
during which any violation of this article occurs or continues shall be deemed
a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein
provided.
(Ord. 24340-08-2020, § 5, passed 8-25-2020, eff. 9-1-2020)
ARTICLE XIII: SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-450 TITLE.
   This article of the Code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby designated and
shall be known and referred to as the "Short-Term Rental Registration" article
of the City Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-451 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to safeguard the life, health, safety,
welfare, and property of the occupants of short-term rentals, the neighbors of
said occupants, and the general public, through the regulation of short-term
rental property.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-452 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing and future
properties, both primary and accessory structures, and any portions thereof
where allowed in accordance with the city's Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-453 DEFINITIONS.
   ADMINISTRATOR means the director of the department designated by the city
manager to enforce and administer this article, including the director's
designees.
   ADVERTISE means the act of drawing the public's attention to a short-term
rental in order to promote the availability of the residence for use as a
short-term rental. Said advertising may be found in any medium, including but
not limited to, newspaper, magazine, brochure, website, or mobile application.
   BEDROOM means the living area(s) of the dwelling unit that is designed and
furnished for sleeping and which has proper egress as required by the
International Residential Code.
   BOOKING SERVICE means any reservation and/or payment service provided by a
person or entity that facilitates a short-term rental transaction between an
owner and a prospective occupant, and for which the person or entity collects
or receives, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, a fee in
connection with the reservation and/or payment services provided for the short-
term rental transaction.
   HOSTING PLATFORM means a person or entity that participates in the short-
term rental business by providing, and collecting or receiving a fee for,
booking services through which an owner may offer premises for an occupant on a
short-term basis. hosting platforms usually, though not necessarily, provide
booking services through an online platform that allows an owner to advertise
the premises through a website provided by the hosting platform and the hosting
platform conducts a transaction by which potential occupants arrange their use
and their payment, whether the would-be occupant pays rent directly to the
owner or to the hosting platform.
   OCCUPANT means any individual person living, sleeping or possessing a
building, or portion thereof. A person is not required to be paying rent,
providing in-kind services, or named in any lease, contract or other legal
document to be considered an occupant.
   OWNER means any person, agent, operator, firm, trust, corporation,
partnership, or any other legal entity who has a legal or equitable interest in
the property; or who is recorded in the official records of the county as
holding title to the property; or who otherwise has control of the property,
including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor of
the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.
   PREMISES means for the purposes of this article property, a lot, plot or
parcel of land, including any structures or portions of structures thereon.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR) means the rental for compensation of dwellings or
accessory dwelling units or portions thereof for the purpose of overnight
lodging for a period of not less than one night and not more than 29
consecutive days other than ongoing month-to-month tenancy granted to the same
renter for the same unit as their primary residence. This is not applicable to
hotels, motels, and bed and breakfasts homes or bed and breakfast inns or
rentals made for less than 30 days upon the sale of a dwelling when the tenancy
is by the former owner.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
DIVISION 2: GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 7-454 UNREGISTERED SHORT-TERM RENTALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to rent, lease, advertise, or
otherwise permit or allow any premises to be operated or used as an
unregistered short-term rental in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-455 SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   An owner who desires to use its premises as a short-term rental must have a
valid, active short-term rental registration from the city prior to using,
allowing the use of, or advertising the use of said premises as a short-term
rental. Upon application to the city, a short-term rental permit may only be
approved by administrator, or designee, if the application satisfies all the
conditions of this article, the "Taxation" chapter, and the "Zoning Ordinance"
of the City Code.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-456 EXPIRATION OF REGISTRATION; RENEWALS.
   A short-term rental registration shall expire on the last day of the month
one year after the date of issuance. No short-term rental registration may be
renewed without a completed renewal application submitted by the owner and
payment of the renewal fee. An application for the renewal of a short-term
rental registration may only be approved by the administrator, or designee, if
the renewal application satisfies all the conditions of this article and all
other applicable City Code provisions, including the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-457 REQUIREMENTS OF REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in this section, every complete application for a
short-term rental registration shall include the following information with
such detail and in a form approved by the administrator:
      (1)   The physical/street address of the short-term rental;
      (2)   The name, address, email address(es), phone number(s) and
authenticated signature for the owner(s) of the premises and the corporation
owner's representative as applicable;
      (3)   The name, address, email address and phone number(s) of the
operator(s), agent(s) if any, and designated local responsible party as
required in §
7-458;
      (4)   Such certifications deemed necessary and proper to ensure
compliance with this article.
   (b)   An application for a short-term renewal registration may be filed
beginning 30 days prior to expiration of a current registration. Every complete
application for a short-term rental renewal registration shall include updates,
if any, to the information contained in the original registration application
or any subsequent renewals. The registration holder shall sign a statement
affirming that there is either no change to such information, or that any
updated information is accurate and complete. The administrator may require
such certifications deemed necessary and proper to ensure continuing compliance
with this section.
   (c)   An application for a short-term rental renewal registration submitted
after the expiration of the most immediate registration for the premises shall
be treated as an application for a new registration as described in subsection
(a) of this section.
   (d)   Applications shall not be considered complete until all documentation
required under this article is submitted, and until the full application and
registration fees have been paid. Incomplete applications will not be accepted.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-458 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL RESPONSIBLE PARTY REQUIRED.
   An owner must designate the name and contact information of a local
responsible party who can be contacted regarding immediate concerns and
complaints from the public. The person designated may be the owner or another
individual. The owner or individual must be available to be reached in person
or by phone at all times while occupants are on the premises of a short-term
rental. If called, a local responsible party must be able to and shall be
present at the premises within one hour of call from administrator, or his
designee. A local responsible party must be authorized to make decisions
regarding the premises and its occupants.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-459 REGISTRATION AND RENEWAL FEES.
   (a)   A registration fee of $150.00 will be charged to reimburse the city
for costs associated with the administration of this article.
   (b)   An annual renewal fee of $100.00 will be charged upon filing of the
renewal application.
   (c)   The applicable fee shall be paid at the time the initial application
is filed and at the time each renewal application is filed with the department.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-460 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAXES; REQUEST FOR OCCUPANCY HISTORY.
   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling short-term rental
shall collect the tax imposed in §
32-17 of this City Code for the city and remit the same to the tax assessor-
collector on or before the due date, and at the same time file the report
required by §§
32-18 and
32-19. If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in
Chapter 32, or shall fail to file a report as required by §
32-19, or shall fail to remit to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed
in
Chapter 32 when such report or remittance is due, or shall file a false report,
then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished as provided in §
1-6 of this Code.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-461 SHORT-TERM RENTAL REGISTRATION NONTRANSFERABLE.
   A short-term rental registration is non-transferable and shall not be
assigned nor transferred to another person or entity. Any attempt to transfer a
registration or attempt to use another person's registration may be grounds for
revocation of said registration.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-462 RESTRICTIONS ON NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS AND RESERVATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to rent, allow, provide,
or advertise for more than two persons per bedroom, plus two additional
persons, when using the premises as a short-term rental.
   (b)   Regardless of the number of bedrooms at the premises, it shall be
unlawful:
      (1)   For more than 12 persons (including children), to occupy a short-
term rental at any one time; or
      (2)   For the owner or operator to allow, suffer, or permit the number of
occupants living, sleeping or possessing a short-term rental to exceed the
maximum occupancy shown on the short-term rental permit or renewal permit.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to rent or allow more than
one group at a time.
   (d)   A visual inspection of more than 12 persons by a city employee at the
premises is prima facie evidence of and shall be probable cause to issue a
citation for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-463 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   The maximum amount of motor vehicles allowed at a short-term rental shall be
limited to the number of available off-street parking spaces. It shall be
unlawful for an owner or person to permit, allow or advise occupants to park
more vehicles on the premises than the available off-street parking spaces, to
suffer or permit parking of vehicles on an unapproved surface, or to allow
parking of vehicles on public streets not in accordance with city ordinances.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-464 MINIMUM STAY REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner to rent or lease a short-term rental for a
period of less than one night.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-465 ADVERTISING, PROMOTING OR ALLOWING OF SPECIAL EVENTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant to advertise or promote
a special event, or allow the advertising and promotion of a special event
(e.g. event center, banquet, wedding, reception, reunion, bachelor or
bachelorette party, concert, or any similar activity that would assemble large
numbers of invitees) to be held on the premises (i.e. utilize the premises as
an event center as defined in the Zoning Ordinance).
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant to allow, suffer or
permit an event center or special event as described to be held on the
premises.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-466 NOTICE TO OCCUPANTS OF SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   An owner or person operating a short-term rental shall provide a notice of
instructions (also known as "host rules") to occupants staying at the premises.
The notice shall instruct the occupants as to all applicable city regulations
pertaining to short-term rentals. These include, but are not limited to,
occupancy restrictions, limits on parking, trash pickup, prohibitions on
special events, limits on noise, and curfew times.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-467 REGISTRATION TO BE DISPLAYED.
   A copy of the approved short-term rental registration shall be posted at a
conspicuous location inside the front entrance(s) to the short-term rental.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-468 USE OF ASSIGNED REGISTRATION NUMBER REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to advertise a short-term rental
in any medium, including but not limited to hosting platforms, newspaper,
magazine, brochure, website, or mobile application without including the
current registration number assigned by the administrator.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-469 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED REGISTRATION NUMBER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person to use, advertise or promote or
allow the use, advertisement or promotion of a short-term rental using a
registration number not assigned to the owner or person, or to a different
address, or to a different dwelling unit.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-470 MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant of a short-term rental
to allow, pennit, or make any noise that would be in violation of the city's
noise ordinance under Chapter
23-8 of the city's Code of Ordinances.
   (b)   Owner or person shall place all garbage, rubbish, and recyclables in
accordance with
Chapter 12.5 "Environmental Protection and Compliance",
Article VIII "Solid Waste and Recycling".
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
DIVISION 3: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 7-471 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Grounds. Any registration issued hereunder may be revoked by the
administrator if the permit holder has:
      (1)   Received one or more citations for violations of this article or
any other provision of City Code within the preceding 12-month time period; or
      (2)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application; or
      (3)   Fails to notify the administrator in writing of any material change
in the information; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with requirements provided in
Chapter 32, Article II, titled "Hotel Occupancy Tax"
   (b)   Notice. Notice of the revocation shall be given to the permit holder
in writing, with the reasons for the revocation specified in the notice, served
either by personal service or by certified United States mail to their last
known address. If the registration holder is not an individual, then service
can be made to either the agent of the owner or the local responsible party.
Such service on either individual shall constitute as proper notice as required
under this article. The revocation shall become effective the day following
personal service or if mailed, three days from the date of mailing.
   (c)   Appeal; hearing. The permit holder shall have ten days from the date
of such revocation in which to file notice with the administrator of their
appeal from the order revoking said permit. The administrator shall provide for
a hearing on the appeal in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (d)   One-year waiting period. In the event an owner's short-term rental
registration is revoked by the administrator and the applicant fails to
successfully appeal the administrator's decision, no second or additional
registration shall be issued for a short-term rental on the premises for one
year of the date such registration was revoked.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
§ 7-472 APPEAL OF REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   If the administrator revokes a registration under §
7-471, the administrator's decision is final unless the owner, within ten days
after the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal with
the city manager or his designee, who shall, within ten days after the appeal
is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action
appealed, and render a decision, either sustaining or reversing the action. The
decision of the city manager or his designee is final.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
DIVISION 4: ENFORCEMENT
§ 7-473 PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person who violates any provision of this Article by performing an
act prohibited or by failing to perform an act required is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day on which a violation exists or continues to exist shall
be a separate offense.
   (b)   If the definition of an offense under this Article does not prescribe
a culpable mental state, then a culpable mental state is not required. Such
offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Although not
required, if a culpable mental state is in fact alleged in the charge of the
offense and the offense governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and
sanitation, including dumping of refuse, such offense shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
   (c)   If the definition of an offense under this article prescribes a
culpable mental state and the offense governs fire safety, zoning, or public
health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, then a culpable mental
state is required and the offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.00.
   (d)   The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in lieu of
any criminal prosecution or penalties as provided by other city ordinances,
county, or state law.
(Ord. 26005-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 2-28-2023)
CHAPTER 8: CABLE COMMUNICATION SERVICE
Cross-reference:
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Section
   
8-1   Franchise requirement
   
8-2   Interference with service prohibited
   
8-3   Demanding or receiving gratuities and payments to permit service
prohibited
   
8-4   Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited
   
8-5   Charges to tenants for service in multiple unit facilities
   
8-6   Reselling service prohibited
   
8-7   Protection of property
   
8-8   Risks assumed by franchisee
   
8-9—8-20   Reserved
§ 8-1 FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall operate or participate in the operation of a cable
communication system within the city without first obtaining a franchise issued
by the city for the right to use the public streets, highways, alleys and
rights-of-way. A cable communication system for the purpose of this section
shall not include a system that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management which does not use
city streets, highways, alleys and rights-of-way.
(1964 Code, § 44-1) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 8-2 INTERFERENCE WITH SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his or her
agent or representative shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful
resident thereof to receive cable communication service, cable installation or
maintenance from a cable communication company regulated by and lawfully
operating under a valid and existing cable communication franchise issued by
the city.
(1964 Code, § 44-2) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-3 DEMANDING OR RECEIVING GRATUITIES AND PAYMENTS TO PERMIT SERVICE
PROHIBITED.
   Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his or her
agent or representative shall ask, demand or receive any payment, service or
gratuity in any form as a condition for permitting or cooperating with the
installation of a cable communication service to the dwelling unit occupied by
a tenant or resident requesting service.
(1964 Code, § 44-3) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-4 PENALTIES AND CHARGES TO TENANTS FOR SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   Neither the owner of any multiple unit residential dwelling nor his or her
agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or
resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or
resident, or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who
requests or receives cable television service from a franchisee operating under
a valid and existing cable television franchise issued by the city.
(1964 Code, § 44-4) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-5 CHARGES TO TENANTS FOR SERVICE IN MULTIPLE UNIT FACILITIES.
   The owner or manager of a multiunit facility that receives cable
communications service shall charge the tenants for services according to one
of the following methods:
   (a)   Included as a part of the rent; or
   (b)   Charge separately for cable communications services in accordance with
§
8-6.
(1964 Code, § 44-5) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-6 RESELLING SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall resell, without the expressed, written consent of both the
company and the city, any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a
cable television company operating under a franchise issued by the city.
(1964 Code, § 44-6) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-7 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable
television system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable
conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of
premises for the convenience and safety of persons and property.
(1964 Code, § 44-7) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 8-8 RISKS ASSUMED BY FRANCHISEE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring a cable
television company to agree to indemnify the owner or his or her agents or
representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television facilities.
(1964 Code, § 44-8) (Ord. 8307, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§§ 8-9—8-20 RESERVED.
CHAPTER 9: COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
      
III.   INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
      
IV.   COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
      
V.   CITY PARTICIPATION IN COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENT
      
VI.   ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF DELIVERING COMMUNITY FACILITIES
      
VII.   CONSTRUCTION, FINAL INSPECTION, AND CFA CLOSEOUT
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 9692, adopted August 12, 1986, repealed the city’s civil
defense provisions, codified in §§ 9-1 through 9-9 hereof, as derived from the
1964 Code, §§ 2-24 through 2-32; and Ord. 7599, § 1, adopted August 16, 1977.
Section 2 of Ord. 9692 added provisions concerning the office of emergency
management in lieu thereof, as set out in §§ 13-36 et seq. of this code.
Statutory reference:
   Authority for local agencies, see V.A.C.S. art. 6889-7, § 8(c)
   State Disaster Act, see V.A.C.S. art. 6889-7, §§ 1 through 19
Section
Article I: In General
   
9-1   Short title
   
9-2   References to the policy for the installation of community facilities
   
9-3   Purpose and scope
   
9-4   Definitions
   
9-5   Administrative regulations
   
9-6   Authority to establish impact fees retained
   9-7—9-99   Reserved
Article II: Determination of Required Public Infrastructure
   
9-100   Rough proportionality
   
9-101   Transportation improvements
   
9-102   Appeal of rough proportionality determination
   9-103—9-199   Reserved
Article III: Infrastructure Plan Review Process
   
9-200   Infrastructure plan review center
   
9-201   Pre-submittal conference
   
9-202   Express CFA review determination
   
9-203   Fees required for first review
   
9-204   Acceptance of plans
   
9-205   Requirements of contractors
   
9-206   Adjustment or disturbance of infrastructure during maintenance bond
period
   
9-207   Design standards; requests for alternative specifications
   
9-208   Expiration of engineering plans
   9-209—9-299   Reserved
Article IV: Community Facilities Agreements
   
9-300   CFA application
   
9-301   Material testing
   
9-302   Inspection fees
   
9-303   Water testing lab fees
   
9-304   Calculation and payment of estimated inspection and testing fees
   
9-305   Standard form of contracts; changes
   
9-306   Term of the CFA
   
9-307   CFA amendments and assignments
   
9-308   Financial guarantee required
   
9-309   Types of financial guarantees
   
9-310   Reductions in financial guarantees - development bonds, cash deposits
and letters of credit
   
9-310.1   Reductions in financial guarantees - escrow agreements
   
9-311   Reductions in financial guarantees for streetlights
   
9-312   Replacing a completion agreement with a different financial guarantee
   
9-313   Phased CFAs
   
9-314   Concurrent CFAs
   
9-315   Execution of CFAs based on estimates of probable costs
   
9-316   Procurement and award of construction contracts for community
facilities without city participation
   
9-317   Requirements for contractors constructing community facilities
   
9-318   Requirements for a notice to proceed to construction
   9-319—9-399   Reserved
Article V: City Participation in Community Facilities Agreements
   
9-400   Purpose of city participation
   
9-401   Public procurement requirements
   
9-402   Calculating city participation
   
9-403   Limits on city participation
   
9-404   City’s wage rates
   
9-405   Award of publicly bid contracts with city participation
   
9-406   Change orders
   9-407—9-499   Reserved
Article VI: Alternative Methods of Delivering Community Facilities
   
9-500   Future improvements in lieu of construction
   
9-501   Water miscellaneous contracts
   9-502—9-599   Reserved
Article VII: Construction, Final Inspection, and CFA Closeout
   
9-600   Construction notice
   
9-601   Final inspections
   
9-602   Requirements for project closeout
   
9-603   Accuracy of records
   
9-604   Reconciliation
   
9-605   Maintenance agreements
   9-606—9-699   Reserved
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 9-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Community Facilities Agreements Ordinance
or CFA Ordinance.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-2 REFERENCES TO THE POLICY FOR THE INSTALLATION OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES.
   All references to the policy for the installation of community facilities
contained in the city code or city policies after the effective date of this
chapter shall mean and refer to this chapter.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-3 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This chapter applies to the design, construction of or payment for public
infrastructure, and the dedication of property by developers in the City of
Fort Worth and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, to ensure that all
developments are adequately served by public infrastructure and that the public
infrastructure is constructed according to city standards.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-4 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   BUSINESS DAY. An official work day from Monday through Friday, not including
Saturdays, Sundays, or officially recognized holidays on which the city is
closed for business.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY CODE. The Code of the City of Fort Worth (2015), as amended.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Fort Worth.
   CITY PARTICIPATION. The city's financial participation in a community
facilities agreement for the construction of public infrastructure.
   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of property for commercial and
industrial use, or multi-family developments.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES. Streets, sidewalks, storm drains, water and sanitary
sewer facilities, bridges, culverts, and other public infrastructure
constructed pursuant to a community facilities agreement or other agreement
between the city and a developer.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENT OR CFA. A contract between a developer and
the city for the construction of community facilities, on property in which the
city has or will have an ownership or other legal interest, that the city
requires to be constructed as a condition of plat or plan approval, or the
issuance of a building permit.
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. The infrastructure plan review stage at which the city
confirms that the design engineer has revised the engineering plans to
adequately address the comments received in the first review, or pre-submittal
conference for express CFA review projects, and ensures that the submittal
package is complete and complies with the city's policies and specifications.
   CONCURRENT CFAs. A CFA in which one or more of the community facilities
being constructed by a developer is dependent upon connecting to community
facilities being constructed by a different developer pursuant to a separate
CFA.
   CONSTRUCTION INSPECTOR. An employee or contractor of the city responsible
for inspecting community facilities.
   DESIGN ENGINEER. A professional engineer, licensed by the State of Texas,
working for a developer, who performs studies and tests, and prepares a
complete set of plans, specifications, and contract documents for the
construction of community facilities.
   DEVELOPER. The owner, or the agent of an owner, of a tract of land that has
been subdivided, is being subdivided, or requires the construction of public
infrastructure as a condition of the approval of a plat, building permit, or
other plans.
   DEVELOPMENT. Property on or to which a developer is extending or
constructing public infrastructure to provide service to one or more existing
or proposed lots, regardless of whether the property is located in an area that
was previously developed, or the act of making improvements to property.
   DEVELOPMENT COORDINATION OFFICE. A division of the planning and development
department responsible for managing community facilities agreements.
   ENGINEERING MANAGER. An employee of the city responsible for the contract
administration of engineering related to community facilities.
   ENGINEERING SHEET. Each page of plans, drawings or documents prepared by the
design engineer for the design of community facilities.
   EXPRESS CFA REVIEW. An expedited IPRC review process in which the pre-
submittal conference will serve as the first review.
   FIRST REVIEW. The infrastructure plan review stage at which engineering
plans and other documents submitted by a design engineer are distributed to and
simultaneously reviewed by a team of city staff and review comments are
provided by city staff to the design engineer.
   FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a developer
through which the developer pays to the city the cost of constructing one or
more public improvements in lieu of constructing the public improvements.
   GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. The state, the federal government, or a political
subdivision of the state or federal government. The term does not include a
charter school.
   GRADING AND EARTHWORK. The clearing, grubbing, or other disturbance or
alteration of land, including bringing additional dirt or other fill to a site.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN REVIEW CENTER (IPRC). The division of the transportation
and public works department responsible for the consultation, intake and review
of public infrastructure plans that will be constructed pursuant to a CFA or
other agreement between the city and a developer.
   INTERIOR STREET. A current or future street located within the boundaries of
a development.
   OVERSIZING. When city participation in a CFA is used to make the public
improvements larger, longer or more enhanced than the developer is required to
construct.
   PARENT PROJECT. The public infrastructure being constructed pursuant to a
CFA that some or all of the public infrastructure constructed pursuant to a
phased CFA will directly connect to and is dependent upon.
   PHASED CFA. Community facilities being constructed by a developer that will
connect to public infrastructure being constructed in a parent project by the
same developer.
   PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE. An optional meeting a developer may have with
city staff to discuss a proposed project to assist in determining the
requirements for and feasibility of the project.
   PRE-SUBMITTAL CONFERENCE. A mandatory meeting between a design engineer and
city staff prior to a design engineer or developer being allowed to submit
engineering plans for review that allows the developer, the design engineer,
and city staff to conduct a cursory review of the engineering plans for
completeness and to identify any issues that may cause the engineering plans to
be rejected or require major modifications.
   PRIMARY PROJECT.  Community facilities being constructed by a developer that
will be connected to and relied upon by community facilities being constructed
pursuant to a concurrent CFA.
   PROJECT. A developer's plan to develop a specific area.
   PROJECT MANAGER. An employee of IPRC responsible for managing a CFA project
for the city.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. As-built drawings prepared by a design engineer after
construction that show the public infrastructure that was constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of property for a residential use
that does not require a certificate of occupancy issued by the city.
   ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY. The construction of public infrastructure, dedication
of land, or payment of fees that the city is authorized by state and federal
law to require from a developer based upon the information and studies required
to be submitted to the city by the developer.
   STANDARD CONDITIONS. The document promulgated by the city entitled standard
city conditions of the construction contract for developer awarded projects.
   STANDARD PLAN REVIEW. The engineering plan review process conducted by the
infrastructure plan review center that encompasses the first review and
compliance review.
   STREET. Any highway, alley, road, avenue, or bridge, and their respective
appurtenances, dedicated or devoted to public use.
   SUBMITTAL PACKAGE. Design plans and related documentation submitted by a
design engineer to the infrastructure plan review center for review of a
project.
   UNIT PRICE ORDINANCE. An ordinance adopted by the city council that
establishes unit prices and methods for calculating city participation in a
community facilities agreement or future improvements agreement.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-5 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
   Administrative guidelines may be adopted to implement and administer this
chapter.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-6 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH IMPACT FEES RETAINED.
   As provided by state law, this chapter shall not diminish the authority or
modify the procedures specified by Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 395.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-7 - 9-99 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
§ 9-100 ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY.
   (a)   As a condition of approval for a property development project, the
city requires developers to bear a portion of the costs of municipal
infrastructure improvements by the making of dedications, the payment of fees,
or the payment of construction costs.
   (b)   Developers are required to submit to the city various studies and
impact analyses as a condition of development review. These submittals help to
define the demand the development will have on public infrastructure systems
and identify the extent and size of new infrastructure necessary to support the
development.
   (c)   A developer must deliver to the city studies and other information
necessary for the city to make a rough proportionality determination. The
information the developer must submit to the city may include traffic impact
analyses, water and wastewater loading analyses and comprehensive studies, site
grading plans, assessments of existing site drainage, stormwater management
plans, or other information necessary for the city to make a rough
proportionality determination.
   (d)   The city will determine rough proportionality in accordance with state
and federal law.
   (e)   Impact fees for transportation facilities assessed and collected in
accordance with
Chapter 30, Article VIII of the city code and impact fees for water and
wastewater facilities assessed and collected in accordance with
Chapter 35, Article III, Division 2 of the city code shall be charged by the
city independently of a developer's requirement to bear a roughly proportionate
cost of municipal infrastructure improvements. Credits to impact fees may be
available as provided by state law and the city code.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-101 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   The developer shall be responsible for the entire cost to design and
construct interior streets for a project unless there is city participation for
the interior streets in the project.
   (b)   Street improvements bordering or extending beyond the final plat
boundaries of a development may be required to be constructed based upon the
city's rough proportionality determination. The requirements may include
improvements to the intersections near the development as determined by the
city based upon the information required to be submitted by the developer, the
rough proportionality analysis, and the city's policies and plans.
   (c)   Streets shall be required to be improved at the time of development
unless conditions preclude improvements as determined by the director of the
transportation and public works department. If street improvements cannot be
made at the time of development, the developer may be required to deliver to
the city the cost of the street improvements and execute a future improvements
agreement in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-102 APPEAL OF ROUGH PROPORTIONALITY DETERMINATION.
   (a)   A developer may appeal the city's rough proportionality determination
to the city council. The developer must deliver a written notice of appeal to
the director of the planning and development department. The director of the
planning and development department will schedule the date of the appeal before
the city council. The director of the planning and development department may
attempt to resolve the appeal with the developer before the hearing before the
city council.
   (b)   At the hearing before the city council, the developer and city staff
may present testimony and other evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The city
council must uphold, reverse, or modify the rough proportionality determination
made by the city's engineer within 30 days following the final submission of
any testimony or other evidence. The developer may appeal the determination of
the city council in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-103—9-199 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
§ 9-200 INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN REVIEW CENTER.
   The IPRC will be responsible for managing the design and construction of
community facilities on behalf of the city to ensure the community facilities
comply with the city's policies and specifications. The IPRC is comprised of a
team of professional engineers and administrative staff. The professional
engineers serve as project managers for their assigned projects. The IPRC, in
conjunction with city staff responsible for public infrastructure, will review
and provide comments on engineering plans, contract documents, and other
documents necessary for the construction of public infrastructure. The IPRC
will accept final plans for construction, assist with public bidding, and
coordinate with the developer, the design engineer, the construction inspector,
and city staff during construction of community facilities. Developers and
design engineers must comply with the processes established by the IPRC for the
submission, review, and approval of construction plans and related information
by the IPRC.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-201 PRE-SUBMITTAL CONFERENCE.
   (a)   To schedule a pre-submittal conference, a complete set of engineering
plans and all detailed checklists must be fully completed, executed, and
delivered to the IPRC in the form and manner specified by the IPRC.
   (b)   City staff will review the engineering plans and provide the design
engineer with comments on the plans before the pre-submittal conference.
Engineering plans shall be discussed by city staff and the design engineer
during the mandatory pre-submittal conference before the design engineer will
be allowed to submit the applicable submittal package to IPRC for the first
formal review.
   (c)   A project manager will be assigned to the project before the pre-
submittal conference.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-202 EXPRESS CFA REVIEW DETERMINATION.
   (a)   To be eligible for an express CFA review the following criteria must
be met:
      (1)   Eight hundred feet or less of total street and alley paving;
      (2)   Eight hundred feet or less of either water or sewer infrastructure;
      (3)   Minor stormwater infrastructure, such as lateral and inlet
reconstruction as determined by the IPRC engineering manager;
      (4)   Approximately, 800 feet or less of streetlights; and
      (5)   All required studies have been accepted and approved by the city.
   (b)   To be considered for an express CFA review, the design engineer must
have a meeting with the IPRC engineering manager prior to submitting plans for
the pre-submittal conference. At the meeting, the engineering manager will
determine if the project is eligible for express CFA review based upon the
criteria in this section.
   (c)   The intent of the city is for this section to be interpreted broadly
to allow express CFA review for as many projects as possible, while providing
staff with the discretion to determine which projects meet the criteria in this
section required for express CFA review. The city will make the final
determination on whether a project will need a standard review or express CFA
review.
   (d)   A project that does not meet the requirements for an express CFA
review will have a standard review.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-203 FEES REQUIRED FOR FIRST REVIEW.
   (a)   All IPRC engineering plan review fees and the CFA application fee
specified in §
2-321 of the city code shall be paid to the city:
      (1)   Before a standard review project will be scheduled by IPRC for a
first review; or
      (2)   Before an express CFA review project will be scheduled by IPRC for
a pre-submittal conference.
   (b)   For purposes of calculating the IPRC engineering plan review fee, all
detail sheets, regardless of the number of pages, will be considered one page.
   (c)   The IRPC engineering plan review fee will not apply to the following
engineering sheets:
      (1)   Cover sheet;
      (2)   Plat notes; and
      (3)   General notes.
   (d)   When there is city participation in the design of a project, the IPRC
engineering plan review fees will not be charged to the developer for the
portion of the design that is attributable to the city participation in the
design of the project as outlined in the written agreement between the city and
the developer.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-204 ACCEPTANCE OF PLANS.
   (a)   The city's signing of the cover sheet for the plans and specifications
shall not constitute or be deemed to be a release of the responsibility and
liability of the developer, the design engineer, or the developer and design
engineer's officers, agents, employees, and subcontractors, for the accuracy
and competency of the plans and specifications, including but not limited to
surveys, location of subsurface investigations, design, working drawings and
specifications, and other engineering documents.
   (b)   The city's signing of the cover sheet for the plans and specifications
shall not be deemed to be an assumption of such responsibility and liability by
the city for any negligent act, error or omission in the conduct or preparation
of the subsurface investigation, surveys, designs, working drawings and
specifications, and other engineering documents by the developer, the design
engineer, or the developer and design engineer's officers, agents, employees,
and subcontractors, it being the intent of the developer, design engineer and
the city that acceptance by the city of the plans, contracts between the
developer and the developer's contractors, payment, performance, and
maintenance bonds, insurance certificates, and other documents signifies the
city's acceptance only of the format of the documents and the general design
concept of the community facilities.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-205 REQUIREMENTS OF CONTRACTORS.
   (a)   The contracts between the developer and the developer's contractors
must incorporate the city's standard conditions.
   (b)   The insurance policy from the developer's contractor must be in the
amounts required by the standard conditions and must name the city as an
additional insured under all insurance policies.
   (c)   The payment, performance, and maintenance bonds must be in the total
amount of the construction contract between the developer and the contractor.
The bonds must meet the requirements of the city's standard conditions, Tex.
Government Code Chapter 2253, and the Texas Insurance Code. The maintenance
bond must cover the community facilities to be constructed against defects in
materials and workmanship for a period of two years after completion and final
acceptance of the community facilities by the city.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-206 ADJUSTMENT OR DISTURBANCE OF INFRASTRUCTURE DURING MAINTENANCE BOND
PERIOD.
   If a project requires an adjustment, cut, relocation, or disturbance of
public infrastructure that has been accepted by the city and is covered by a
maintenance bond, the contractor for the project must provide the city with a
new maintenance bond covering the scope of work being performed by the
contractor that is valid for a period of two years from acceptance of the
community facilities. Compliance with the city's utility construction policy,
if applicable, is required.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-207 DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUESTS FOR ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   All engineering plans must be designed in accordance with state and
federal law, and with all applicable city policies, design specifications, and
design standards, including but not limited to the:
      (1)   Subdivision ordinance;
      (2)   Traffic engineering manual;
      (3)   Master thoroughfare plan;
      (4)   Installation policy and design criteria for water, wastewater, and
reclaimed water infrastructure;
      (5)   Access management policy;
      (6)   Neighborhood and community park dedication policy;
      (7)   Form based codes;
      (8)   Design overlay zoning district requirements;
      (9)   Stormwater criteria manual; and
      (10)   Utility construction policy.
   (b)   All engineering plans and CFA exhibits must identify the public
infrastructure that the community facilities will connect to. If the public
infrastructure that community facilities will connect to has not been
constructed and accepted by the city, the engineering plans and CFA exhibits
must identify that the public infrastructure has not been constructed.
   (c)   Any request for an alternative to a city design specification must be
submitted in writing to the city engineer by the design engineer no later than
seven business days after the design engineer receives review comments from
IPRC. The policies in subsection (a) may contain a separate appeal process that
must be complied with by the developer or design engineer.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-208 EXPIRATION OF ENGINEERING PLANS.
   Engineering plans accepted by the city shall be valid for a period of two
years. A CFA will not be executed for engineering plans that are more than two
years old.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-209—9-299 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
§ 9-300 CFA APPLICATION.
   Before submitting engineering plans to the infrastructure plan review center
for first review, or compliance review for an express CFA review project, the
developer must submit a completed CFA application and the CFA application fee
set forth in §
2-321 of the city code to the development coordination office.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-301 MATERIAL TESTING.
   (a)   The city shall determine the estimated amount of material testing
necessary for a CFA based upon the engineering plans submitted to the city for
first review. The estimated cost of material testing will be provided by the
city to the developer.
   (b)   The city will maintain a list of pre-approved material testing
laboratories. The developer must contract with material testing laboratories on
the city's list. Material testing laboratories must provide copies of all test
results directly to the city and the developer. If the community facilities
being constructed fail a test, the developer must correct or replace the
community facilities until the community facilities pass a retest. The
developer must pay the material testing laboratories directly for all material
testing and retesting. The city will obtain proof from the material testing
laboratories that the material testing laboratories have been paid in full by
the developer before the city will accept the community facilities that were
tested.
   (c)   The developer shall pay the city's administrative material testing
service fee set forth in §
2-321 of the city code for each material test required for community facilities
constructed pursuant to a CFA to reimburse the city for the city's cost
incurred for material testing.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-302 INSPECTION FEES.
   The city will inspect community facilities being constructed to ensure that
the community facilities are constructed in accordance with the engineering
plans. The developer must pay the construction inspection service fees set
forth in §
2-321 of the city code to the city to cover the city's cost for performing
inspections.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-303 WATER TESTING LAB FEES.
   (a)   The city will perform bacterial testing on water mains, firelines and
fire hydrants being constructed by the developer. The developer must pay the
water testing lab fee set forth in §
2-321 of the city code to the city to cover the city's cost for the tests. The
water testing lab fee does not include the time required for the city's
inspectors to collect and deliver water samples, which will be included in the
construction inspection service fee.
   (b)   Tests will be performed on every:
      (1)   One thousand feet of water mains;
      (2)   Dead-end of a water main;
      (3)   Branch at a minimum of one joint of pipe for water mains;
      (4)   Fireline; and
      (5)   Fire hydrant.
   (c)   Two consecutive passing bacterial tests must be obtained before the
city can accept the water mains, firelines and fire hydrants.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-304 CALCULATION AND PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED INSPECTION AND TESTING FEES.
   (a)   The city will calculate the estimated cost of administrative material
testing service fees, construction inspection service fees, and water testing
lab fees based on the engineering plans and construction schedule submitted to
IPRC for first review. The city will deliver a copy of the written estimate of
the fee to the developer with the comments from IPRC on the engineering plans
submitted for first review.
   (b)   The developer must pay the estimated cost of the administrative
material testing service fees, construction inspection service fees, and water
testing lab fees to the city before the CFA is executed. If there is city
participation in the project, the city will be responsible for administrative
material testing service fees, construction inspection service fees, and water
testing lab fees attributable to the city participation.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-305 STANDARD FORM OF CONTRACTS; CHANGES.
   The city uses standardized forms for community facilities agreements and
financial guarantees. The developer may request changes to the language in the
forms. The city is not required to accept the changes requested by the
developer.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-306 TERM OF THE CFA.
   (a)   The term for completing construction of community facilities pursuant
to a CFA shall be two years. The city and the developer may agree upon a term
of less than two years.
   (b)   If construction of the community facilities has commenced before the
end of the term, the CFA may be amended to extend the term for up to one
additional year. The maximum term of a CFA may not be more than three years.
   (c)   If construction of community facilities pursuant to a CFA has not
begun 90 days before the end of the term, the city may send written notice to
the developer of the city's intent to use the developer's financial guarantee
to construct the community facilities. If the developer and the city do not
agree on an extension of the term within 60 days before the term expires or if
the term of the CFA is already three years, the city may use the developer's
financial guarantee to construct all or some of the community facilities
contemplated by the CFA.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-307 CFA AMENDMENTS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   All requests to amend or assign an executed CFA must be submitted by the
developer to the development coordination office. The developer must pay the
CFA amendment fee set forth in §
2-321 of the city code to the city before an amendment or a consent to an
assignment of a CFA will be executed by the city. An amendment or assignment of
a CFA shall be at the discretion of the city.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-308 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE REQUIRED.
   The developer must provide the city with adequate financial security to
guarantee the developer's obligations under the CFA, which include, but are not
limited to, the developer's obligations to construct all the community
facilities contemplated by the CFA and the payment by the developer to all
contractors and material suppliers with whom the developer has a contract for
the project. No construction of community facilities shall ever begin until the
financial guarantee has been delivered to and approved by the city and the CFA
has been executed by the developer and the city.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-309 TYPES OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   (a)   One or more of the following types of financial guarantees shall be
provided by the developer to the city to guarantee the developer's obligations
under the CFA:
      (1)   Development bond. A development bond in the amount of 100% of the
total amount of the developer's share of the construction costs in the CFA. The
development bond shall be executed by the developer and guarantee that the
developer will construct the community facilities and pay all contractors,
material suppliers, and equipment suppliers for the project. The development
bond must meet the requirements of Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 2253, and
the Texas Insurance Code. The development bond may be required to cover the
city's participation in the CFA if the construction contracts are not publicly
bid;
      (2)   Cash deposit. A cash deposit with the city in the amount of 125% of
the total amount of the developer's share of construction costs in the CFA. The
additional 25% above the developer's share of the construction costs shall
cover charge orders to the CFA. The city will not pay any interest on cash
deposits made with the city;
      (3)   Letter of credit. A letter of credit in the amount of 125% of the
total amount of the developer's share of the construction costs in the CFA. The
additional 25% above the developer's share of the construction costs shall
cover change orders to the CFA. The expiration date of a letter of credit shall
be no less than 90 days after the term of the CFA expires;
      (4)   Escrow agreement. An escrow agreement between the city, the
developer and a financial institution or escrow agent in the amount of 125% of
the developer's share of the construction costs in the CFA. The additional 25%
above the developer's share of the construction costs shall cover change orders
to the community facilities agreement;
      (5)   Completion agreement. The completion agreement provides that the
plat will not be filed until the community facilities are accepted by the city
and the developer has submitted proof to the city that the developer has paid
all contractors and material suppliers. Completion agreements will not be
allowed:
         a.   For community facilities being constructed outside the boundaries
of a plat;
         b.   For community facilities constructed inside the boundaries of a
plat, when the plat is only conveying right-of-way or an easement;
         c.   When there is city participation in a CFA; or
         d.   for a primary project if there is a concurrent CFA; and
      (6)   Statement of appropriated funds. At the discretion of the city,
written proof from a governmental entity that sufficient funding for the costs
associated with the community facilities has been approved, appropriated, and
set aside may be used as a financial guarantee. Only a governmental entity
shall be allowed to use a statement of appropriated funds as a financial
guarantee for a CFA.
   (b)   All financial guarantees must be on forms prescribed by or acceptable
to the city.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-310 REDUCTIONS IN FINANCIAL GUARANTEES - DEVELOPMENT BONDS, CASH DEPOSITS
AND LETTERS OF CREDIT.
   (a)   The developer may request a reduction in the amount of a development
bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit that is provided as the financial
guarantee for a CFA if the initial term of the CFA is more than four months.
   (b)   No more than two reductions of a development bond, cash deposit or
letter of credit may
be made for any CFA. The director of the Development Services Department may
authorize more than two reductions of a development bond, cash deposit or
letter of credit and establish the requirements that must be met for the
additional reductions.
   (c)   The first reduction in a development bond, cash deposit, or letter of
credit may only be made after:
      (1)   One-third of the value of community facilities being constructed
pursuant to the CFA have been verified by the city's inspectors to have been
constructed in accordance with the engineering plans; and
      (2)   The city has received an affidavit and release of lien executed by
the contractor indicating that the contractor has been paid by the developer
and the contractor has paid all subcontractors and material suppliers for one-
third of the value of the community facilities being constructed pursuant to
the CFA.
   (d)   After the city has confirmed that one-third of the community
facilities have been constructed in accordance with the engineering plans and
the city has received an affidavit and release of lien from the contractor in
the amount of one-third of the value of the community facilities being
constructed pursuant to the CFA, then the development bond, cash deposit, or
letter of credit may be reduced in an amount that does not exceed one-third of
the original amount of the development bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit.
   (e)   The second reduction in a development bond, cash deposit, or letter of
credit may only be made after:
      (1)   Two-thirds of the value of community Facilities being constructed
pursuant to the CFA have been verified by the city's inspectors to have been
constructed in accordance with the engineering plans; and
      (2)   The city has received an affidavit and release of lien executed by
the contractor indicating that the contractor has been paid by the Developer
and the contractor has paid all subcontractors and material suppliers for two-
thirds of the value of the community facilities being constructed pursuant to
the CFA.
   (f)   After the city has confirmed that two-thirds of the community
facilities have been constructed in accordance with the engineering plans and
the city has received an affidavit and release of lien from the contractor in
the amount of two-thirds of the value of the community facilities being
constructed pursuant to the CFA, then the development bond, cash deposit, or
letter of credit may be reduced in an amount that does not exceed two-thirds of
the original amount of the development bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit
if more than 30 calendar days have passed since the first reduction in the
financial guarantee.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019; Ord. 25556-06-2022, §
1, passed 6-14-2022, eff. 6-15-2022)
§ 9-310.1 REDUCTIONS IN FINANCIAL GUARANTEES - ESCROW AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   Every 30 days, the developer may request a reduction in the amount of
an escrow agreement that has been provided as the financial guarantee for a
CFA.
   (b)   The reduction in an escrow agreement may only be made after:
      (1)   The city's inspectors have verified the amount of the community
facilities that have been constructed in accordance with the engineering plans;
and
      (2)   The city has received an affidavit and release of lien executed by
the contractor indicating that the contractor has been paid by the developer
and the contractor has paid all subcontractors and material suppliers for the
community facilities that have been constructed pursuant to the CFA.
   (c)   After the city has confirmed the amount of the community facilities
that have been constructed in accordance with the engineering plans and the
city has received an affidavit and release of lien from the contractor for the
community facilities that have been constructed, then the escrow agreement may
be reduced to an amount equal to 125% of the value of the community facilities
that are remaining to be constructed that are guaranteed by the escrow
agreement.
(Ord. 25556-06-2022, § 2, passed 6-14-2022, eff. 6-15-2022)
§ 9-311 REDUCTIONS IN FINANCIAL GUARANTEES FOR STREETLIGHTS.
   (a)   In addition to the reductions in financial guarantees allowed by §
9-310, a developer may request a reduction in the financial guarantee when the
only community facilities remaining to be constructed in a residential
development are streetlights.
   (b)   To be eligible for a reduction in the financial guarantee under this
section:
      (1)   The construction and final inspection of all Community facilities
in the CFA, except streetlights, must be completed;
      (2)   The construction of all streetlights must be completed and the
streetlights only require a connection to a permanent source of electrical
power and final inspection by the city;
      (3)   The contract between the developer and the developer's contractor
for the construction of streetlights must not include the construction of any
other community facilities;
      (4)    The remaining financial guarantee for the CFA must cover 125% of
the cost of constructing the streetlights; and
      (5)    The developer shall pay to the city the CFA amendment fee set
forth in §
2-321 of the city code unless:
         a.   A separate financial guarantee for the streetlights, other than a
completion agreement, was provided to the city when the CFA was executed; or
         b.   The developer previously provided a separate financial guarantee
for the streetlights, other than a completion agreement, as authorized by this
chapter.
   (c)   The developer shall connect the streetlights to the electricity
provided by an electric utility company within 30 days of an electric utility
company providing power to the development.
   (d)   The streetlights must pass a final inspection before the streetlights
will be accepted by the city and the financial guarantee for the streetlights
is released by the city.
   (e)   A reduction in a financial guarantee for streetlights:
      (1)   Allows the plat hold for the CFA to be released;
      (2)   Allows building permits to be issued if all other requirements of
the city for the issuance of building permits have been met; and
      (3)   Allows the community facilities being constructed pursuant to a
CFA, other than the streetlights, to be accepted by the city when all
requirements for approval of those community facilities have been met.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-312 REPLACING A COMPLETION AGREEMENT WITH A DIFFERENT FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
   (a)   The developer may request that a completion agreement be replaced with
a different type of financial guarantee.
   (b)   The completion agreement may only be replaced after:
      (1)   The value of the community facilities that have previously been
constructed pursuant to the CFA have been verified by the city's inspectors to
have been constructed in accordance with the engineering plans; and
      (2)   The city has received an affidavit and release of lien executed by
the contractor indicating that the contractor has been paid by the developer
and the contractor has paid all subcontractors and material suppliers for the
value of the community facilities that have previously been constructed
pursuant to the CFA.
   (c)   The financial guarantee that replaces the completion agreement must be
in the amount of 125% of the value of the remaining community facilities to be
constructed pursuant to the CFA. If a development bond is used, the bond must
be in the amount of 100% of the value of the remaining community facilities to
be constructed pursuant to the CFA.
   (d)   The developer must pay the CFA amendment fee to the city before the
completion agreement may be replaced with another type of financial guarantee.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-313 PHASED CFAS.
   (a)   A phased CFA allows a developer constructing a multi-phased
development to construct subsequent phases of the development before
construction of the community facilities for the previous phases have been
completed and accepted by the city. A phased CFA is also allowed when one
developer is constructing two different developments and would like to
simultaneously construct the community facilities in the two developments that
will be connected to each other.
   (b)   The developer or design engineer must notify the city on the CFA
application and on the IPRC checklist that the CFA will be a phased CFA.
   (c)   The IPRC plans for a phased CFA may be reviewed simultaneously with
the review of the plans for the parent project regardless of whether the parent
project includes on-site or off-site community facilities.
   (d)   The parent project and the phased CFA must be constructed by the same
developer.
   (e)   Any type of financial guarantee a developer is authorized by this
chapter to use may be used for a phased CFA.
   (f)   If the phased CFA is for a residential development, the city will not
record the final plat related to the phased CFA until the Community facilities
being constructed pursuant to the phased CFA have been constructed and accepted
by the city.
   (g)   If the phased CFA is for a commercial development, the city will not
issue a certificate of occupancy for any buildings until the community
facilities being constructed pursuant to the phased CFA have been completed and
accepted by the city.
   (h)   The developer must notify all of the developer's contractors
performing work on the phased CFA that the developer has elected to construct a
phased CFA, the provisions relating to phased CFAs in the community facilities
agreement, the risks associated with a phased CFA, and that the city will not
bear any responsibility for the developer's decision to proceed with a phased
CFA. The developer will be responsible for resolving any disputes between
contractors performing work on the parent project and contractors performing
work on the phased CFA. Technical conflicts relating to connection of the
community facilities between the parent project and the phased CFA are part of
the at-risk nature of a phased CFA and the developer must resolve all
conflicts.
   (i)   A developer may not make the final connection of the community
facilities in the phased CFA to the community facilities in the parent project
until the community facilities in the parent project have been constructed and
accepted by the city and the city has consented to the developer making the
connection.
   (j)   The developer of a phased CFA must assume all risks associated with a
phased CFA and must indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless for the
construction of the community facilities pursuant to a phased CFA and the
developer's decision to construct community facilities pursuant to a phased
CFA.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-314 CONCURRENT CFAS.
   (a)   A concurrent CFA allows a developer to construct community facilities
that will connect to and are dependent upon community facilities being
constructed by another developer, before the construction and acceptance by the
city of the community facilities being constructed by the other developer.
   (b)   The developer or design engineer must notify the city on the CFA
application and the IPRC checklist that the CFA will be a concurrent CFA.
   (c)   The primary project must have reached compliance review before the
engineering plans for a concurrent CFA may be submitted to IPRC for pre-
submittal review.
   (d)   A concurrent CFA will not be allowed if the financial guarantee for
the primary project is a completion agreement. Any type of financial guarantee
a developer is authorized by this chapter to use may be used for a concurrent
CFA.
   (e)   If the concurrent CFA is for a residential development, the city will
not record the final plat related to the concurrent CFA until the community
facilities being constructed pursuant to the concurrent CFA have been
constructed and accepted by the city.
   (f)   If the concurrent CFA is for a commercial development, the city will
not issue a certificate of occupancy for any buildings until the community
facilities being constructed pursuant to the concurrent CFA have been completed
and accepted by the city.
   (g)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must acknowledge in writing to the
city that due to the developer's election to proceed with a concurrent CFA, the
potential exists for technical, delivery, acceptance, or performance problems
which could result in the developer having to remove and reconstruct, at the
developer's expense, the community facilities constructed under the concurrent
CFA.
   (h)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must agree that the developer will
resolves all disputes with the developer of the primary project and between
contractors and subcontractors performing work on the concurrent CFA and
contractors and subcontractors performing work on the primary project.
   (i)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must execute a written agreement
with the developer of the primary project that includes the following
provisions:
      (1)   Provides access to the developer of the concurrent CFA onto
property owned or controlled by the developer of the primary project that is
necessary for the construction of the community facilities pursuant to the
concurrent CFA;
      (2)   Stipulates that the developer of the concurrent CFA and the
developer of the primary project must resolve all disputes regarding the design
and construction of the concurrent CFA and the primary project; and
      (3)   Provides that the developer of the primary project must notify the
developer of the concurrent CFA of all changes to the design or construction of
the community facilities in the primary project, including any field changes.
   (j)   The written agreement between the developer of the concurrent CFA and
the developer of the primary project does not have to be delivered to the city
for review.
   (k)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must certify to the city in an
attachment to the developer's CFA that the written agreement required by
subsection (i) has been executed.
   (l)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must notify all of developer's
contractors performing work on the concurrent CFA that:
      (1)   The developer has elected to construct community facilities
pursuant to a concurrent CFA;
      (2)   The provisions relating to concurrent CFAs in the community
facilities agreement;
      (3)   The risks associated with a concurrent CFA; and
      (4)   The city will not bear any responsibility for the developer's
decision to construct community facilities pursuant to a concurrent CFA.
   (m)   A developer shall not make the final connection of community
facilities constructed pursuant to a concurrent CFA to community facilities in
the primary project until the community facilities in the primary project have
been constructed and accepted by the city and the city has consented to
developer making the connection.
   (n)   The developer of a concurrent CFA must assume all risks associated
with a concurrent CFA and must indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless for
the construction of the community facilities pursuant to a concurrent CFA and
the developer's decision to construct community facilities pursuant to a
concurrent CFA.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-315 EXECUTION OF CFAS BASED ON ESTIMATES OF PROBABLE COSTS.
   (a)   At the discretion of the project manager, a CFA may be executed based
upon the design engineer's estimate of probable costs before the engineering
plans for the CFA have been accepted by the city. The engineering plans must
have completed first review before a CFA may be executed based upon the design
engineer's estimate of probable costs.
   (b)   The project manager and city infrastructure departments shall review
the cost estimates and must agree with the design engineer's estimate of
probable costs before the CFA is executed.
   (c)   The developer's financial guarantee must be in the amount of 150% of
the design engineer's estimate of probable costs.
   (d)   Before a pre-construction meeting can be scheduled, the developer must
amend the financial guarantee if the financial guarantee is less than 125% of
the cost of the community facilities based upon the bids received by the
developer's contractors.
   (e)   If the CFA exhibits must be revised or the cost of the public
infrastructure for the engineering plans accepted by the city is more than the
amount in the CFA, the CFA must be amended and the developer shall pay the CFA
amendment fee.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-316 PROCUREMENT AND AWARD OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS FOR COMMUNITY
FACILITIES WITHOUT CITY PARTICIPATION.
   If there is no city participation in a CFA, the developer may procure the
construction contracts by public or private bids, or any other lawful manner.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-317 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTORS CONSTRUCTING COMMUNITY FACILITIES.
   (a)   Community facilities must be constructed by contractors that:
      (1)   Are pre-qualified by the city, where required;
      (2)   Are licensed, bonded, and insured; and
      (3)   Have the proper permits required by the city code and policies.
   (b)   If the developer provides a development bond as the financial
guarantee for a CFA that does not involve city participation, the developer's
contractors will not be required to provide the city with payment and
performance bonds, but must provide a maintenance bond for the community
facilities.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-318 REQUIREMENTS FOR A NOTICE TO PROCEED TO CONSTRUCTION.
   The following items are required before the city will issue a notice to
proceed to construction for a CFA:
   (a)   A complete set of engineering plans accepted by the city;
   (b)   Proof of conveyance of all easements and temporary construction
easements for the community facilities, and proof that all required permits
have been issued;
   (c)   A CFA executed by the city and the developer;
   (d)   A financial guarantee acceptable to the city;
   (e)   Payment of all required fees;
   (f)   Complete contract document books that have been accepted by the city;
   (g)   A maintenance bond in the amount of the construction contracts
executed in the name of the city covering community facilities to be
constructed against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of two
years after completion and acceptance of the community facilities by the city;
and
   (h)   Payment and performance bonds provided by the contractors, or a
development bond provided by the developer for a CFA that does not have city
participation which eliminates the requirement that the contractors provide
payment and performance bonds as specified in §
9-317.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-319—9-399 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: CITY PARTICIPATION IN COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
§ 9-400 PURPOSE OF CITY PARTICIPATION.
   (a)   City participation in a CFA may be used to enlarge the scope of the
project beyond what the developer is responsible for constructing or as an
economic incentive.
   (b)   City participation in a CFA, allows the city to:
      (1)   Take advantage of the developer's construction mobilization,
allowing for faster delivery of public infrastructure;
      (2)   Increase the extent or capacity of the public infrastructure beyond
what the developer is responsible for constructing; or
      (3)   Replace or improve existing public infrastructure that is deficient
or in a deteriorating condition.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-401 PUBLIC PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The city must comply with state laws relating to the expenditure of public
funds. No city participation will be paid for work performed prior to a CFA
being executed or for work performed that was not procured in accordance with
state law. Contractors working pursuant to a CFA that includes city
participation must be selected in accordance with state laws relating to the
expenditure of public funds and the procurement of contractors for public works
projects. The method of selection may include lowest responsive and responsible
bid, or best value, as allowed by state law.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-402 CALCULATING CITY PARTICIPATION.
   City participation in a CFA shall be calculated in accordance with the
city's unit price ordinance.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-403 LIMITS ON CITY PARTICIPATION.
   City participation is limited to the availability of city funds and subject
to approval of the city council when required. The city's obligation to
participate in a CFA will terminate if construction of the community facilities
is not completed within the term of the CFA, including any extension period.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-404 CITY'S WAGE RATES.
   A developer must pay wages that meet or exceed the city's currently adopted
wage rates for all community facilities that have city participation.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-405 AWARD OF PUBLICLY BID CONTRACTS WITH CITY PARTICIPATION.
   (a)   All public bids involving city participation in a CFA will be opened
at the Fort Worth City Hall or an alternative location designated by the city
manager. The city's project manager, or city staff designated by the project
manager, will attend the bid opening.
   (b)   Before construction contracts for a CFA that is publicly bid are
awarded, the developer must deliver the following items to the city:
      (1)   A bid tabulation showing the bid proposals of all prospective
bidders;
      (2)   A publisher's affidavit from the newspaper showing that the notice
of public bidding was properly advertised;
      (3)   A letter of recommendation from the developer for contract award;
and
      (4)   A breakdown of the developer cost and city participation based upon
the bid items contained in the winning bid.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-406 CHANGE ORDERS.
   All change orders must be approved in writing by the developer and the
contractor and then submitted to the city for approval. If a change order
increases city participation by more than the current amount authorized by the
city council for administrative approval, the change order must be submitted to
the city council for approval. The additional city participation is contingent
upon compliance with public procurement laws, the approval of the city council,
and the availability of funds.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-407—9-499 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF DELIVERING COMMUNITY FACILITIES
§ 9-500 FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   At the discretion of the city, the immediate construction of the
public infrastructure required for a development may be infeasible or
impractical until a later date for reasons including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Scheduling or other conflicts with other planned public
improvements the city or other entities may be making in the same general area;
or
      (2)   The public infrastructure creating a potentially hazardous
condition if they are constructed immediately.
   (b)   To accommodate the later construction of the public improvements, the
city may require a developer to enter in a future improvements agreement in
lieu of the developer constructing the public improvements.
   (c)   The design engineer must deliver to the city an estimated construction
cost for the public infrastructure required for the development based upon the
city's unit price ordinance.
   (d)   After the city and developer agree to the estimate, the future
improvements agreement will be executed by the city and the developer and the
developer shall deliver a check to the city in the amount of 125% of the total
estimated construction costs for the community facilities.
   (e)   After the future improvements agreement has been executed by the city
and the developer, and the developer has paid the city the amount required by
this section, the developer's requirement to construct public infrastructure
for the development contained in the future improvements agreement shall be met
unless the developer makes changes to the design of the development that would
require additional or different public infrastructure.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-501 WATER MISCELLANEOUS CONTRACTS.
   The water department's miscellaneous contract process is the city's in-house
option for design and construction of water or wastewater infrastructure. The
miscellaneous contract process is included in the city's installation policy
and design criteria for water, wastewater and reclaimed water infrastructure.
If public improvements are accepted by the city for the miscellaneous contract
process, all required fees must be paid to the city before any plat holds
related to a CFA may be released.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-502—9-599 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: CONSTRUCTION, FINAL INSPECTION, AND CFA CLOSEOUT
§ 9-600 CONSTRUCTION NOTICE.
   For all construction activities in the right-of-way that impact traffic, the
developer must provide notice to residences and businesses. The notice must be
posted by the developer in the manner, form, and times proscribed by the city.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-601 FINAL INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a final inspection will
not be scheduled until:
      (1)   The community facilities are fully constructed as determined by the
construction inspector;
      (2)   All required material testing has been completed with a passing
result and delivered to the construction inspector;
      (3)   Redline engineering sheets completed by the contractors showing
differences between the engineering plans and the community facilities that
have been constructed have been delivered to the construction inspector; and
      (4)   Compliance with the rules established by the transportation and
public works department's construction office for obtaining a final inspection.
   (b)   Any deficiencies in or adjustments needed to the community facilities
that are found by the construction inspector during a final inspection shall be
listed on a punch list. Once all of the items on the punch list have been
addressed and closed, a follow-up final inspection may be scheduled with the
construction inspector.
   (c)   Once the construction passes final inspection, an acceptance letter is
initiated by the construction inspector. The acceptance letter starts the
closeout of the CFA and the process by which the city accepts and capitalizes
the community facilities.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-602 REQUIREMENTS FOR PROJECT CLOSEOUT.
   The following items must be delivered to the city before a CFA can be closed
out:
   (a)   An affidavit of bills paid and final lien waiver executed by the
developer's contractors on forms provided by the city;
   (b)   Consent of surety forms for the payment and performance bonds executed
by the surety company issuing the bonds; and
   (c)   Record drawings completed by the design engineer.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-603 ACCURACY OF RECORDS.
   (a)   The developer, the developer's contractors, and the design engineer
must ensure that all changes to the record drawings have been made by making
adequate and proper entries on each page of the specifications, each sheet of
engineering plans, and on any other documents where such notations are required
to reflect the change properly.
   (b)   All changes to the record drawings shall be made in a manner that all
information contained in the record drawings may be reasonably relied upon.
   (c)   In order to ensure the accuracy of records, all redline changes or
entries should be made within 24 hours after the changes have occurred.
   (d)   The developer, the developer's contractors, and the design engineer
must provide factual information regarding all aspects of the community
facilities that were constructed to enable future modifications of the
community facilities to be made without extensive site measurement,
investigation, or examination.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-604 RECONCILIATION.
   (a)   The development coordination office will reconcile the final actual
construction costs with the costs reflected in the CFA.
   (b)   The development coordination office will reconcile the actual cost of
administrative material testing service fees, construction inspection service
fees, and water testing lab fees with the estimated fees paid by the developer.
If the actual costs of the fees is more than the estimated payments made by the
developer, the developer must pay the difference to the city before the
improvements will be accepted by the city. If the actual costs of the fees is
less than the estimated payments made by the developer, the city will refund
the difference to the developer. If the difference between the actual costs and
the estimated payments made by the developer for administrative material
testing service fees, construction inspection service fees, and water testing
lab fees is less than $50, the city will not issue a refund and the developer
will not be responsible for paying the difference.
   (c)   If the developer owes the city administrative material testing service
fees, construction inspection service fees, or water testing lab fees, the fees
shall be paid before the financial guarantee can be released by the city. Any
refunds for administrative material testing service fees, construction
inspection service fees, or water testing lab fees owed by the city to the
developer shall be processed after reconciliation of the CFA is complete.
   (d)   Once the CFA has been fully reconciled and all fees have been paid to
the city, the financial guarantee for the CFA will be released.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§ 9-605 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
   The city may allow a developer to install community facilities that are
enhanced beyond the city's standard specifications, including but not limited
to, stamped or colored concrete sidewalks, lights within sidewalks or
intersections, designs in the street paving, or decorative streetlights. If
enhanced public infrastructure is authorized by the city, the developer must
execute a maintenance agreement with the city by which the developer agrees to
maintain the enhanced community facilities. The maintenance agreement must be
executed by the developer before the community facilities are constructed.
(Ord. 23656-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
§§ 9-606—9-699 RESERVED.
CHAPTER 10: COURTS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   PARKING VIOLATION BUREAU
Charter reference:
   Creation and operation of municipal court, see
Ch. VII
Cross-reference:
   General penalty for code violations, see §
1-6
   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, see
Ch. 23
   Police, see
Ch. 27
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9509, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 1985, repealed Ch. 12, municipal courts, of
the 1964 Code, codified as §§ 10-1 through 10-15, 10-31 through 10-33 herein,
as derived from §§ 12-1 through 12-15, 12-33 through 12-35 of the 1964 Code,
and the following legislation:
 
Ord. Section Date       Ord. Section Date
5736 1                  9017         1-17-1984
6613 1—3   1-24-1972  9111 1       5-29-1984
8018 1—6   12-18-1979 9148 1, 2    7-17-1984
 
   New provisions designated as §§ 12-1 through 12-6 are included as §§
10-1 through
10-6 herein.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal courts, see Tex. Government Code Ch. 29
   Ft. Worth municipal court provisions, see Tex. Government Code Ch. 29.101
Section
Article I. In General
   
10-1   Municipal court of record established; divisions; jurisdiction
   
10-2   Ad hoc municipal courts advisory committee of the council, other
relationships prohibited
   
10-3   Judges; chief judge; chief prosecutor
   
10-4   Creation of a department of municipal court services; creation of the
office of director of municipal court services; duties of director of municipal
court services; creation of the office of clerk of the municipal courts
   
10-5   Fines bureau
   
10-6   City marshal
   
10-7   Special expense applicable to certain dismissed cases
   
10-8   Municipal court building security fund; security fee to be collected as
a cost of court
   
10-9   Municipal court technology fund; technology fee to be collected as a
cost of court
   
10-9.1   Collection contracts
   
10-10   Fee for record on appeal
   
10-11   Juvenile case manager fund and fee
   
10-12   Court costs for parking violations
   10-13—10-15   Reserved
Article II. Parking Violations Bureau
   
10-16   Parking violations bureau created
   
10-17   Hearing officers; powers, duties and functions
   
10-18   Parking citations
   
10-19   Presumption of ownership; exceptions to vehicle owner liability
   
10-20   Hearings; contest parking citation online and via mail
   
10-21   Appeal
   
10-22   Enforcement
   
10-23   Procedures for immobilization and/or impoundment
   
10-24   Boot removal
   
10-25   Boot hearing
   
10-26   Fines and fees
   
10-27   Certain conduct unlawful
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 10-1 MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD ESTABLISHED; DIVISIONS; JURISDICTION.
   (a)   Within the municipal court system established and created for the City
of Fort Worth in accordance with the terms, provisions, powers, duties and
limitations set forth in Tex. Government Code Title 2 and in
Chapter VII of the Charter of the City of Fort Worth, there is hereby created,
established and designated a unified municipal court of record to be known as
the “municipal court of record in the City of Fort Worth” with nine divisions
to be known as Division No. 1, Division No. 2, Division No. 3, Division No. 4,
Division No. 5, Division No. 6, Division No. 7, Division No. 8 and Division No.
9.
   (b)   Each division of the municipal court of record in the City of Fort
Worth shall have and exercise concurrent jurisdiction with the other divisions
thereof.
   (c)   The municipal court of record in the City of Fort Worth shall have and
exercise such jurisdiction as is granted by the Charter and ordinances of the
City of Fort Worth and by any laws of this state, including, but not limited
to, general jurisdiction provided by Tex. Government Code Chapter 30, that may
now exist or may hereafter be passed by the legislature of this state
regulating or increasing the jurisdiction of the municipal courts in cities of
the grade and size of the City of Fort Worth.
   (d)   In addition to other jurisdiction provided for herein and in
accordance with Tex. Government Code § 30.00005(c), the Fort Worth city council
by ordinance hereby provides that the municipal court of record in the City of
Fort Worth has concurrent jurisdiction with a justice court in any precinct in
which the City of Fort Worth is located in criminal cases that arise within the
territorial limits of the city and that are punishable only by fine.
   (e)   In addition to other jurisdiction provided for herein and in
accordance with Tex. Government Code § 30.00005(d), the Fort Worth city council
by ordinance hereby provides that the municipal court of record in the City of
Fort Worth has:
      (1)   Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal
ordinances enacted under Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 214, Subchapter A
or Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E;
      (2)   Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at
law under Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 54, Subchapter B within the city’s
territorial limits and over property owned by the city located in the city’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety
and nuisance abatement ordinances; and
      (3)   Authority to issue:
         a.   Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and
safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and
         b.   Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing or
demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985; Ord. 19626-04-2011, § 1, passed 4-5-2011)
§ 10-2 AD HOC MUNICIPAL COURTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF THE COUNCIL, OTHER
RELATIONSHIPS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   An ad hoc municipal court advisory committee shall be established to
meet as needed to act as the liaison between the municipal court judges and the
city council and make recommendations to the city council in all matters
regarding municipal court. The ad hoc advisory committee shall consist of
members of the city council appointed in accordance with the city council rules
of procedure.
   (b)   Except as herein provided and by way of reinforcing the provisions
contained in §§
2-236 through
2-239.1 (Code of Ethics) of this code, it is hereby declared unlawful for any
officer or employee of the city to be involved, directly or indirectly, in the
defense of any person charged with the violation of an ordinance of the city or
a criminal law of the state in or before the municipal courts of the city,
except to give evidence in open court.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985; Ord. 16555, § 1, passed 8-30-2005)
§ 10-3 JUDGES; CHIEF JUDGE; CHIEF PROSECUTOR.
   (a)   Municipal court judges shall be selected and appointed or reappointed
for a term of two years, commencing April 1 of even-numbered years. The
appointment or reappointment of substitute judges shall be for a term of two
years from the date of their appointment or reappointment and shall be
initiated upon the recommendations of the chief judge, concurred in by the
municipal court advisory committee.
   (b)   The city council shall appoint one of the municipal judges as chief
judge. The chief judge shall have all of the powers and duties of a presiding
judge as set forth in this subsection (b), and in addition, those cited in the
Uniform Municipal Courts of Record Act, as amended by the city court of record
statute. The chief judge shall:
      (1)   Maintain administrative oversight of the municipal judges;
      (2)   Establish work rules for the administration of the municipal
courts, including establishing rules for maintaining uniformity in procedures
in the municipal courts;
      (3)   Establish work hours for each municipal judge, including the hours
during which each judge shall be present in the office and on the bench;
      (4)   Call periodic meetings of all municipal court judges and substitute
judges to review the procedures which establish uniformity of procedures in the
court system, and to discuss any other issues of importance for the
administration of the municipal court;
      (5)   Schedule and approve vacation and other absences for each municipal
judge;
      (6)   Assign the duties and schedules of each municipal judge, including
assigning judges or substitute judges to exchange benches and to act for each
other in a proceeding pending in a court, if necessary, for the expeditious
disposition of business in the courts;
      (7)   Assign municipal judges to classes and courses on an as needed
basis;
      (8)   Provide quarterly case adjudication reports for each municipal
judge to the Ad Hoc Municipal Courts Committee;
      (9)   Receive and investigate, as needed, judicial complaints and forward
the result of any investigation to the Ad Hoc Municipal Courts Advisory
Committee; and
      (10)   Conduct performance evaluations of municipal judges twice during
each year of the municipal judge’s term, and forward the evaluations to the Ad
Hoc Municipal Courts Advisory Committee for review after each evaluation is
performed.
   (c)   The city council shall appoint one of the municipal judges as deputy
chief judge. The appointment of the deputy chief judge shall be recommended by
the chief judge to the Ad Hoc Municipal Court Advisory Committee (Committee).
If approved by the Committee, the recommendation shall be placed on the City
Council's agenda for consideration and approval. The deputy chief judge shall
have all of the powers and duties of a presiding judge as set forth in this
subsection (c), and in addition, those cited in the Uniform Municipal Courts of
Record Act, as amended by the city court of record statute. The deputy chief
judge shall:
      (1)   Assist the Chief Judge in supervising judicial staff, which
includes prioritizing and assigning work; conducting performance evaluations;
maintaining a healthy and safe working environment; and, making hiring,
termination, and disciplinary recommendations.
      (2)   Assists in managing all administrative judicial services and
activities. Recommends and administers policies and procedures; and prepares
docketing calendar for jury courts and the Attorney plea docket as assigned by
the Chief Judge.
      (3)   Participates in evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of
judicial court service delivery methods and procedures.
      (4)   Assists in monitoring and evaluating the quality, responsiveness,
efficiency and effectiveness of judicial court methods and procedures.
      (5)   Presides over jury and non-jury trials; and instructs jury panel
regarding applicable laws, procedures and sentences or fines if offender is
convicted.
      (6)   Reviews new laws, major court decisions and other pertinent
information relevant to the revision of Court procedures and operations.
      (7)   Assists in explaining, justifying, and defending Municipal Court
programs, policies and activities; and negotiating and resolving sensitive and
controversial issues.
      (8)   Issues search and arrest warrants; sets and forfeits bail for Class
C misdemeanors falling under municipal court jurisdiction; and sets bail for
felonies and misdemeanors.
      (9)   Processes alias and capias warrant queues, administrative dockets,
cash dockets and miscellaneous dockets.
      (10)   Performs other related duties as required and assigned by the
Chief Judge.
      (11)   Adheres to assigned work schedule as outlined in the Department
and City attendance policies and procedures; ensures all behaviors comply with
the City's Personnel Rules and Regulations.
   (d)   In order to coordinate the prosecution of all cases in the municipal
courts and appeals taken therefrom, the city attorney shall designate one of
the assistant city attorneys as chief prosecutor.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985; Ord. 14147, § 1, passed 3-28-2000; Ord.
21380-08-2014, § 1, passed 8-19-2014; Ord. 21687-03-2015, § 1, passed 3-17-
2015; Ord. 23546-01-2019, § 1, passed 1-29-2019)
§ 10-4 CREATION OF A DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT SERVICES; CREATION OF THE
OFFICE OF DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL COURT SERVICES; DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF MUNICIPAL
COURT SERVICES; CREATION OF THE OFFICE OF CLERK OF THE MUNICIPAL COURTS.
   (a)   A department of municipal court services is hereby established. It
shall embrace all personnel and activities of the municipal court system
except:
      (1)   The judges who are directly under the cognizance of the city
council;
      (2)   The assistant city attorneys assigned duties as prosecutors who are
members of the department of law and under the cognizance of the city attorney;
      (3)   The official court reporter or reporters who are under the
cognizance of the chief judge;
      (4)   The director of the teen court program who shall be under the
cognizance of the chief judge; and
      (5)   Such other court or system functionaries who are or may be members
of other departments and are either temporarily or permanently assigned duties
within or in support of the municipal court.
   (b)   There is hereby created the position of director of municipal court
services. The director of municipal court services shall be the head and
supervisor of the department of municipal court services; shall be subject to
appointment and removal by the city manager; and shall be paid a salary
established in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
   (c)   The director of municipal court services, subject to the provisions of
this section, shall have the power to appoint, employ and remove such officers,
assistants, employees and personnel as such director may deem necessary for the
efficient administration of the department of municipal court services and to
prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority and qualifications.
   (d)   The director of municipal court services shall be responsible for the
administrative functions of the municipal court system, which shall include
responsibility to assure the system functions within and in consonance with
personnel and other procedures governing the operation of all other city
departments generally as promulgated by the city manager and shall specifically
include all of the fiscal affairs of the municipal courts. The director of
municipal court services shall submit annually to the city manager a budget
estimate of the revenues of the municipal courts and the expenses of conducting
the affairs thereof for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (e)   Within the municipal court system and under the general supervision of
the director of municipal court services there is hereby created the office of
clerk of the municipal courts. The clerk of the municipal courts shall be
appointed by the city manager with the consent of the city council and shall
perform all duties in accordance with state statutes, the City Charter and city
ordinances.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985; Ord. 11942, § 1, passed 5-9-1995)
§ 10-5 FINES BUREAU.
   There is hereby established for the municipal courts system a bureau for the
payment of fines. This division shall be known as “fines bureau.” A bureau
clerk shall be appointed by the clerk of the municipal courts, together with
such deputies as may be deemed necessary. Such bureau clerk shall be under the
direction and control of the clerk of the municipal courts. The city council
shall prescribe the amount of the official fidelity bond that the bureau clerk
shall execute in favor of the city. The premium of such bond shall be paid by
the city. The bureau clerk shall be a duly qualified notary public.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985)
§ 10-6 CITY MARSHAL.
   (a)   There is hereby created a position of city marshal for the municipal
courts system, who shall also appoint such deputies as are authorized from time
to time. The city marshal or his or her deputies shall meet all qualifications
necessary to be certified as peace officers by the state commission on law
enforcement officer standards and education; however, the city marshal and his
or her deputies shall not be considered as “policemen” as that term is defined
in Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 1269m.
   (b)   The city marshal and his or her deputies, acting under the direction
of the director of municipal court services, shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas and other legal process
issuing out of the municipal courts; and
      (2)   Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas and legal process as
determined by the municipal court clerk or deputy court clerk.
   (c)   The city marshal and his or her deputies shall serve as peace officers
and have full police authority in the exercise of their assigned duties.
   (d)   The city marshal and his or her deputies are not members of the police
department of the city; however, they are eligible for membership in the
employees’ retirement fund of the City of Fort Worth. The city marshal and his
or her deputies are paid law enforcement officers for the purpose of qualifying
for survivor’s assistance benefits under the provisions of Tex. Revised Civil
Statutes Article 6228f, as amended.
(Ord. 9509, § 1, passed 11-5-1985)
§ 10-7 SPECIAL EXPENSE APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN DISMISSED CASES.
   Pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Articles 45.0511 and 45.052, a
municipal court is authorized to collect a special expense for services
performed in cases in which the laws of this state require that the case be
dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were
subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are limited to
compliance with the provisions of Tex. Transportation Code §§ 543.111 through
543.116. Such special expense shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred for
the services or $10, whichever is less.
(Ord. 10032, § 1, passed 12-22-1987)
§ 10-8 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND; SECURITY FEE TO BE COLLECTED AS
A COST OF COURT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund.
   (b)   A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in
municipal court shall pay a $3 security fee as a cost of court.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
      (1)   A sentence is imposed on the person;
      (2)   The person receives community supervision, including deferred
adjudication; or
      (3)   The court defers final disposition of the person’s case.
   (d)   The court clerk shall collect the security fee costs and pay them to
the city treasurer, for deposit in the municipal court building security fund.
   (e)   The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance
the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services
for buildings housing a municipal court:
      (1)   The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
      (2)   Handheld metal detectors;
      (3)   Walkthrough metal detectors;
      (4)   Identification cards and systems;
      (5)   Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
      (6)   Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract security
personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services;
      (7)   Signage;
      (8)   Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; or
      (9)   Locks, chains or other security hardware.
   (f)   The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by
the city manager under the direction of the city council.
(Ord. 12204, § 1, passed 10-10-1995)
§ 10-9 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND; TECHNOLOGY FEE TO BE COLLECTED AS A
COST OF COURT.
   (a)   There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund.
   (b)   A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court
shall pay a $4 security fee as a cost of court.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
      (1)   A sentence is imposed on the person;
      (2)   The person is places on community supervision, including deferred
adjudication community supervision; or
      (3)   The court defers final disposition of the person’s case.
   (d)   The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to
the city treasurer, for deposit in the municipal court technology fund.
   (e)   The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the
purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court, including:
      (1)   Computer systems;
      (2)   Computer networks;
      (3)   Computer hardware;
      (4)   Computer software;
      (5)   Imaging systems;
      (6)   Electronic kiosks;
      (7)   Electronic ticket writers; and
      (8)   Docket management systems.
   (f)   The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by the city
manager under the direction of the city council.
(Ord. 13909, § 1, passed 8-24-1999)
§ 10-9.1 COLLECTION CONTRACTS.
   (a)   Pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 103.0031, the
addition of collection fees in the amount of 30% is hereby authorized on each
debt or account receivable, such as fines, fees, restitution and other debts or
costs, (other than forfeited bonds) that is ordered to be paid by the municipal
court or by a city hearing officer appointed under Tex. Transportation Code
Chapter 682 and that is more than 60 days past due and that has been referred
to an attorney or vendor for collection.
   (b)   A defendant is not liable for the collection fees under subsection (a)
above if above the court or hearing officer of original jurisdiction has
determined the defendant is indigent, or has insufficient resources or income
or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs.
(Ord. 15144, § 1, passed 6-25-2002, eff. 7-1-2002; Ord. 18645-06-2009, § 1,
passed 6-2-2009)
§ 10-10 FEE FOR RECORD ON APPEAL.
   There is hereby established a clerk’s record preparation fee in the amount
of $25 pursuant to Tex. Government Code § 30.00014(f), as amended. This fee
does not include the fee the defendant shall pay for the actual transcript of
the proceedings. The clerk shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of
the court. In the event that the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be
refunded to the defendant.
(Ord. 17379, § 1, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 10-11 JUVENILE CASE MANAGER FUND AND FEE.
   (a)   In accordance with Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 102.0174,
there is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund (“fund”) to be a separate
fund in the city treasury administered under the direction of the Fort Worth
city council and to be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a
juvenile case manager employed in accordance with Tex. Code of Criminal
Procedure Article 45.056.
   (b)   (1)   A defendant who is convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense
in municipal court shall pay a juvenile case manager fee (“fee”) of $3 as a
cost of court for each convicted offense.
      (2)   For purposes of this provision, a person is considered convicted
if:
         a.   A sentence is imposed on the person; or
         b.   The person receives deferred disposition, including deferred
proceedings under Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 45.052 or 45.053.
   (c)   A judge in the municipal court may waive the fee in cases of
demonstrated financial hardship.
   (d)   The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay it to the
official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal
treasurer for deposit in the fund.
(Ord. 19274-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-17-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§§ 10-12 COURT COSTS FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A $5.00 court cost shall be assessed on all parking violations in
accordance with Article 102.014 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
   (b)   The proceeds from the $5 court cost will be placed in the city’s Child
Safety Fund Account to be used only to operate a school crossing guard program,
or in the absence of a school crossing guard program, for programs designed to
enhance child safety, health, and nutrition in accordance with Article 102.014
of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
   (c)   A hearing examiner or judge in the municipal court may waive the court
cost in cases of demonstrated financial hardship.
   (d)   The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay it to the
official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal
treasurer for deposit in the fund.
(Ord. 21887-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§§ 10-13—10-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Cross-reference:
   Stopping, standing and parking, see §§
22-155 et seq.
§ 10-16 PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU CREATED.
   There is hereby created a parking violations bureau in and for the City of
Fort Worth which shall have original jurisdiction over cases involving
violations of city ordinances relating to the parking, stopping or standing of
vehicles as contained in
Chapter 22 (§§
22-155 through 22-240) of the code of the City of Fort Worth (1986), as
amended.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988)
§ 10-17 HEARING OFFICERS; POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   (a)   The parking violations bureau shall be composed of one or more hearing
officers who shall be appointed by the city council for terms of two years.
Hearing officers shall report to and be under the administrative oversight of
the director of municipal court services. The city council shall be authorized
to remove hearing officers. The director of municipal court services shall be
authorized to take disciplinary action against hearing officers other than
removal. Hearing officers shall be exempt from the dismissal, suspension and
demotion sections in
Chapter 2, Article V of the Fort Worth City Code.
   (b)   Hearing officers shall preside over parking hearings in accordance
with this article and shall have the authority to accept pleas, administer
oaths and to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents.
   (c)   An order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of
documents may be enforced by the municipal court.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 13943, § 1, passed 9-21-1999; Ord.
20858-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013; eff. 8-19-2013)
§ 10-18 PARKING CITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   The administrative adjudication process for parking, stopping
and standing violations shall be initiated by the issuance of a parking
citation which may be issued by a peace officer or other authorized parking
enforcement agent. Authorized parking enforcement agents shall include any
police officer, traffic control technician, city marshal or other employee or
volunteer of the city designated by the chief of police, city marshal or the
city manager to enforce the provisions of this code in regard to the parking,
stopping or standing of vehicles.
      (2)   Consistent with the provision of this section and with state law,
the city manager is authorized to establish, under the direction of the chief
of police, the accessible parking volunteer enforcement program, utilizing
volunteers to enforce the provisions of this code concerning disability
parking.
   (b)   A parking citation must be served personally upon the operator of a
vehicle, if present at the time of service. If the operator of the vehicle is
not present at the time of issuance of the citation and cannot be personally
served, the citation must be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle by
affixing the citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place or by mailing the
citation to the registered owner of the vehicle by first class mail.
   (c)   The citation shall provide that the registered vehicle owner or
operator charged with a parking, stopping or standing offense shall have the
right to an instanter hearing to determine the issue of liability for the
charged offense. Such right to a hearing shall be exercised by appearing in
person before a hearing officer within 21 calendar days from the date of the
citation at such convenient and reasonable hours as may be determined by the
municipal court clerk, said hours to be printed on the parking citation. The
twenty-first calendar day shall be the last day to respond to a parking
citation, and shall be known as the appearance date.
   (d)   The original or any copy of the citation is a record kept in the
ordinary course of business in the city and is rebuttable proof of the facts it
contains.
   (e)   Failure of the registered vehicle owner or operator to answer the
parking citation and contest liability, on or before the appearance date is
considered an admission of liability for the parking violation charge and will
result in the assessment of fines, costs and fees.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 2, passed 8-30-1988; Ord.
14860, § 1, passed 11-20-2001; Ord. 20858-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013; eff.
8-19-2013)
§ 10-19 PRESUMPTION OF OWNERSHIP; EXCEPTIONS TO VEHICLE OWNER LIABILITY.
   (a)   It is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle that is
the subject of the administrative hearing is the person who parked or stopped
the vehicle at the time and place of the offense charged.
   (b)   A state department of highways and public transportation computer-
generated record of the registered vehicle is prima facie evidence of its
contents in an administrative adjudication hearing under this article.
   (c)   The operator of a vehicle who is not the registered owner but has the
express or implied permission to operate the vehicle is considered the
registered owner’s agent and is authorized to receive and contest a parking
citation.
   (d)   A registered vehicle owner is not liable for a violation subject to
this article if:
      (1)   The vehicle operator, not the registered owner, assumes
responsibility for the issued citation by either paying the fine or contesting
the citation online, via mail or in person as outlined in this article;
      (2)   The registered vehicle owner files an affidavit with the parking
bureau and attaches supporting documentation, establishing that the vehicle
being operated at the time of the violation was sold prior to the date and time
the citation was issued. Supporting documentation includes but is not limited
to a bill of sale and the vehicle’s title signed by both the seller and the
purchaser of the vehicle;
      (3)   The registered vehicle owner files an affidavit with the parking
bureau and attaches supporting documentation, establishing that the vehicle
being operated at the time of the violation was stolen prior to the date and
time the citation was issued. Supporting documentation includes, but is not
limited to, a copy of an official police report; or
      (4)   The registered vehicle owner is now deceased and no other vehicle
operator has been personally served with the citation, nor claimed
responsibility for the citation. Proof may be shown by submitting an official
death certificate.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 20858-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013;
eff. 8-19-2013)
§ 10-20 HEARINGS; CONTEST PARKING CITATION ONLINE AND VIA MAIL.
   (a)   At the hearing before the hearing officer, the registered vehicle
owner or operator may enter a plea of liable, not liable or liable with an
explanation to the alleged violation.
   (b)   The issuing peace officer or other authorized parking enforcement
agent shall not be required to attend the hearing.
   (c)   It is not required that the city’s prosecuting attorney attend the
hearing. If the registered vehicle owner or operator is represented by legal
counsel at the hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the prosecuting
attorney who shall have a right to appear on behalf of the city at said
hearing.
   (d)   No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer
shall examine the contents of the citation and the evidence related to
ownership of the vehicle in question, and shall hear and consider evidence and
testimony presented by the registered vehicle owner or operator, and the
issuing officer if in attendance. If the hearing officer determines by the
preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the
registered vehicle owner or operator, the hearing officer shall find the person
liable therefor.
   (e)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an
order stating whether or not the registered vehicle owner or operator charged
is liable for violation of the parking or stopping ordinance and the amount of
any fine, costs or fee assessed against the person. The order shall be filed
with the clerk of the municipal court. All such orders shall be kept in a
separate index or file by the municipal court clerk using appropriate data
processing techniques.
   (f)   Failure of the registered vehicle owner or operator charged with the
offense to appear at the hearing within the aforesaid 21 calendar day period
shall be considered an admission of liability for the charged offense.
   (g)   The Texas Rules of Evidence do not apply to a hearing under this
article.
   (h)   The registered vehicle owner or operator charged with a parking,
stopping or standing violation may contest the citation online within seven
calendar days from the date of the citation. The director of the municipal
courts department shall establish procedures which will allow for the online
submission of written statements and evidence.
   (i)   The registered vehicle owner or operator charged with a parking,
stopping or standing violation may contest the citation via mail within 21
calendar days from the date of the citation, by submitting written statements
and evidence. The envelope containing the correspondence must be postmarked no
later than the twenty-first day from the date of the citation.
   (j)   If the registered vehicle owner or operator charged with a parking,
stopping or standing violation elects to contest the citation online or via
mail, that person waives the right to an instanter hearing before a hearing
officer.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 20858-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013;
eff. 8-19-2013)
§ 10-21 APPEAL.
   (a)   After the administrative adjudication hearing, online adjudication
process or finding of liability via mail, a person found liable by the hearing
officer for violating the parking or stopping ordinance may appeal this
determination to the municipal court.
   (b)   The appeal must be instituted by the liable party filing, not later
than the thirtieth day after the filing of the hearing officer’s order, a
petition with the clerk of the municipal court along with payment of a
nonrefundable administrative appeal filing fee in the amount of $10, as well as
payment of any other costs required by law for municipal courts.
   (c)   After the liable party files a petition for appeal, the municipal
clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify all parties of the date, time and
place of the hearing.
   (d)   The appeal hearing shall be a de novo review. The municipal court
shall examine the evidence presented at the appellate hearing and if the court
determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was
committed by the appealing party, the court shall find the appealing party
liable therefor.
   (e)   Service of notice of appeal under this section does not stay the
enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person who files the
appeal posts a cash bond before filing notice of appeal with the clerk of the
municipal court. Said cash bond shall be in the amount of all fines, costs and
fees assessed by the hearing officer.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 3, passed 8-30-1988; Ord.
20858-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013; eff. 8-19-2013)
§ 10-22 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   An order filed by a hearing officer under this article, or a final
judgment of the municipal court after appeal, may be enforced by:
      (1)   Impounding the vehicle;
      (2)   Placing a device (“boot”) that prohibits the movement of a motor
vehicle on the vehicle that is the subject of the order filed;
      (3)   An additional fine if not paid within the specified time;
      (4)   Denial of parking permits; or
      (5)   Refusing to allow the registrations of the vehicle as provided by
applicable state law.
   (b)   Provided, however, that no vehicle shall be impounded or immobilized
under this article unless:
      (1)   The offender has three or more delinquent unpaid citations; and
      (2)   Written notice is mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle at
least 14 days before the vehicle is impounded or immobilized, said notice to
inform the registered owner of the vehicle’s eligibility of immobilization or
impoundment. Said notice shall also inform the owner of his or her right to
submit information to the hearing officer regarding the propriety of the
immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 4, passed 8-30-1988; Ord.
19947-10-2011, § 1A, passed 10-25-2011)
§ 10-23 PROCEDURES FOR IMMOBILIZATION AND/OR IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   When a vehicle is found parked, whether legally or illegally, at any
time upon a public street or public property in the city, and such vehicle has
met the criteria for immobilization or impoundment as provided in §
10-22(b), any authorized parking enforcement agent of the city may immobilize
the vehicle by the installation on or attachment to the vehicle of a device, or
boot, designed to restrict the normal movement of the vehicle. In the
alternative, such vehicle may be towed and impounded, provided that the towing
and impoundment is authorized at the direction of a peace officer.
   (b)   At the time of immobilization, the agent shall also conspicuously
attach to the vehicle a written notice on a form provided by the city, said
notice to contain the following information:
      (1)   Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this
article, and that attempted movement may cause damage to the vehicle;
      (2)   That release of the vehicle may be obtained at a designated place;
      (3)   That there is a right to a hearing regarding the immobilization;
and
      (4)   That the vehicle may be towed and impounded after a designated
period of time.
   (c)   Any vehicle which remains immobilized after 6:00 p.m. may be towed and
impounded.
   (d)   In the event that a vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner thereof
shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees for towing, impoundment and
storage in addition to the fines, costs and fees provided for herein. Towed
vehicles that are not redeemed within 30 days shall be subject to disposition
in the manner provided by
Chapter 22 of this code.
   (e)   This section is to be cumulative of existing law, and nothing herein
shall be construed to restrict or limit the right to tow and impound vehicles
under other applicable law.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 5, passed 8-30-1988)
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned and junked vehicles, see §§
22-301 et seq.
§ 10-24 BOOT REMOVAL.
   (a)   The registered owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle, or other
authorized person, may secure the release of the vehicle upon:
      (1)   Payment of the amount of the fine and late fees, if any, for each
delinquent parking citation plus the applicable boot fee and/or towing and
storage fees; or
      (2)   The posting of a cash bond in the amount of such fines, late fees,
boot fees and/or towing and storage fees to ensure appearance at the boot
hearing.
   (b)   Payment of the fines, late fees, boot fee and any towing and storage
fees shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest such fines and fees.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 6, passed 8-30-1988)
§ 10-25 BOOT HEARING.
   (a)   The registered owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle shall have
the right to a prompt post-immobilization hearing (“boot hearing”) before the
hearing officer.
   (b)   The request for a boot hearing shall be made in writing on a form
supplied by the city.
   (c)   The boot hearing shall be held within 48 hours following the written
request therefor, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays, at the public
safety and courts building, or at such other convenient and reasonable place as
the hearing officer may direct.
   (d)   The issue to be determined at the boot hearing is whether the
immobilization was authorized by law.
   (e)   The immobilization of a vehicle is valid if it complies with the
requirements of this article, unless the registered owner can establish:
      (1)   That he or she was not the registered owner or the operator of the
vehicle at the times in question; or
      (2)   That he or she did not receive notice as required by law.
   (f)   The determination of the hearing officer at the boot hearing is final
and shall not be subject to appeal.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 10160, § 7, passed 8-30-1988)
§ 10-26 FINES AND FEES.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code related to the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $200 for each offense, the amount to be determined by
the hearing officer in his or her reasonable discretion, subject to review or
appeal to the municipal court.
   (b)   The city council may, by resolution, adopt a schedule of standard
fines for various parking offenses. Such standard fines shall be the amount to
be paid and accepted by those persons who do not desire a hearing and wish to
pay the fines by mail or otherwise.
   (c)   The boot fee shall be $50. Charges for towing and/or storage of
impounded vehicles shall be as provided by the law applicable to abandoned
vehicles.
   (d)   All fines, costs and fees shall be deposited in the proper account of
the general fund of the city, unless otherwise directed by resolution of the
city council.
(Ord. 10107, § 2, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 19947-10-2011, § 1B, passed 10-25-2011)
§ 10-27 CERTAIN CONDUCT UNLAWFUL.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee
of the city acting in the course and scope of his or her duties under this
article, to remove or attempt to remove or to tamper in any manner with an
immobilization device (boot) installed on any vehicle pursuant to this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the direction of a
peace officer, to tow or move or to cause to be towed or moved any vehicle on
which a boot is then installed pursuant to this article from the place where it
was booted.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee
of the city acting in the course and scope of his or her duties or the owner or
operator of a booted vehicle, to remove or relocate any notice placed upon a
booted vehicle under §
10-23(b) of this code.
   (d)   Any offense under this section shall be a criminal offense punishable
upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500. To the extent that any conduct
declared to be unlawful under this section also constitutes a violation of any
valid and applicable state law, then it shall be punishable as provided by
state law.
(Ord. 10160, § 8, passed 8-30-1988)
CHAPTER 11: ELECTRICITY
Cross-reference:
   Buildings, see
Ch. 7
   Cable television, see
Ch. 8
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Editor’s note:
Ord. 12841, §§ 1, 2, adopted January 28, 1997, repealed Ch. 11, §§ 11-1 through
11-3, concerning electricity, in its entirety and added new §§ 11-1 through 11-
3. Former §§ 11-1 through 11-3 derived from Ord. 11888, § 1, adopted March 21,
1995; Ord. 10671, §§ 1, 2, 6, adopted September 18, 1990; Ord. 11227, § 1,
adopted December 15, 1992 and Ord. 11540, § 1, adopted April 12, 1994.
Subsequently, Ord. 15994, § 1, adopted June 8, 2004, amended Ch. 11 in its
entirety. Subsequently, Ord. 18358-11-2008, §§ 1 through 4, adopted November
11, 2008, amended Ch. 11 in its entirety. Subsequently, Ord. 21554-12-2014, §§
1 through 4, adopted December 9, 2014, effective January 1, 2015, amended Ch.
11 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative
Table.
Section
   
11-1   2023 Edition of the National Electrical Code adopted
   
11-2   Amendments
   
11-3   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
11-4   Penalty for violation
§ 11-1 2023 EDITION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The electrical code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2023
edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), and the same as amended is hereby adopted as the city's
electrical code. One copy of the 2023 National Electrical Code marked as
Exhibit "A", is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the
office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection.
   (b)   This code shall serve as the electrical provisions of the
International Residential Code, as adopted elsewhere.
   (c)   Any Errata corrections published by the National Fire Protection
Association for the 2023 National Electrical Code (NFPA70), as they are
discovered, are considered as part of this code.
(Ord. 18358-11-2008, § 1, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 21554-12-2014, § 1, passed
12-9-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; Ord. 22836-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-15-2017, eff. 9-1-
2017; Ord. 24584-12-2020, § 1, passed 12-15-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 26721-02-
2024, § 1, passed 2-13-2024, eff. 3-1-2024)
§ 11-2 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2023 edition of the National Electrical Code is hereby amended as
follows:
   ARTICLE 100
   *Article 100, "Scope"; amended to read as follows:
   Scope. This article contains only those definitions essential to the
application of this Code. It is not intended to include commonly defined
general terms or commonly defined technical terms from related codes and
standards. In general, only those terms that are used in two or more articles
are defined in Article 100. Definition are also found in XXX.2 section of other
articles. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms
shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this
article. The provisions of this article shall also apply to other definitions
listed elsewhere in this Code.
   Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and
are defined in other City adopted codes, such terms shall have meanings
ascribed to them as in those codes.
   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   Part I of this article contains definitions intended to apply wherever the
terms are used throughout this code. Part II contains definitions applicable to
installations and equipment operating at over 1000 volts, nominal. Part III
contains definitions applicable to Hazardous (Classified) Locations.
   *Article 100, Part I; definitions are amended and new definitions are added
to read as follows:
      BUILDING. A structure that stands alone or that is separated from
adjoining structures by fire walls as defined by the building code.
      BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction.
      ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references
to NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
      ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
      ENGINEERING SUPERVISION. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas
Licensed Professional Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance
of electrical installations,
      FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code,
shall mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
      FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code
as adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
      GROUPED (ATTACHED-OUTDOORS) (SAME LOCATION). Where this Code specifies
that disconnects, overcurrent devices or equipment "shall be grouped", the
equipment shall not be separated more than thirty (30) feet and shall be on the
same wall facing the same cardinal orientation or elevation. This includes all
service, service equipment, and all service disconnecting means.
      HAZARDOUS LOCATION. (See Article 500.5). The location is not necessarily
categorized in the International Building Code as a high hazard use group
classification. The areas consist of Class I, Divisions 1 and 2; Class II,
Divisions 1 and 2; and Class III, Divisions 1 and 2.
      MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
      PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code
and the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
      RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International
Residential Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
      TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign, and Existing Building codes which regulate the
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
   ARTICLE 90.10
   *Article 90.10; added to read as follows:
   90.10 Primary Power Source, The primary power source for all buildings shall
be from an electrical utility provider. Power sources, such as generator power,
that supply a service panel for uses without a building, such as gas compressor
sites, shall be regulated by this code.
      Exceptions No 1: Alternate, non-generator power sources, including but
not limited to fuel cell power plants, wind generators, solar panels, etc, are
permitted when approved by the code official and installed in accordance with
the provisions of this code and other city codes.
      Exception No 2: Temporary generator power is permitted for buildings that
are connected to a normally active utility provider during periods of power
outages, such as after a major storm. Any connection to the building power
system shall be in compliance with this code.
      Exception No 3: Generator power to buildings as a primary power source
shall only be permitted when approved by the code official. Such approval shall
take into consideration all hazards such as fuel delivery, storage and usage,
as well as, noise nuisances, and compliance with all other applicable codes and
ordinances of this city.
      Use of alternate power sources, inclusive of generators, shall not be
permitted when the proposed use is in violation of other codes and ordinances
of this city.
      When permitted, such power source and connection shall comply with this
code, the Building Code and Fire Code. The attachment cable to the building
shall be considered to be a service entrance conductor.
   ARTICLE 110.2
   *Article 110.2; amended to read as follows:
   110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this
Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident
by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab
(NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party
inspection agency or a field evaluation by a Field Evaluation Body accredited
by either the International Code Council International Accreditation Service
AC354 or ANSI National Accreditation Board programs approved by the AHJ.
      Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location
within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the
AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third
party inspection agency or a field evaluation by a Field Evaluation Body
accredited by either the ICC IAS AC354 or ANAB program approved by the AHJ.
      Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety,
and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See
definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed.
      Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment
may not necessarily comply with US product safety standards as certified by a
Nationally Recognized Testing Lab.
      Informational Note No. 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an
approved method for qualifying a third-party inspection agency.
   ARTICLE 230.2
   *Article 230.2(A); add a "Special Condition" 7 to read as follows:
   (7)   In supplying electrical service to other than single family dwellings,
two or more laterals or overhead service drops shall be permitted to a building
and they shall be grouped together.
   *Article 230.2(B)(2); changed to read as follows:
   (2)   Buildings two-hundred-fifty (250) feet or more in length measured in
the most direct path along the exterior of the building shall be permitted one
additional service location for each 200 linear feet of exterior wall.
   ARTICLE 230.42
   *Article 230.42(A); add two new paragraphs after item (2) to read as
follows:
   230.42 Minimum Size and Ampacity.
   (A)   General. Service-entrance conductors ...
   (2)   The minimum service-entrance conductor size shall have an ampacity not
less than the maximum load to be served after the application of any adjustment
or correction factors.
   Service entrance conductors after the utility provider point of delivery or
service point shall be subject to the requirements of this code and shall be
sized based upon the overcurrent protection provided.
   When the utility provider service conductors connect directly to the service
equipment disconnecting means, the utility provider's service cables shall be
subject to the requirements of this code and shall be sized based upon the
service equipment overcurrent device.
   ARTICLE 230.70
   *Article 230. 70(A): add a "Special Condition" 4 to read as follows:
   230.70 General. Means shall be provided to disconnect all ungrounded
conductors in a building or other structure from the service conductors.
   (A) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in
accordance with 230.70 (A) (1), (A) (2), (A) (3), and (A) (4).
   (4) Special Condition. Where more than one electrical service is installed,
all disconnecting means shall be grouped in the same location in accordance
with one of the following:
      (1)   All inside the building.
      (2)   All outside and attached to the building
   ARTICLE 250.50
   *Article 250.50; amended to read as follows:
   250.50 Grounded Electrode System. All grounding electrodes as described in
250.52(A)(1) through (A)(7) that are present at each building or structure
served shall be blonde together to form the grounding electrode system. If none
of these grounding electrodes exist, one or more of the grounding electrodes
specified in 250.52(A)(4) through (A)(8) shall be installed and used.
   Exception: Concrete-encased electrodes of existing buildings or structures
shall not be required to be part of the grounding electrode system if the rebar
is not accessible for use without disturbing the concrete. (For purposes of
this provision, "existing buildings or structures" shall not include concrete
foundation(s) permitted as part of any alteration(s), addition(s), or new
foundation(s)).
   Informational Note: When a new foundation is poured, it is understood that a
concreate encased electrode is present. Failure to utilize the concreate
encased electrode will require an approved alternate means of compliance from
the AHJ.
   ARTICLE 250.52
   *Article 250.52 (A)(4); amended to add an exception to read as follows:
   250.52 Grounding Electrodes.
   (A) Electrodes Permitted for Grounding.
   (4) Ground Ring. A ground ring encircling the building or structure, in
direct contact with the earth, consisting of at least 6.0 m (20 ft.) of bare
copper conductor not smaller than 2 AWG.
   Exception: In lieu of encircling the building, two ground rod or pipe
electrodes, complying with item 250.52(A)(5), may be used when separated by at
least 20 feet and connected with a minimum of 2 AWG bare copper conductor at
least 30 inches deep.
   ARTICLE 310.14(A)(3)
   *Article 310.14(A)(3); add a sentence after the first paragraph to read as
follows:
   310.14 Ampacities for Conductors Rated 0 Volts - 2000 Volts.
   (3)   Temperature Limitations of Conductors. No conductor shall be used in
such a manner that it's operating temperature exceeds that designated for the
type of insulated conductor involved. In no case shall conductors be associated
together in such a way, with respect to the type of circuit, the wiring method
employed, or the number of conductors, that the limiting temperature of any
conductor is exceeded. Where NM and NMC other cables, conductors and wiring
methods listed in Chapter 3 are installed in an attic outside the building
thermal envelope, the ambient temperature shall be considered to exceed 140°F.
   ARTICLE 334.10
   *Article 334.10; amended to read as follows:
   334.10 Uses Permitted. Type NM and Type NMC cables shall be permitted to be
used in the following:
   (1)   One- and two-family dwellings and their attached or detached garages,
and their storage buildings.
   (2)   Multifamily dwellings of Types III, IV, and V construction when of
wood stud wall framing, except as prohibited in 334.12. When exceeding three
(3) stories, as determined by the Building Code, an approved automatic
sprinkler system is required throughout.
      Exception No. 1: Usage is permitted for multifamily dwellings of any
construction type, with any wall framing material, in buildings not exceeding
four (4) stories, as determined by the Building Code, when provided with an
approved automatic sprinkler system.
      Exception No. 2: Usage is permitted for multifamily dwellings of any
construction type, with any wall framing material, in buildings not exceeding
five (5) stories, as determined by the Building Code, after the switchboard or
pane/board of all individual dwelling units, when provided with an approved
automatic sprinkler system.
   (3)   Other structures of Types III, IV, and V construction when of wood
stud wall framing, except as prohibited in 334.12. When exceeding three (3)
stories, as determined by the Building Code, an approved automatic sprinkler
system is required throughout. Cables shall be concealed within walls, floors,
or ceilings that provide a thermal barrier of material that has at least a 15-
minute finish rating as identified in listings of fire-rated assemblies.
      Exception No. 1: Usage is permitted for hotel/motel uses of any
construction type, with any wall framing material, in buildings not exceeding
four (4) stories, when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
      Exception No. 2: Usage is permitted in detached one (1) story commercial
buildings not exceeding 5,000 square feet of any construction type with any
wall framing material.
   (4)   Cable trays where the cables are identified for the use.
   ARTICLE 408.4
   *Article 408.4 (A); Amend to read as follows:
   404.8 Field Identification Required
   (A) Circuit Directory or Circuit Identification. Every circuit and circuit
modification shall be legibly identified as to its clear, evident, and specific
purpose or use. The identification shall include an approved degree of detail
that allows each circuit to be distinguished from all others. Spare positions
that contain unused overcurrent devices or switches shall be described
accordingly. The identification shall be included in a circuit directory that
is located on the face, inside of, or in an approved location adjacent and
permanently affixed to the panel door in the case of a panelboard and at each
switch or circuit breaker in a switchboard or switchgear. No circuit shall be
described in a manner that depends on transient conditions of occupancy.
   ARTICLE 410.118
   *Article 410.118; amended to read as follows:
   410.118 Access to Other Boxes. Luminaires recessed in ceilings, floors, or
walls shall not be used to access outlet, pull, or junctions boxes or conduit
bodies, unless the box or conduit body is an integral part of the listed
luminaire.
   Exception: Removable luminaires with a minimum measurement of 559 mm x 559
mm (22 in. x. 22 in.) shall be permitted to be used as access to outlet, pull
junction boxes or conduit bodies.
   ARTICLE 422.31
   *Article 422.31(B); Amend to read as follows:
   422.31 Disconnection of Permanently Connected Appliances.
   (B)   Appliances Rated over 300 Volt-Amperes. For permanently connected
appliances rated over 300 volt-amperes, a disconnecting means shall be provided
and shall be located within sight from and readily accessible to the appliance
it serves. A branch-circuit switch or circuit breaker shall be permitted to
serve as the disconnecting means where the switch or circuit breaker is within
sight from and is readily accessible to the appliance it serves or is capable
of being locked in the open position in compliance with 110.25 and is readily
accessible to the appliance it serves.
   Informational Note 1: See 422.34 for appliances employing unit switches,
   Informational Note 2: The following means of access considered to constitute
readily accessible when conforming to the additional access requirements of the
I-codes
      1.   A permanent stair
      2.   A pull-down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity.
      3.   An access door from an upper floor level
   ARTICLE 440.6
   *Article 440.6; add a sentence at the end to read as follows:
   440.6 Ampacity and Rating. The size of conductors for equipment covered by
this article shall be selected from Table 310.16 through Table 310.19 or
calculated in accordance with 310.14 as applicable. The required ampacity of
conductors and rating of equipment shall be determined according to 440.6(A)
and 440.6(B). Branch circuits to AC condensing units 2 tons or larger shall be
a minimum of 10 AWG copper conductors. See also attic temperatures in Articles
310.14(A)(3).
   ARTICLE 500.8
   *Article 500.8(A); amended to read as follows:
   500.8 Equipment.
   (A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by
one of the following:
   (1)   Equipment listing or labeling
   (2)   Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory
or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation
   (3)   Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a
manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by
a qualified Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Texas.
   ARTICLE 505.7
   *Article 505.7(A): amended to read as follows:
   505.7 Special Precaution.
   (A) Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas,
engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods,
installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified licensed
Professional Engineer in the State of Texas.
   ARTICLE 550.1
   *Article 550.1; changed to add sub heading and add Articles 550.1.1,
550.1.2, and 550.1.3 to read as follows:
   Site requirements.
   550.1.1 Applicability. The provisions of this Article apply to the
construction and maintenance of all mobile home and manufactured home parks.
   550.1.2 Installation. All electrical wiring, power distribution lines, and
telephone lines in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be installed
underground and in compliance with this code.
   550.1.3 Street lights. Each internal street shall be provided with street
lighting. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average
illumination level of not less than 0.2 foot candles.
   ARTICLE 551.1
   *Article 551.1; amended to delete 551.1.1.7 to read as follows:
   551.1.1 Site requirements. The following provisions shall apply to
Recreational Vehicle Parks and Recreational Vehicle lots that occur in Mobile
Home and Manufactured Home Parks.
   551.1.1.1 Applicability. The provisions of this Article apply to the
construction and maintenance of all recreational vehicle parks.
   551.1.1.2 Installation. All electrical wiring, main power distribution
lines, and telephone lines shall be installed underground.
   551.1.1.3 Disconnects. Individual electrical connections provided at
recreational vehicle spaces shall include an approved disconnecting device and
over current protective equipment.
   551.1.1.4 Master Meter. Recreational Vehicle lots in Recreational Vehicle
Parks and in Mobile Home or Manufactured Home Parks shall be master metered.
Power releases shall not be permitted for individual lots.
   551.1.1.5 Street lights. Each internal street shall be provided with street
lighting. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average
illumination level of not less than 0.2 foot candles.
   551.1.1.6 Service and Auxiliary Buildings. This section shall apply to all
service buildings, recreation buildings, management offices, repair shops,
storage areas, sanitary facilities, laundry facilities, indoor recreation
areas, commercial buildings supplying essential goods or services for park
tenants, and other similar buildings in recreational vehicle parks.
   Illumination levels shall be maintained, at a minimum, as follows:
      (A)   General seeing tasks: Five (5) foot candles.
      (B)   Laundry room work area: Forty (40) foot candles.
      (C)   Toilet room, in front of mirrors: Forty (40) foot candles.
   ARTICLE 600.6
   *Article 600.6(A)(1) Exception No. 1 add a sentence to read as follows:
Exception No. 1: A disconnect shall not be required for branch circuits(s) or
feeder conductor(s) passing through the sign where not accessible and enclosed
in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the
location. The conductor(s) shall not serve the sign body or sign enclosure
where passing through.
   *Article 600.6(A)(l) Exception No. 3 added to read as follows:
Exception No. 3. A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a
sign body, sign enclosure, or pole for branch circuit conductor(s). The
conductors shall be enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed
cable identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall be routed to a device
box which contains the disconnect. A field-applied permanent warning label that
is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at or near the
point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall
comply with JJ0.21(B) and state the following: "Danger. This raceway contains
energized conductors." The marking shall include the location of the
disconnecting means for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means
shall be capable of being locked in the open position in accordance with
110.25.
   ARTICLE 600.10
   *Article 600.10; amended and sections to 600.10.1 and 600.10.2 added to read
as follows:
   600.10. Portable or Mobile Signs.
   Interior - Shall be those signs that are small in nature, usually hung from
hooks in the wall or ceiling with an electrical cord for plug in or direct
connection to an electrical source. These signs shall not be permitted to be
installed in an outside location.
   Exterior - Shall be those signs that are set on the exterior, usually but
not always in the parking lot, limited in size as described in the Zoning and
Sign Code, some of which may have wheels installed to permit the towing behind
a vehicle.
   600.10.1. Interior
   (A)   Support. Portable or mobile signs shall be adequately supported and
readily moveable without the use of tools.
   (B)   Attachment Plug. An attachment plug shall be provided for each
portable or mobile sign
   (C)   Wet or Damp Location. Portable or mobile signs in wet or damp
locations shall comply with 600.10 (C)(1) and (C)(2)
      (1)   Cords. All cords shall be junior hard-service or hard-service types
as designated in Table 400.4 and have an equipment grounding conductor.
      (2)   Ground-Fault Circuit Interrupter. In addition to the requirements
in 210.8, the manufacturer of portable or mobile signs shall provide listed
ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel. The ground-fault
circuit-interrupter shall be an integral part of the attachment plug or shall
be located in the power-supply cord within 300mm (12in.) of the attachment
plug.
   (D)   Dry Location. Portable or mobile signs in dry locations shall meet the
following:
      (1)   Cords shall be SP-2, SPPE-2, SPT-2, or heavier, as designated in
Table 400.1
      (2)   The cord shall not exceed 4.5 m (15Ft) in length
   600.10.2. Exterior.
   (A)   Exterior portable or mobile signs shall not be illuminated by any
electrical source. Those signs equipped with an electrical cord shall have it
removed.
   (B)   Signs shall be adequately secured to prevent overturning by wind.
   ARTICLE 696 - ELECTRIFIED FENCES
   *add new article with subsection as follows
   696.1 Scope
   This article applies to the installation and maintenance of electrified
fences containing more than two energized strands and having a minimum height
of more than twenty-four (24) inches measured from grade to the highest strand.
   Exception No 1. Battery-charged fences regulated under state law (Local
government code section 250.009) shall not require compliance with this
section.
   696.2 Definitions
   Protective Barrier. Permanent fence or wall that restricts direct access to
the energized portions of an electrified fence. Permanent shall mean not being
able to be removed, lifted or relocated without the use of a tool or equipment.
   Electrified Fence. A fence energized with an electrical current.
   Secure Area. The area bounded by the electrified fence.
   696.3 Permits Required. An electrical permit is required for the
installation, repair, and alteration of electrified fences. A separate permit
is required for the installation of a protective barrier.
   Exception No 1. The repair and replacement of electrified fence conductive
strands, and posts or poles for electrified fence systems.
   Exception No 2. Electrified fences installed on agriculturally zoned
property as defined in the Fort Worth Zoning Code.
   696.3.1 Plan Submittal. Electrical permit applications for electrified
fences shall include the following:
      1.   Site plan showing the location of the protective barrier and the
electrified fence on the property in relationship to property lines, walkways
and exiting buildings.
      2.   Fence details showing both the electrified fence and protective
barrier, including all gates.
      3.   Electrical details showing the equipment, wiring diagrams,
grounding, and other information to insure compliance with the Fort Worth
Electrical Code.
      4.   Energizer Output Certification Form as prescribed in section 696.8.
   696.4 Fee. At the time of permit application, an electrical permit fee of
one hundred seventy dollars ($170.00) shall be paid.
   696.5. Location Restrictions. Electrified fences shall not be installed at
the following locations:
   a.   Within five (5) feet of a building exit.
   b.   Within thirty (30) feet of a hazardous material storage or handling
areas.
   c.   On roof tops or within buildings.
   d.   All residential uses
   696.6 Electrified Fence Height. Electrified fences shall be restricted to a
maximum height of two (2) feet above the height of the protective barrier.
   696.7 Electrical Equipment Standards. Electrical equipment, wiring, and
grounding shall comply with the provisions of this Code and the following
standards:
   1.   The energizer output shall comply with section 22.108 of the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 60335-2-76 Standard.
   2.   Energizers shall provide pulsed power.
   3.   AC current shall not be used to energize any electrified fence.
   4.   The energizer shall be powered by a DC battery not to exceed 12 volts.
A trickle charger and solar panels may be used to recharge the battery but
shall not directly energize the fence.
   5.   All ground system cables shall be properly insulated.
   6.   The electrified fence grounding system shall not be connected to any
plumbing systems.
   7.   Each energizer shall be connected to its own ground system and shall
not be connected to any other grounding system.
   696.8 Energizer Output Certification. The applicant shall sign a form
provided by the City of Fort Worth certifying that the electrified fence
energizer output characteristics comply with section 22.108 of the IEC 6335-2-
76 International Standard.
   696.9 Protective Barrier. The perimeter of the secure area shall be
protected by an additional non-electrified fence meeting the following
standards:
   1.   The protective barrier shall be a permanent fence or wall at least six
(6) feet in height above the adjacent grade, subject to the limitations of the
City of Fort Worth Zoning Ordinance.
   2.   Openings in the protective barrier shall not allow for the passage of a
two (2) inch sphere. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the
bottom of the protective barrier shall be two (2) inch.
      Exception: At rolling gates, the maximum vertical clearance between grade
and the bottom of the protective barrier shall be four (4) inches.
   3.   The protective barrier shall be separated from the electrified fence by
a minimum of six (6) inches and a maximum of twelve (12) inches.
      Exception: Conductive stands installed at gates installed in protective
barriers shall be separated from the gate by a maximum of twelve (12) inches.
   696.10 Warning Signs. Electrified fences shall be clearly marked with
warning signs. The warning signs shall be placed on the protective barrier at
each entrance to the secure area and at intervals not to exceed thirty (30)
feet along the entire perimeter of the fence line. Warning signs shall be
located not less than five (5) feet above the adjacent walking surface.
   696.10.1 Graphics. Warning signs shall be printed on both sides in both
English and Spanish with the following text: "WARNING ELECTRIC FENCE" and
contain the international symbol for electrical shock hazard. Signs shall be
reflective with a minimum 2-inch letter height, minimum stroke of ½ inch and
have a contrasting background.
   696.11 Key Switch. A Fort Worth Fire Department permitted and approved key
switch shall be installed to provide secure access to the electrical power
disconnect switch by public safety personnel. The key switch shall be located
at the main entry point to the property in a location approved by the Fire
Official.
   696.12 Commercial Business Hours of Activation. An electrified fence shall
not be energized during the hours of normal business operation. However, where
businesses are operating continuously on a twenty-four (24) hour basis the
conductors of an electrified fence shall not be energized unless all authorized
persons within or entering the secure area have been informed of the
electrified fence location.
   696.13 Registration. Electrified fences permitted and installed after the
effective date of this ordinance must be registered through the City of Fort
Worth Planning and Development Department. The registration must be renewed
annually from the date of permit issuance. The following information must be
provided at the time of registration application:
   1.   Business Name
   2.   Address of Property
   3.   Contact Person/Representative
   4.   Address and phone number of contact person
Furthermore, an applicant for renewal must provide a notarized statement from a
registered electrician or fence contractor specializing in the installation of
electrified fences, certifying that the electrified fence and equipment is
currently operating in conformance with the provisions of this Code.
   696.13.1 Registration Renewal Fee. An annual registration renewal fee of
$120 shall be charged for the registration of electrified fences.
   696.13.2 Barrier Fence Inspection. As part of the registration renewal
process, a Building Ordinance Inspection shall be scheduled and approved
verifying the integrity of the Protective Barrier.
   ARTICLE 710.15
   Article 710.15(A); delete informational note and amend to read as follows:
   710.15(A) Supply Output. Power supply to premises wiring systems fed by
stand-alone or isolated microgrid power sources shall have adequate capacity to
meet calculated load in accordance with Article 220.
(Ord. 18358-11-2008, § 2, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 19120-04-2010, § 1, passed 4-
20-2010; eff. 5-10-2010; Ord. 20427-09-2012, § 5, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-
2012; Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 5, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 20614-02-
2013, § 1, passed 2-12-2013, eff. 2-20-2013; Ord. 21189-04-2014, § 5, passed 4-
1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord. 21554-12-2014, § 2, passed 12-9-2014, eff. 1-1-
2015; Ord. 22372-08-2016, § 5, passed 8-30-2016; Ord. 22523-12-2016, § 6,
passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22836-08-2017, § 2, passed 8-15-2017,
eff. 9-1-2017; Ord. 22837-08-2017, § 6, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 24584-12-2020, §
2, passed 12-15-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 26721-02-2024, § 2, passed 2-13-2024,
eff. 3-1-2024)
§ 11-3 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting Electrical Code provisions,
as amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances,
except in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct
conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18358-11-2008, § 3, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 21554-12-2014, § 3, passed
12-9-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; Ord. 22836-08-2017, § 3, passed 8-15-2017, eff. 9-1-
2017; Ord. 24584-12-2020, § 3, passed 12-15-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 26721-02-
2024, § 3, passed 2-13-2024, eff. 3-1-2024)
§ 11-4 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this chapter. Each day or any portion thereof
during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed
a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein
provided.
(Ord. 18358-11-2008, § 4, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 21554-12-2014, § 4, passed
12-9-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; Ord. 22836-08-2017, § 4, passed 8-15-2017, eff. 9-1-
2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 24584-
12-2020, § 4, passed 12-15-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 26721-02-2024, § 4, passed
2-13-2024, eff. 3-1-2024)
CHAPTER 11.5: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Cross-reference:
Emergency reporting equipment and procedures, see
Ch. 12
Fallout shelters, see §§
7-186 et seq.
Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
Standard of care for emergency action, see §
1-11.1
Editor’s note:
Section 2 of Ord. 11592, adopted June 6, 1994, provided for the addition of Ch.
9, Emergency Management, §§ 9-1 through 9-11. In order to maintain alphabetical
sequence of chapters of this code, said provisions have been included herein as
Ch. 11.5, §§
11.5-1 through
11.5-11, at the editor’s discretion. See history note following each section
for specific derivation thereof.
Section
   
11.5-1   Director—Generally
   
11.5-2   Same—Responsibilities
   
11.5-2.5   Authority to temporarily detain or restrict movement of individual
to protect public health
   
11.5-3   Economic stabilization measures; emergency abrogation of competitive
bidding requirements
   
11.5-4   Organization
   
11.5-5   Office
   
11.5-6   Plan
   
11.5-7   Interjurisdictional program
   
11.5-8   Override
   
11.5-9   Liability
   
11.5-10   Commitment of funds
   
11.5-11   Offenses; penalties
§ 11.5-1 DIRECTOR—GENERALLY.
   (a)   There exists the position of emergency management director of the City
of Fort Worth, Texas, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state
law, and who shall have all the powers and responsibilities specified in said
law and in this chapter.
   (b)   The line of succession to the mayor, as presiding officer, for the
purpose of declaring a local state of emergency or a local state of disaster
shall be as follows.
      (1)   In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem will act as the
presiding officer.
      (2)   In the absence of the mayor pro tem, a city council member will act
as the presiding officer if elected by the other members of the city council in
accordance with the City Charter.
      (3)   In the absence of a city council member elected to act as presiding
officer, any city council member plus the city manager will act jointly as the
presiding officer.
      (4)   In the absence of any city council member, the city manager will
act as the presiding officer.
      (5)   In the absence of the city manager, his or her designee will act as
the presiding officer.
   (c)   The director bears the ultimate responsibility for the emergency
management program for the city; however, authority for carrying out the
responsibilities specified in this chapter, with the exception of those actions
which are the sole responsibility of the director and/or the city council, may
be delegated to an emergency management coordinator.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-1), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-2 SAME—RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The responsibilities of the director shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following:
   (a)   Conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management including
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery;
   (b)   Conducting an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which
threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which
would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur;
   (c)   Supervising the development and approval of an emergency management
plan for the City of Fort Worth, and recommending for adoption by the city
council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of
such plan;
   (d)   In accordance with state law, declaring a local state of emergency
during times of riot or unlawful assembly by three or more persons acting
together by use of force or violence, or if a clear and present danger of the
use of violence exists, or a natural or technological emergency exists or
threatens the health and/or safety of the citizens of the City of Fort Worth.
The declaration may be issued when an emergency is imminent or during the
initial or response phase of the emergency when resolution of the incident(s)
or situation(s) by use of city personnel and equipment is expected and/or as a
prelude to submitting a request to the governor for assistance from state
resources. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of 72 hours except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of emergency
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with
the city secretary;
   (e)   In accordance with state law, declaring a local state of disaster
during or following a natural, technological, or attack related catastrophe
when response to and/or recovery and rehabilitation from the effects of the
catastrophe will overwhelm the capabilities of the city. The declaration serves
as the initial step in requesting assistance from the state through the
governor. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of
disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the city secretary;
   (f)   Issuing necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations,
regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to
bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the situation prevent or impede, promptly filed with
the city secretary;
   (g)   Ensuring, after a state of emergency or state of disaster has been
declared, that the city exercises all powers reasonably necessary to protect
the health, security, peace, life and property of the city and its inhabitants
during the period of such emergency or disaster. These powers may be exercised
during the state of emergency or disaster after reasonable notice has been
given of the situation and the powers to be exercised. This notice shall be
judged with due regard to the exigent circumstances at the time. Such
reasonable notice may include publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, announcement over television or radio, circulation of notices or
posted signs in the affected area, or by other appropriate means. These special
powers shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Imposition of a general or limited curfew regulating or prohibiting
any person or persons from being or remaining, loitering or congregating on any
street, alley, park, public property or any other place which may be specified
and where they have no right or authority to be under the terms of and during
the period covered by said curfew;
      (2)   Limitation or prohibition of the sale or dispensing of beer, wine,
liquor and any or all other forms of alcoholic beverages;
      (3)   Limitation or prohibition of the sale or dispensing of gasoline or
other liquid flammable or combustible products, dynamite or other explosives,
firearms or ammunition;
      (4)   Limitation upon or prohibition against the operation of any
establishment selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away any of the items
enumerated in subsections (g)(1), (g)(2) and (g)(3) above;
      (5)   Appropriation of real property, fixtures and/or personal property
for purposes of necessary governmental operations for not longer than 360
consecutive days after commencement of such natural, technological or attack
related emergency or disaster or until termination of the emergency or disaster
period by the local governing body declaration, whichever first occurs; and
      (6)   Establishment of temporary emergency housing, for persons needing
same, upon any and all lands to which the city has right of possession or
custody, whether the same shall be deraigned from grantors, donors or lessors
by purchase, dedication or otherwise, irrespective of local zoning ordinances,
rules and regulations or deed restrictions, effective at the time of or during
the establishment of such housing.
   (h)   Assuming direction and control of the operations of the City of Fort
Worth emergency management organization as well as ensuring the training of
emergency management personnel;
   (i)   Determining all questions of authority and responsibility that may
arise within the emergency management organization of the city;
   (j)   Maintaining liaison with other municipal, county, district, state,
regional or federal emergency management organizations;
   (k)   Marshaling all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any
department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
emergency management plan;
   (l)   Supervising the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in
cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political
subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable,
of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other
municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency
management efforts;
   (m)   Supervising and authorizing the procurement of all necessary supplies
and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be
offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city;
   (n)   Authorizing agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use
of private property for public shelter and other purposes;
   (o)   Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies
and services which could be used during an emergency or a disaster, as provided
for herein; and
   (p)   Satisfying other requirements as specified in the state law.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-2), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-2.5 AUTHORITY TO TEMPORARILY DETAIN OR RESTRICT MOVEMENT OF INDIVIDUAL
TO PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH.
   (a)   In addition to the authority granted by other provisions in this
chapter or under other law, during a declared public health emergency related
to a communicable or infectious disease, a peace officer or other individual
designated by the city's chief of police or city marshal is hereby granted the
explicit authority to protect the public health by detaining or restricting the
mobility of any individual who has been confirmed as being infected with the
contagious communicable disease or condition that is the subject of the public
health emergency and for whom a control order is being sought or for whom a
control order has been issued, provided, however, that such detainer or
restriction shall be strictly limited in duration in accordance with subsection
(d) below.
   (b)   The authority granted under subsection (a) may only be exercised if
the individual in question demonstrates by words or actions that he is either
unwilling or unable to voluntarily comply with medical directions regarding
self-isolation or similar measures intended to reduce the risk of infection by
others or with the terms of a control order.
   (c)   If an individual is unwilling or unable to voluntarily comply with the
terms of a control order and a court order is not actively being sought by
another appropriate entity, City staff is authorized to seek a court order to
enforce a control order.
   (d)   A detainer or restriction while awaiting the issuance of a control
order or of a court order to enforce a previously issued control order shall
not exceed longer than is reasonably necessary and under no circumstances
longer than 24 hours.
(Ord. 24090-03-2020, § 1, passed 3-26-2020)
§ 11.5-3 ECONOMIC STABILIZATION MEASURES; EMERGENCY ABROGATION OF COMPETITIVE
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Upon finding by the city council of substantial disruption of the
local free, competitive market in the purchase or sale of goods and services,
the mayor may promulgate a schedule of maximum retail prices chargeable or
collectable in the city on the purchase and sale of any or all goods or
services, in whole or part, for a period of not more than 15 days or until
earlier termination of the subject emergency or disaster period by council
declaration, after the occurrence of a natural, technological or attack related
emergency or disaster.
   (b)   No rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall provide any maximum
price for an item of goods or services enumerated above which is less than the
arithmetically averaged, prevailing retail price for such item as of the date
of the occurrence of such natural, technological or attack related emergency or
such disaster. Such prevailing retail price may be determined by statistical
sampling as the mayor, with approval of the city council, may direct.
Alternatively, however, the mayor may set the maximum retail price for any or
all items of goods and services enumerated above by declaring, with city
council approval, that the price charged by the purveyor of such affected good
or service within the jurisdictional limits of the city on such occurrence date
shall be the maximum retail price lawfully chargeable by the purveyor of such
affected good or service. An added special transportation cost for any
regulated goods may be permitted by the local governing body. If at a later
time it becomes evident that different prices may be proper, the mayor, with
city council approval, may order adjusted the figures by any method conforming
to this section. Any person affected by this subsection (b) and dissatisfied
with the action taken may resort to remedies provided by law. In no event shall
the city, city council, city officers, employees or agents be held pecuniarily
liable for any losses or damages attributable to its regulation of prices
hereunder. In promulgating maximums under this section, the declaration by the
mayor that the arithmetically averaged, prevailing price of any item charged on
the occurrence date in the city by the purveyors thereof shall be the maximum
retail price chargeable by such purveyors for the period of price control shall
be deemed sufficient for the invocation of the regulatory power herein
provided.
   (c)   In the event of occurrence of a natural, technological or attack
related emergency or disaster, the mayor, with approval of the city council,
under the terms of this section, may remove, by ordinance or order, on one
reading, the operation, in whole or in part, of the competitive bidding
requirements of state law and applicable local law, whether in Charter,
ordinance or order, for a period of not more than 90 days after the calamity or
disaster occurrence date if each such order shall be preceded by final passage
and approval of an ordinance or order of the city council declaring its finding
of the existence of a prevalent natural or technological emergency or a
disaster, pursuant to the terms of this section. However, the council shall
diligently strive insofar as practicable to follow the guidelines of such
competitive bidding law.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-3), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-4 ORGANIZATION.
   The operational emergency management organization of the City of Fort Worth
shall consist of the officers and employees of the city as well as support
organizations or agencies and organized volunteer groups so designated in the
emergency management plan. The functions and responsibilities of this
organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees, supporting
organizations and organized volunteer groups in accordance with the terms of
the emergency management plan.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-4), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-5 OFFICE.
   There is hereby created an office of emergency management as a division of
the department of emergency management and communications, which shall have a
coordinator under the supervision and direction of the director of the
emergency management and communications department to carry out the
responsibilities of the office.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-5), passed 6-6-1994; Ord. 27741-06-2025, § 3, passed 6-10-
2025)
§ 11.5-6 PLAN.
   A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained
in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization;
establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities,
tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. The plan shall address the mitigation,
preparedness, response and recovery phases of emergency management. As provided
by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by
the division of emergency management of the State of Texas. Insofar as
possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved by
the director, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform
the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in
a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall
be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during
the time of an emergency or disaster.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-6), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-7 INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
   The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County
of Tarrant and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation
of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of
Tarrant, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an
interjurisdictional emergency management plan, as well as all powers necessary
to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said
program may affect the City of Fort Worth. The emergency management coordinator
for the City of Fort Worth may also serve in that capacity for unincorporated
Tarrant County.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-7), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-8 OVERRIDE.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-8), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-9 LIABILITY.
   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the City of
Fort Worth, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of
the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to
comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons
as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or
other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of
Fort Worth a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
practice natural, technological or attack related disaster shall, together with
his or her successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death
of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under
such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-9), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-10 COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.
   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in
carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter
without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and
specific approval of the city council unless during a declared emergency or
disaster. During a declared emergency or disaster, the mayor or presiding
officer may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent
and necessary for the protection of health, life or property.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-10), passed 6-6-1994)
§ 11.5-11 OFFENSES; PENALTIES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of
any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display
any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member, or as a
representative of the emergency management organization of the City of Fort
Worth, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper
officials. The proper officials are the city council, city manager, assistant
city managers, department directors and emergency management coordinator.
   (c)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so
as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, or who shall
make an unauthorized all-clear announcement or signal, shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by
this chapter.
   (d)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 11592, § 2(9-11), passed 6-6-1994)
CHAPTER 12: EMERGENCY REPORTING EQUIPMENT AND PROCEDURES
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
   Emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5
   Traffic accidents, see §§
22-136 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15750, § 1, adopted November 18, 2003, amended
Ch. 12, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§
12-1 through
12-17. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 12 pertained to similar
subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
Section
   
12-1   Definitions
   
12-2   Alarm permit required; fee; application; transfer
   
12-3   Grounds for denial of a permit/revocation
   
12-4   Duration; renewal; inspection
   
12-5   Reinstatement of a permit; avoidance of permit revocation
   
12-6   Appeal from permit denial or revocation
   
12-7   Alarm system operation and maintenance
   
12-8   Monitoring procedures
   
12-9   Duties of an alarm company
   
12-10   Alarm reset
   
12-11   Indirect alarm reporting
   
12-12   Direct automatic alarm notification
   
12-13   Alarm system operating instructions
   
12-14   Alarm dispatch records
   
12-15   Reserved
   
12-16   Service fee
   
12-17   Violations; penalty
§ 12-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ALARM COMPANY. Any person who sells, installs, services or monitors an alarm
system.
   ALARM NOTIFICATION. A notification intended to summon the police, which is
designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system
that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion.
   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location (one street address) to include
suites, sections or units served by an alarm system or systems that are under
the control of one owner.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to protect
buildings, premises or persons from criminal acts or unauthorized entries by
warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry through the emission of a
sound or the transmission of a signal or message intended to summon police of a
municipality in response to a burglary or robbery. The term includes an alarm
that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. The term does not
include an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is used for a
habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the
inhabitants within the premises, which does not have a local alarm.
   ALARM UNIT. City personnel assigned to the planning and development
department who issue permits, monitor false alarms and manage permit
revocations on behalf of the chief of police.
   AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATION. An alarm notification sent over telephone
lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message,
synthesized voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
   CENTRAL STATION. An office to which remote and supervisory signaling devices
are connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and/or where guards are
maintained continuously to investigate signals.
   DURESS ALARM .The deliberate activation of a silent alarm by entering at a
keypad a code that is different from the normal arm/disarm code or by a
separate deliberate act at another device.
   CHIEF. The chief of police of the city or his or her authorized
representative.
   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION. An alarm signal received by a law enforcement
official and upon inspection of the premises, the law enforcement official
determines that there is no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted criminal
offense, fire or other emergency.
   LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is
audible or visible from the exterior of a structure.
   PANIC ALARM. An audible alarm generated by the deliberate activation of a
panic device.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The person designated in the application who is responsible
for responding to alarms and giving access the site and who is responsible for
proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization
or any legal entity.
   SERVICE FEE. The fee paid for each false alarm notification when a burglar
alarm system has signaled at least three other false alarms during the
preceding 12-month period.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16622, § 1, passed 9-27-2005; Ord.
16908, § 1, passed 4-25-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 12-2 ALARM PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; APPLICATION; TRANSFER.
   (a)   A valid alarm permit issued by the chief of police is required if a
permit holder operates or causes to operate an alarm system and the permit
holder desires to receive police response to an alarm site. A separate permit
is required for each alarm site.
   (b)   The chief shall refuse police response to any alarm notification from
an alarm site that does not have a valid alarm permit unless the alarm
notification is a duress alarm, a hold-up alarm, a panic alarm or a report to
911 emergency telephone or to the police department by a person other than an
alarm company.
   (c)   The fee for annual permit, an annual permit renewal or a permit
reinstatement for all alarm permits is specified in §
2-321 of the City Code.
   (d)   Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a 12-
month period for the date of issuance as indicated on the permit. No refund of
a permit, permit renewal or permit reinstatement fee will be made.
   (e)   A tenant of a multifamily dwelling, apartment building or apartment
complex desiring police response for an alarm notification is required obtain a
valid alarm permit from the chief before operating or causing the operating of
an alarms system in the tenant’s residential unit.
   (f)   The owner or property manager of an apartment complex desiring police
response for an alarm notification is required to obtain separate valid alarm
permits for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment
building or apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant
areas, office, storage and equipment areas.
   (g)   Within 30 days of receipt of a completed application form and the
required fee, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the
applicant has failed to pay a service fee or has had an alarm permit revoked,
and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected.
   (h)   An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or to alarm
system except by authorization of the chief.
   (i)   A permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any
information listed on the permit application within two business days. No fee
will be assessed for such changes.
   (j)   A permit holder shall cancel a permit for any alarm system which is
removed from an alarm site or which otherwise ceases to come under the
permitting requirements of this chapter. Cancellation may be accomplished by
returning the permit to the chief.
   (k)   All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be
issued or renewed.
   (l)   No permit fee shall be required for a permit obtained for an alarm
system at a one-family or two-family dwelling when the alarm site is determined
by the chief to be occupied by a low-income family. In making such
determination, the chief shall consult applicable United States government
guidelines for housing and other assistance, and may require the applicant to
furnish appropriate documentation regarding household income.
   (m)   No permit shall be required of state and federal governmental
entities.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16908, § 2, passed 4-25-2006; Ord.
23383-09-2018, § 2, passed 9-18-2018, eff. 10-1-20188; Ord. 23820-09-2019, § 2,
passed 9-10-2019, eff. 10-1-2019)
§ 12-3 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF A PERMIT/REVOCATION.
   (a)   Grounds for denial of a permit.
      (1)   The chief shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one or more
of the following conditions are present:
         a.   The applicant fails to provide all of the information requested
on the application or otherwise submits an incomplete application;
         b.   The applicant gives false, misleading or untrue information of
material fact on the application;
         c.   The operation, as proposed by the applicant would not comply with
all applicable laws, included but not limited to, this chapter or the city
building, zoning or health codes;
         d.   The alarm system has generated eight or more false alarms during
the preceding 12-month period;
         e.   The applicant has failed to pay the applicable fee or any service
fee assessed pursuant to this chapter that are due and owing; or
         f.   The application is for a location where a permit was revoked
during the preceding 12-month period.
      (2)   Denial of an alarm permit shall be effected by written denial,
setting forth the grounds for denial and mailed to the applicant by depositing
the notice in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant with postage
prepaid.
   (b)   Revocation of a permit.
      (1)   The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he or she determines
that:
         a.   The permit holder or his or her designated agent has given false,
misleading or untrue information of material fact in any record or report
required by this chapter;
         b.   The permit holder fails to maintain the alarm system in
accordance with this chapter;
         c.   The operation of the alarm system by the permit holder has
generated eight or more false alarms during the preceding 12-month period and
the permit holder has not complied with the requirements of §
12-5; or
         d.   The permit holder has failed to make payment of an assessed
service fee within 30 days of receiving notice to do so.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates an alarm system
during the period in which his or her alarm permit is revoked.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16622, § 2, passed 9-27-2005; Ord.
16908, § 3, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-4 DURATION; RENEWAL; INSPECTION.
   (a)   A permit expires one year from the date of issuance and must be
renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee
in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application
and the required permit fee prior to the permit expiration date. A permit shall
not be renewed if the applicant has past due outstanding service fees at this
alarm site or at another alarm site for which he or she is the permit holder,
unless the service fees are under review in an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Before terminating a permit the chief shall provide 30 days prior
written notice to the permit holder of the need to renew the permit and file
and updated permit application.
   (d)   The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep such permit at the
alarm site and shall produce such permit or evidence thereof for inspection
upon request of any member of the police department.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-5 REINSTATEMENT OF A PERMIT; AVOIDANCE OF PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may have the permit
reinstated if the person:
      (1)   Submits an updated application in accordance with this chapter; and
      (2)   Pays all outstanding service fees assessed under this chapter for
which a bill has been issued and for which a payment plan has not been
established and the permit holder has not been revoked for having generated
eight or more false alarms during the preceding 12-month period.
   (b)   A permit holder whose alarm permit is pending revocation for excessive
false alarms may avoid permit revocation if within 45 days after receipt of
notice from the alarm unit, provides the following information or the following
circumstances are met:
      (1)   A statement on official letterhead from the alarm company and/or a
work order listing the work performed and confirmation that the system has been
repaired or replaced;
      (2)   A written statement of proactive steps taken to resolve user-error
issues that are not system related such as employee training. Final authority
to accept or reject this statement rests with the chief of police;
      (3)   Pays all outstanding service fees assessed under this chapter for
which a bill has been issued and for which a payment plan has not been
established; and
      (4)   A permit holder has not been previously served with a revocation
notice for excessive false alarms and avoided revocation with documentation of
corrective action.
   (c)   A reinstated permit expires the same date on which the original permit
would have expired had it not been revoked.
   (d)   A permit revoked for excessive false alarms shall not be eligible for
reinstatement for 12 months from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16908, § 4, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-6 APPEAL FROM PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit,
he or she shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of his or her action and a statement
of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may resolve the
situation as outlined in §
12-5 if eligible or appeal the decision of the chief to the city manager by
filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing setting forth the
reasons for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the
chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager
stays the action of the chief in revoking a permit until the city manager or
his or her designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for
an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the
chief is final.
   (b)   The city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing, which
shall be served upon the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The city manager or his or her representative shall serve as
hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person.
The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. All parties to
the hearing shall have the right to present evidence and shall have the right
of cross-examination. The hearing officer shall make his or her decision on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence within 15 days after the request for
an appeal hearing is filed. The time for hearing an appeal may be extended by
agreement of the parties. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify
the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to
administrative remedies with the city.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16908, § 5, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-7 ALARM SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   A permit holder shall:
   (a)   Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that
ensures proper operation of the alarm system;
   (b)   Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm
notifications;
   (c)   Respond or cause a representative to respond within one hour after
requested by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises;
   (d)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report;
   (e)   Notify the police department prior to activation of an alarm for
maintenance purposes; and
   (f)   A permit holder shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to
be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 30 minutes
after being activated.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-8 MONITORING PROCEDURES.
   Any alarm company engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems in the
city shall:
   (a)   Report alarm signals only by using telephone numbers designated by the
chief;
   (b)   Before requesting police response to an alarm signal, attempt to
verify every alarm signal, except a duress, hold up or panic alarm activation,
by placing two telephone calls to the alarm site;
   (c)   When reporting an alarm notification to the city, provide the alarm
permit number and address of the alarm site from which the alarm notification
originated; and
   (d)   Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the chief.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16908, § 6, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-9 DUTIES OF AN ALARM COMPANY.
   (a)   An alarm company shall confirm that a valid alarm permit has been
issued by the city for an alarm site before performing any system conversion at
the site.
   (b)   An alarm company that has a contract with a permit holder or person in
control of an alarm system shall send a certification to the chief within 30
days of performing or causing the performance of an alarm system installation
or conversion. The information contained in the certification is confidential
to the extent required by Tex. Occupations Code § 1702.286 and other law. The
certification must state:
      (1)   The date of installation or conversion of the alarm system,
whichever is applicable;
      (2)   The name, address, telephone number and current state license
number of the alarm company providing the alarm system installation or
conversion;
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number and current license number of
the alarm company providing monitoring for the alarm system, if different from
the alarm company under contract to provide installation or conversion of the
alarm system;
      (4)   The name of the occupant of the alarm system location and the
address of the alarm system location;
      (5)   That the applicant has been given a complete set of written
operating instructions for the alarm system, written information on the
applicable law relating to false alarms, including the potential for penalties
and revocation or suspension of a permit, and written guidelines on how to
avoid false alarms; and
      (6)   That the alarm company has trained the applicant in the proper use
of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16908, § 7, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-10 ALARM RESET.
   A permit holder of an alarm system that utilizes a local alarm shall adjust
the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that, upon activation,
the local alarm will not transmit another alarm signal without first being
reset.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-11 INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to
the city shall:
   (a)   Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form
determined by the chief;
   (b)   Provide local or toll free call-back telephone numbers when requested
by the police department;
   (c)   Contact a representative of the alarm site when requested by the
police department; and
   (d)   Comply with all other requirements of this chapter and any rules and
regulations promulgated by the chief.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-12 DIRECT AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATION.
   An alarm system, other than an alarm system in a local, state or federal
governmental entity or in a financial institution, which transmits automatic
alarm notifications directly to the communications center of the police
department, shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-13 ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS.
   A permit holder shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations or
passwords must not be included in these instructions.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-14 ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.
   (a)   The police dispatcher receiving the alarm notification and/or the
police officer responding to a dispatch resulting from a burglar, robbery or
personal hostage or robbery alarm notification shall cause to be recorded in
the police information systems such information as necessary to permit the
chief to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   Identification of the permit holder;
      (2)   Identification of the alarm site;
      (3)   Dispatcher received time, dispatch time and officer arrived at
scene time;
      (4)   Date of occurrence; and
      (5)   Name of permit holder’s representative on premises, if any.
   (b)   The responding police officer shall prepare and submit the appropriate
reports in regard to any criminal offenses, attempts or other incidents which
contributed to the alarm notification as determined by investigation.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
§ 12-15 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16908, § 8, adopted April 25, 2006, repealed §
12-15, which pertained to system performance reviews and appeals. See also the
Code Comparative Table.
§ 12-16 SERVICE FEE.
   (a)   (1)   The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of an
alarm system shall pay a service fee in the following dollar amounts for each
false alarm notification when a burglar alarm system has signaled at least
three other false alarms during the preceding 12-month period:
 
# of False Alarms Fee
0—3             No charge
4—5             $50
6—7             $75
8 or more         $100
 
      (2)   A service fee of $60 shall be charged for all users for each
robbery or other manually activated alarm system that is in excess of two
alarms within any 12-month period.
   (b)   An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when a
service fee will be assessed or when revocation proceedings commence if the
permitee can prove that the alarm notification was the result of severe weather
condition, such as a tornado, hurricane or earthquake or other weather
condition that causes physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of a
malfunction in the operation of telephone lines for the transmission of alarm
signals, proof of the latter being documented in the form of telephone company
work orders or time stamped records from the alarm company showing the periods
of interrupted service. If there is evidence that an alarm is the result of
some other circumstance that is beyond the reasonable control of the permit
holder, the alarm unit supervisor, at his or her discretion, will not count the
alarm notification when determining service fees or alarm revocation. If a
service fee is assessed or revocation proceedings commence as a result of the
alarm notification determination, the applicant or permit holder may appeal the
decision to the chief by filing a written request for a conference within ten
days of the decision by the alarm unit.
   (c)   An alarm notification will not be counted when determining when a
service fee will be assessed or when revocation proceedings commence if more
than 30 minutes elapse between the time the police department’s communications
division receives the notification and the time a responding officer arrives at
the location of the alarm notification.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003; Ord. 16622, § 3, passed 9-27-2005; Ord.
16908, § 9, passed 4-25-2006)
§ 12-17 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   An alarm company, an alarm permit holder or a person in control of an
alarm system commits an offense if he or she violates by commission or omission
any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him or her a duty or
responsibility.
   (b)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 but not less than:
      (1)   Two hundred dollars upon first conviction; and
      (2)   Two hundred fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent
conviction.
   (c)   In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of
individuals, it is the intent of this chapter to hold a corporation,
partnership or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions
performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership or other
association, and within the scope of his or her employment. A person or
business utilizing an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete
set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes,
combinations or passwords must not be included in these instructions.
(Ord. 15750, § 1, passed 11-18-2003)
CHAPTER 12.5: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND COMPLIANCE
   Article
      
I.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
II.   AIR QUALITY
      
III.   STORMWATER PROTECTION
      
IV.   GROUNDWATER AND SURFACE WATER QUALITY
      
V.   PUBLIC DRINKING WATER
      
VI.   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
      
VII.   LIQUID WASTE
      
VIII.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
      
IX.   FILL MATERIAL
      
X.   GRADING PERMIT
Section
Article I: Administration and Enforcement
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-1—12.5-99   Reserved
   
12.5-100   Purpose
   
12.5-101   Numbering system
   
12.5-102   Short title
   
12.5-103   Definitions
   
12.5-104   Abbreviations
   
12.5-105   Incorporation of federal and state statutes, rules and regulations
Division 2: Department of Environmental  Management
   
12.5-106   Creation of department of environmental management
   
12.5-107   Authority of director of environmental management
   
12.5-108—12.5-110   Reserved
Division 3: Enforcement
   
12.5-111   Enforcement options
   
12.5-112   Criminal citation
   
12.5-113   Notice of violation
   
12.5-114   Consent order
   
12.5-115   Compliance order
   
12.5-116   Show cause hearing
   
12.5-117   Reserved
   
12.5-118   Stop work order
   
12.5-119   Reconsideration and hearing
   
12.5-120   Nuisance abatement
   
12.5-121   Right of entry
   
12.5-122   Confidentiality of records
   
12.5-123   Judicial remedies and penalties
   
12.5-124—12.5-135   Reserved
Division 4: Environmental Use Agreements
Subdivision I: General Provisions
   
12.5-136   Definitions
   
12.5-137   Purpose
   
12.5-138   Authority of city manager
   
12.5-139   Minimum requirements for use agreements
   
12.5-140   Priority of placement
   
12.5-141—12.5-144   Reserved
Subdivision II: Sub-Surface Environmental  Sampling
   
12.5-145   Informal request for subsurface environmental sampling
   
12.5-146   Formal request for subsurface environmental sampling
   
12.5-147   Use agreement for subsurface environmental sampling
   
12.5-148—12.5-154   Reserved
Subdivision III: Monitoring Wells
   
12.5-155   Necessity of monitoring wells
   
12.5-156   Informal request for monitoring wells
   
12.5-157   Formal request for monitoring wells
   
12.5-158   Use agreements for monitoring wells
   
12.5-159—12.5-164   Reserved
Subdivision IV: Mitigation of Contaminated Soil
   
12.5-165   Confirmation of contaminated soil
   
12.5-166—12.5-199   Reserved
Article II: Air Quality
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-200   Definitions
   
12.5-201   Purpose
   
12.5-202   Authority of the director
   
12.5-203   Right of entry
   
12.5-204—12.5-209   Reserved
Division 2: Ambient Air and Emissions Standards
   
12.5-210   Adoption of state regulations
   
12.5-211   Nuisance
   
12.5-212—12.5-299   Reserved
Article III: Stormwater Protection
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-300   Definitions
   
12.5-301   Administration
   
12.5-302   Discharge to MS4 prohibited
   
12.5-303   Connection of sanitary sewer prohibited
   
12.5-304   Nuisances
   
12.5-305   Emergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access
   
12.5-306   Non-emergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access
   
12.5-307—12.5-314   Reserved
Division 2: Cosmetic Cleaning
   
12.5-315   Permit and registration required
   
12.5-316   Permit application procedures
   
12.5-317   Issuance of permit and registration certificates
   
12.5-318   Display of registration numbers and certificates
   
12.5-319   Permit conditions
   
12.5-320   Permit denial and revocation
   
12.5-321   Nuisances
   
12.5-322—12.5-329   Reserved
Division 3: Stormwater Discharges Associated  with Industrial Activity,
Including Construction Activity
   
12.5-330   Applicability
   
12.5-331   Access to facilities
   
12.5-332   Unpermitted discharges prohibited
   
12.5-333   Submission of NOI to city
   
12.5-334   Compliance with permit
   
12.5-335   Modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans
Division 4: Municipal Drainage Utility System
   
12.5-336   Definitions
   
12.5-337   Findings; adoption of state law
   
12.5-338   Service area
   
12.5-339   Establishment of a drainage utility fee
   
12.5-340   Categories of drainage utility rates
   
12.5-341   Billing for drainage utility fee
   
12.5-342   Drainage utility fund
   
12.5-343   Administration; rules
   
12.5-344   Appeal
   
12.5-345   Hearings
   
12.5-346   Exemptions
   
12.5-347   No waiver of immunity
   
12.5-348   Access to stormwater drainage infrastructure; hours of operation
Article IV: Groundwater and Surface Water Quality
Division 1: Enforcement of the Texas Water  Quality Control Act
   
12.5-400   Definitions
   
12.5-401   Declaration of policy and purpose
   
12.5-402   Authority of the director
   
12.5-403   Inspection authority
   
12.5-404   Nuisance
   
12.5-405—12.5-410   Reserved
Division 2: Municipal Setting Designations
   
12.5-411   Findings
   
12.5-412   Definitions
   
12.5-413   Use of groundwater in municipal setting designation as a potable
water source prohibited
   
12.5-414   Application for city council approval of municipal setting
designation
   
12.5-415   Staff review
   
12.5-416   Director action following application review
   
12.5-417   Notice of public meeting and public hearing
   
12.5-418   Conduct of public meeting
   
12.5-419   Conduct of public hearing
   
12.5-420   Limitation on reapplication
   
12.5-421   Additional requirements
   
12.5-422—12.5-499   Reserved
Article V: Public Drinking Water
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-500   Definitions
   
12.5-501   Purpose
   
12.5-502   Drinking water facility standards
   
12.5-503   City drinking water analysis
   
12.5-504   Connection of private water supply to city system
   
12.5-505—12.5-510   Reserved
Division 2: Protection of Lake Worth
   
12.5-511   Authority of director
   
12.5-512   Pollution of Lake Worth watershed
   
12.5-513   Extended municipal court jurisdiction
   
12.5-514   Nuisance
   
12.5-515—12.5-524   Reserved
Division 3: Cross-Connection Control
Subdivision I: General Provisions
   
12.5-525   Purpose
   
12.5-526   Cost of compliance
   
12.5-527   Responsibilities of owners and renters
   
12.5-528   Backflow prevention assembly requirements
   
12.5-529   Residential service connections
   
12.5-530   Plumbing code
   
12.5-531   Installation requirements
   
12.5-532   Testing of assemblies
   
12.5-533   Maintenance of assemblies
   
12.5-534   Thermal expansion
   
12.5-535   Pressure loss
   
12.5-536   Mobile units
   
12.5-537   Wholesale customers
   
12.5-538   Right-of-way encroachment
   
12.5-539—12.5-542   Reserved
Subdivision II: Cross-Connection Inspectors
   
12.5-543   Certification of cross-connection inspectors
   
12.5-544—12.5-547   Reserved
Subdivision III: Backflow Prevention  Assembly Testers
   
12.5-548   Required license for a backflow prevention assembly tester
   
12.5-549   Required registration of a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester
   
12.5-550   Requirements to become a registered certified backflow prevention
assembly tester
   
12.5-551—12.5-554   Reserved
Subdivision IV: Installation Standards and  Specifications
   
12.5-555   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP)
   
12.5-556   Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC)
   
12.5-557   Double detector check valve assembly (DDC)
   
12.5-558   Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB)
   
12.5-559   Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB)
   
12.5-560   Air gap separation
   
12.5-561   Fire systems
   
12.5-562   Offense
   
12.5-563—12.5-569   Reserved
Subdivision V: Enforcement
   
12.5-570   Access to premises
   
12.5-571   Emergency suspension of utility service
   
12.5-572   Nonemergency termination of water supply
   
12.5-573   Nuisance
   
12.5-574—12.5-599   Reserved
Article VI: Industrial Wastewater
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-600   Definitions
   
12.5-601   Purpose and policy
   
12.5-602   Administration
   
12.5-603   Fees
   
12.5-604   Incorporation of EPA or TCEQ standards
   
12.5-605—12.5-609   Reserved
Division 2: Discharge Prohibitions  and Limitations
   
12.5-610   Discharges to the City of Fort Worth Village Creek water reclamation
facility
   
12.5-610.1   Discharges to the Trinity River Authority central regional
wastewater system
   
12.5-610.2   Discharges to the Trinity River Authority Denton Creek Regional
wastewater system
   
12.5-611   City’s right of revision
   
12.5-612   Dilution
   
12.5-613   Upset
   
12.5-614   Bypass
   
12.5-615—12.5-619   Reserved
Division 3: Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
12.5-620   Pretreatment facilities
   
12.5-621   Additional pretreatment measures
   
12.5-622   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
12.5-623   Hauled septage and industrial waste
   
12.5-624—12.5-629   Reserved
Division 4: Wastewater Discharge  Permit Application
   
12.5-630   Wastewater analysis
   
12.5-631   Wastewater discharge permit required
   
12.5-632   Permit application process
   
12.5-633   Signatories and certification
   
12.5-634—12.5-638   Reserved
Division 5: Wastewater Discharge Permit  Issuance Process
   
12.5-639   Wastewater discharge permit decisions
   
12.5-640   Wastewater discharge permit duration
   
12.5-641   Wastewater discharge permit contents
   
12.5-642   Reserved
   
12.5-643   Permit modification
   
12.5-644   Permit transfer
   
12.5-645   Grounds for permit denial or revocation
   
12.5-646   Permit reissuance
   
12.5-647   Regulation of wastes from other jurisdictions
   
12.5-648   Extrajurisdictional users
   
12.5-649—12.5-650   Reserved
Division 6: Reporting Requirements
   
12.5-651   Baseline monitoring reports
   
12.5-652   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
12.5-653   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline
   
12.5-654   Periodic compliance reports for facilities discharging to the City
of Fort Worth Village Creek water reclamation facility
   
12.5-654.1   Periodic compliance reports for facilities discharging to the
Trinity River Authority Central Regional wastewater system
   
12.5-654.2   Periodic compliance reports for facilities discharging to the
Trinity River Authority Denton Creek regional wastewater system
   
12.5-655   Reports of changed conditions
   
12.5-656   Reports of accidental discharges
   
12.5-657   Reports from non-permitted users
   
12.5-658   Notification of violation based on self-monitoring
   
12.5-659   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
12.5-660   Analytical requirements
   
12.5-661   Sample collection
   
12.5-662   Date reports deemed received
   
12.5-663   Record keeping
   
12.5-664—12.5-669   Reserved
Division 7: Compliance Monitoring  and Enforcement
   
12.5-670   Inspection and sampling
   
12.5-671   Publication of users in significant noncompliance for facilities
discharging to the City of Fort Worth Village Creek water reclamation facility
   
12.5-671.1   Publication of users in significant noncompliance for facilities
discharging to the Trinity River Authority Central Regional wastewater system
   
12.5-671.2   Publication of users in significant non-compliance for facilities
discharging to the Trinity River Authority Denton Creek Regional wastewater
system
   
12.5-672   Emergency suspension of water supply and/or discharge
   
12.5-673   Non-emergency termination of water supply and/or discharge
   
12.5-674   Performance bonds
   
12.5-675   Liability insurance
   
12.5-676   Additional criminal offenses
   
12.5-677   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations for action in municipal
or state court
   
12.5-677.1   Affirmative defenses to upset only in federal court
   
12.5-677.2   Other affirmative defenses to specific prohibited discharge
standards only in federal court
   
12.5-678   Nuisance
   
12.5-679—12.5-699   Reserved
Article VII: Liquid Waste
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-700   Definitions
   
12.5-701   Administration
   
12.5-702   Purpose
   
12.5-703   Disposal fee
   
12.5-704   Reserved
Division 2: Generation, Transportation  and Disposal
   
12.5-705   Permit required
   
12.5-706   Permit application procedures
   
12.5-707   Issuance and display of permit
   
12.5-708   Grounds for permit denial
   
12.5-709   Permit conditions
   
12.5-710   Permit modification
   
12.5-711   Transporter responsibilities
   
12.5-712   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
12.5-713   Generator responsibilities
   
12.5-714   Disposer responsibilities
   
12.5-715   Additional permit holder responsibilities
   
12.5-716   Previously issued permits
   
12.5-717—12.5-729   Reserved
Division 3: Disposal Offenses
   
12.5-730   Interference with grease trap, grit trap or sanitary sewer
   
12.5-731   Bioremediation of grease traps
   
12.5-731.1   Nuisances
   
12.5-732   Cross-reference to other restrictions in this chapter
   
12.5-733—12.5-799   Reserved
Article VIII: Solid Waste and Recycling
Division 1: General Provisions
   
12.5-800   Definitions
   
12.5-801   Administration and enforcement
   
12.5-802   Operation of convenience centers
   
12.5-803   Special waste not accepted
   
12.5-804   Vehicles at convenience centers
   
12.5-805   Assumption of risk of injury at convenience centers
   
12.5-806   Waste containers required
   
12.5-807—12.5-820   Reserved
Division 2: Household Collection
   
12.5-821   City household collection service
   
12.5-822   Preparation of household garbage and rubbish for collection
   
12.5-822.1   Reserved
   
12.5-823   Preparation of yard trimmings and small bundled brush for collection
   
12.5-823.5   Preparation of brush for collection
   
12.5-824   Preparation of recyclables for collection
   
12.5-825   Placement of garbage, yard trimmings, small bundled brush, brush and
recyclables for curbside city household collection service
   
12.5-826   Placement of garbage and recyclables for carry-out city household
collection service
   
12.5-827   Maintenance and storage of carts
   
12.5-828   Bulky waste collection
   
12.5-829   Reserved
Division 3: Commercial Services
   
12.5-830   Commercial collection service in carts
   
12.5-831   Commercial waste containers
   
12.5-832   Nuisance caused by commercial waste container
   
12.5-833—12.5-839   Reserved
Division 4: Deposits, Rates and Collection
   
12.5-840   Deposits
   
12.5-841   Billing
   
12.5-841.1   Residential collection fees
   
12.5-841.2   Commercial garbage collection fees
   
12.5-842   Delinquent accounts
   
12.5-842.1   Appeal
   
12.5-842.2   Hearings
   
12.5-842.3   Continuation of water service during appeal
   
12.5-842.4   Rights and remedies of the city
   
12.5-843   Environmental protection fee
   
12.5-844   Non city waste landfill environmental fee
   
12.5-845—12.5-849   Reserved
Division 5: Private Collectors
   
12.5-850   Agreement required
   
12.5-851   Privilege agreement application
   
12.5-852   Granting of privilege agreement
   
12.5-853   Suspension or revocation
   
12.5-854   Records and reports
   
12.5-855   Penalties for violations
   
12.5-856   Payment of fees/quarterly reports/annual report
   
12.5-857   Solid waste vehicle hauling permit
   
12.5-858   Hauling permit application
   
12.5-859   Issuance of a hauling permit
   
12.5-860   Display of hauling permit
   
12.5-861   Hauling permit fees; terms
   
12.5-862   Suspension or revocation of a hauling permit
   
12.5-863   Penalties for violations
Article IX: Fill Material
Division 1: Definition of Fill Material
   
12.5-864   Definition
Division 2: Registration, Notice and  Placement of Sign
   
12.5-865   Registration
   
12.5-866   Notice
   
12.5-867   Placement of sign
Division 3: Restrictions on Placement  of Fill Material
   
12.5-868   Height and slope restrictions
   
12.5-869   Additional provisions
Division 4: Exemptions from Requirements  of Division 2
   
12.5-870   Exemptions
Division 5: Placement of Fill Material in  Rights-of-Way
   
12.5-871   Placement of fill material in existing or proposed rights-of way
Division 6: FEMA and Drainage Standards
   
12.5-872   FEMA and city storm drainage standards
   
12.5-873   Existing drainage pattern
Article X: Grading Permit
   
12.5-874   Definitions
   
12.5-875   Incorporation of stormwater criteria manual
   
12.5-876   Construction of single-family and duplex homes
   
12.5-877   Grading permit required; exemptions from grading permit requirement
   
12.5-878   Application for a grading permit; approval
   
12.5-879   Early grading permits
   
12.5-880   Additional grading requirements
   
12.5-881   Grading certificate
   
12.5-882   Permit fees
   
12.5-883   Violations
ARTICLE I: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§§ 12.5-1—12.5-99 RESERVED.
§ 12.5-100 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is the consolidation and update of the
environmental regulations of the City of Fort Worth which come under the
administrative authority of the department of environmental management, the
department of water and the department of city services.
   (b)   It is the objective of this chapter to make the city’s environmental
regulations more accessible and understandable by consolidating them and
arranging them into a more logical order, by employing a format and numbering
system designed to facilitate citation of the regulations and to accommodate
future expansion, and by providing a uniform system of enforcement.
   (c)   The user of this chapter is cautioned, however, that not all of the
city’s environmental regulations are in this chapter. The user should continue
to consult other provisions of the city code, most notably:
      (1)   The zoning code;
      (2)   The fire code, including provisions on flammable and combustible
liquids and hazardous materials,
      (3)   The Lake Worth chapter, regarding the regulation of marinas; and
      (4)   The airports and aircraft chapter, regarding noxious and corrosive
substances and aircraft fueling.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001)
§ 12.5-101 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   In this chapter the numbers of the sections begin with §
12.5-100. Each section number corresponds to the number of the article in which
the section is found. For example, all sections in
Article I are numbered in the 12.5-100s, all sections in
Article II are numbered in the 12.5-200s, and so on.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-102 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the environment code.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-103 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACCEPTABLE COMMERCIAL PILE. A brush pile produced by a commercial service
provider hired by a resident of the service unit or owner/agent of a service
unit, generated and located at that service unit and in compliance with
Chapter 12.5 but does not include brush generated by a utility service
provider.
   ACT OF GOD. War, strike, riot or other catastrophe completely outside the
user’s control.
   AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands and other non-point source agricultural
activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal
production facilities as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.24.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Waterborne liquid, gaseous or solid substances that
arise from the agricultural industry and agricultural activities, including
without limitation, agricultural animal feeding pens and lots, structures for
housing and feeding agricultural animals and processing facilities for
agricultural products. The term AGRICULTURAL WASTE does not include tail water
or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or
uncultivated range land, pasture land and farmland.
   AIR CONTAMINANT. Any particulate matter, radioactive material, dust, fumes,
gas, mist, smoke, vapor or odor, or any combination thereof, produced by
processes other than natural processes.
   AIR POLLUTION. The presence in the atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants or any combination thereof, in sufficient quantities and of such
duration as are or may tend to be injurious to or adversely affect human health
or welfare, animal life, vegetation or property, or which interferes with the
normal use and enjoyment of animal life, vegetation or property.
   ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK. A nonvehicular device that is:
      (1)   Made of nonearthen materials;
      (2)   Located on or above the surface of the ground or on or above the
surface of the floor of a structure below ground such as a mineworking,
basement or vault; and
      (3)   Designed to contain any petroleum substance, hazardous substance,
hazardous waste, or any mixture of two or more hazardous substances, and/or
petroleum substances, and/or hazardous waste.
   AMBIENT AIR. That portion of the atmosphere, external to buildings, to which
the general public has access.
   AMBIENT AIR STANDARDS. The standards for the outdoor atmosphere, adopted by
the commission, which are established by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and known as the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The executive director of the Texas commission on
environmental quality (TCEQ) where the state has been delegated NPDES permit
authority and has an approved pretreatment program.
   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY or ASSEMBLY. An
assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly
must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the City of Fort Worth
water department.
   AQUATIC MONITORING ORGANISM. The Fathead minnow Pimephales promelas, the
bacterium Photobacterium phosphoreum or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         a.   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         b.   The manager of one more manufacturing, production or operating
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or any
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above, may
designate another authorized representative if: the authorization is in
writing, specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and such
authorization is submitted to the city.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the public water
system, that may be available in a building or on any property.
   AVB. Atmospheric vacuum breaker.
   AVERAGE. The arithmetic mean of the values for samples collected over a
designated period.
   BACKFLOW.
      (1)   The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow; or
      (2)   The introduction of any foreign liquids, gases or substances into
the public water system.
   BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY. See APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).The schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and/or other management practices to
implement the prohibitions listed in §§
12.5-610,
12.5-610.1 and
12.5-610.2 of
Article VI this code and to prevent or reduce the pollution of the MS4 and
waters of the United States. BMPs shall include treatment requirements,
operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials.
   BIOREMEDIATION MEDIA. Bacterial cultures, enzymes or other media which are
designed to eliminate or reduce the need for the mechanical cleaning of grease
traps.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as parts per million (ppm) by weight
or in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BORESIGHT or BORESIGHT TO DAYLIGHT. Providing adequate drainage for backflow
prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed
drain pipe.
   BRUSH. Shrub limbs, tree limbs (up to four inches in diameter and not to
exceed eight feet in length), untreated lumber and tree trimmings resulting
from landscape maintenance and cleaning operations (other than a commercial
pile).
   BRUSH PILE. A waste pile consisting only of brush.
   BULKY WASTE COLLECTION WEEK. The week in which a service unit shall have its
bulky waste pile collected, as established by the city.
   BULKY WASTE. Furniture, treated wood, up to ten cubic yards of construction
materials generated by a service unit (and not by a commercial service
provider) as a result of a household project, mattresses and box springs,
carpet, swing sets, plastic swimming pools, small and large toys, bicycles,
fish aquariums, toilets, household appliances and other similar items, white
goods (CFC-free), large branches (being branches in excess of four inches in
diameter but less than eight feet in length), tree trunks and root balls;
provided such items do not contain hazardous waste or any waste which is not
acceptable at the designated landfill.
   BULKY WASTE PILE. A waste pile that contains bulky waste.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams or wastewater from any
portion of a user’s wastewater treatment equipment or pretreatment equipment.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Limitations on
the discharge of pollutants to the POTW, promulgated by EPA in accordance with
§ 307 of the Act, that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular
industrial categories (40 C.F.R. 403.6 and Parts 405 through 471).
   CERCLA. The Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act, 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 9601 et seq., as amended.
   C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY SANITARY LANDFILL. A controlled area of land owned or operated by the
city upon which municipal solid waste is disposed of in accordance with
standards, rules or orders established by the commission.
   CITY SOLID WASTE FACILITY. All contiguous land and its structures, other
appurtenances and improvements, used for processing, storing or disposing of
solid waste, and which is owned or operated by the city.
   CLASS 1 NONHAZARDOUS INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Waste classified as such under
Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, § 335.505.
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity
of inorganic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as
determined by the amount of oxidant consumed from a chemical reflux. Such term
does not, however, differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter,
and therefore does not necessarily correlate with BOD.
   COLLECT. As used in
Article VII of this chapter, means to remove liquid waste for transport
elsewhere, or cause such to be done.
   COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). A procedure found in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6
(e) for calculating fixed alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities
applicable when regulated process wastewater, subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard, is mixed with non-regulated wastewaters prior to
sampling.
   COMMERCIAL GARBAGE AND RUBBISH. Garbage and rubbish generated as a by-
product of any commercial operation. The term does not include swills, slops,
toxic or corrosive materials, manure or other material which is or might be
harmful to collection personnel or equipment.
   COMMERCIAL SERVICE PROVIDER. A commercial business enterprise or commercial
service provider for the maintenance of yard trimmings, leaves, trees and yard
maintenance in general.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE CONTAINER. A truck-loaded or truck-emptied non-disposable
container, commonly referred to as a dumpster, used for the collection of
commercial garbage and rubbish.
   COMMISSION. The Texas commission on environmental quality and its successor
agencies.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample that is collected over time and formed either by
continuous sampling or by mixing of discrete sampling aliquots. Composites
formed by mixing discrete sampling aliquots may be collected on a flow or time
proportional basis as follows:
      (1)   Flow proportional composite.
         a.   Composed of sampling aliquots collected at consistent time
intervals and proportioned in volume according to stream flow;
         b.   Composed of sampling aliquots of consistent volume that are
collected at time intervals proportioned according to stream flow; or
         c.   Flow proportional composite will be used only in locations that
has the capability to measure flow during the sampling period.
      (2)   Time proportional composite. Composed of discrete sampling aliquots
of representative volume collected at consistent time intervals regardless of
stream flow.
   CONTAMINATED. A harmful quantity of any substance, or as otherwise defined
by law.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   COOLING WATER.
      (1)   CONTAMINATED COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling purposes only
which may become contaminated either through the use of water treatment
chemicals used for corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with
process materials and/or wastewater.
      (2)   UNCONTAMINATED COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling purposes only
which has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate or final
product and which does not contain a level of contaminants detectably higher
than that of the intake water. Also known as NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.
   COSMETIC CLEANING. Cleaning done for cosmetic purposes. It does not include
industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with manufacturing activities,
hazardous or toxic waste cleaning, or any cleaning otherwise regulated under
federal, state or local laws.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is
actually or potentially connected with any non-potable water system, used water
system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage
reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, air conditioning unit, fire
protection system or any other assembly which contains, or may contain,
contaminated water, domestic sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe
quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies or other temporary or
permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are
considered to be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   DAILY COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The concentration of discharge of a pollutant
measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents
the calendar day for purposes of sampling.
   DC. Double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
   DDC. Double detector check valve assembly.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. The low or high hazard classification that shall be
attached to all actual or potential cross-connections.
   DISCHARGE. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or
otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or introduce any thing
into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
   DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
   DISPOSAL. As used in
Article VII of this chapter, means discharging, depositing, injecting, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing liquid waste into or onto land or water so that
the waste or any constituent thereof may be emitted into the air, discharged
into surface water or groundwater or introduced into the environment in any
other manner.
   DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any system for disposing of waste, including sewer systems
and treatment facilities.
   DISPOSER. As used in
Article VII of this chapter means a person who receives and processes, or
disposes of liquid waste.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE (or SEWAGE). Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes
washing, bathing, showers, dish washing and food preparation), other wastewater
from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories and institutions, that is free from industrial
waste.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (or DOUBLE CHECK ASSEMBLY or
DOUBLE CHECK). An assembly which consists of two independently operating check
valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a
gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks
for tightness.
   DRINKING WATER. Water distributed for human consumption, for use in
preparing food or beverages, or for use in cleaning a utensil or article used
in preparing food or beverages for, or consuming food or beverages by, human
beings.
   EARTH AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Earth, rocks, concrete, roofing materials,
materials from demolished houses or other structures, trash and materials from
an unimproved lot, and materials resulting from new residential and commercial
construction and remodeling by a building contractor, roofing contractor or
landscaping contractor.
   EMISSION. The release into the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants or combinations thereof.
   ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGER. The city’s director of the department of
environmental management and the director’s authorized representative.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge to the POTW, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act, as amended (33
U.S.C. § 1317).
   EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USER. A significant industrial user or monitored user,
other than a local government, which is located outside the corporate limits of
the city, and which discharges or plans to discharge to the POTW.
   FACILITY. All contiguous property owned, operated, leased or under the
control of the same person. The contiguous property may be divided by a public
or private right-of-way.
   FIRE CODE. The Fire Prevention and Protection chapter of the city code.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The fire department of the City of Fort Worth, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.
   FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or
extinguish a fire.
   FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGE (FWA). A procedure used to calculate alternative
limits where wastestreams regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard and
other wastestreams combine after treatment but prior to the monitoring point.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food is manufactured, packaged,
produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended
or otherwise handled. The term includes any such place regardless of whether
there is a charge for the food. The term does not include private homes where
food is prepared or served for guests and individual family consumption.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials and/or residue
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce
and other food products.
   GENERATOR. As used in
Article VII of this chapter, means a person whose act or process produces a
liquid waste or first causes it to be regulated.
   GOVERNING ENTITY. A lawful governmental entity that has the having
jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes and/or
jurisdiction over indirect discharges to and discharges from such a treatment
works.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample which is collected without regard to the
flow in the wastestream over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   GRAY WATER. Wastewater from clothes- washing machines, showers, bathtubs,
hand-washing lavatories and sinks that are not used for disposal of chemical or
chemical-biological ingredients.
   GREASE TRAP. An interceptor placed in a drainage system to separate and
retain grease prior to it entering the sanitary sewer, and includes such
interceptors in hotels and motels, restaurants and other food establishments,
schools, commercial kitchens, slaughterhouses, meat packing plants, soap
factories, fat rendering plants and similar facilities.
   GRIT TRAP (SAND TRAP). An interceptor placed in a drainage system at
maintenance and repair shops, automobile service stations, car washes,
laundries and other similar facilities, to separate and retain undesirable
matter and deleterious materials prior to it entering the sanitary sewer.
   HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of
waters of the state, waters of the United States, or that will cause lethal or
sub-lethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring
organisms belonging to the city, upon their exposure to samples of any
discharge into waters of the state, waters of the United States or the MS4.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.
      (1)   Means:
         a.   A substance designated under § 311(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. § 1321);
         b.   An element, compound, mixture, solution or substance designated
under § 102 of CERCLA, as amended (42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.);
         c.   A hazardous waste having the characteristics identified under or
listed under § 3001 of the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. § 6921),
excluding waste, the regulation of which under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal
Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.) has been suspended by an Act of Congress;
         d.   A toxic pollutant listed under § 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317);
         e.   A hazardous air pollutant listed under § 112 of the Federal Clean
Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 7412); or
         f.   Any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with
respect to which the administrator of the EPA has taken action under § 7 of the
Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2606).
      (2)   The term does not include:
         a.   Petroleum, which means crude oil or any fraction of crude oil
that is not otherwise specifically listed or designated as a hazardous
substance under subsection (1)a. through (1)f. above;
         b.   Natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas, or
synthetic gas usable for fuel mixtures of natural gas and synthetic gas; or
         c.   Waste materials that result from activities associated with the
exploration, development or production of oil or gas or geothermal resources or
any other substance or material regulated by the Texas railroad commission
under the Tex. Natural Resources Code, Chapter 91.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste
by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), as amended.
   HIGH HAZARD. The classification assigned to a cross-connection that could
potentially allow a substance that may cause illness or death to a person to
backflow into the potable water supply.
   HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE AND RUBBISH. Garbage and rubbish generated by occupants of
premises used exclusively for residential purposes.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid waste generated in single-family and
multifamily dwellings by a consumer, which except for the exclusion provided in
40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R., Part 261.
   HUMAN CONSUMPTION. Uses by humans in which water can be ingested into or
absorbed by the human body. Examples of these include, but are not limited to,
drinking, cooking, brushing teeth, bathing, washing hands, preparing foods and
washing dishes, utensils, and other articles used in the preparation or
consumption of food.
   INCOMPATIBLE WASTES. Wastes which have different processing, storage or
disposal requirements.
   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to a
process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from
any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE. Solid waste from health care, research and veterinary
facilities that contains pathogens or biologically active material which,
because of its type, concentration and quantity is capable of transmitting
disease and which is comprised of any of the following:
      (1)   Animal waste (includes carcasses, body parts, bedding and whole
bulk blood or other blood components of animals intentionally exposed to
pathogens);
      (2)   Bulk blood and blood products (includes all waste bulk human blood,
serum, plasma and other blood components);
      (3)   Microbiological waste (includes cultures and stocks of infectious
agents and associated biologicals, cultures from laboratories, discarded
vaccines, disposable culture dishes and disposable devices used to transfer,
inoculate and mix cultures);
      (4)   Pathological wastes (includes, but is not limited to, human
materials including body parts, tissues and/or fluids removed from a body, and
anatomical remains); or
      (5)   Sharps (includes the following materials when contaminated:
hypodermic needles and syringes with attached needles; scalpels and razor
blades used for medical procedures; pasteur pipettes; and broken glass from
laboratories).
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge to the POTW, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (1)   Causes a violation of the POTW’s TPDES permit; or
      (2)   Prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or
any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the Act; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   KRAFT BAG. A biodegradable, multi-layer paper collection bag specifically
designed for yard trimmings.
   LAKE WORTH WATERSHED. Lake Worth and its tributaries located between Lake
Worth Dam and a point 4.0 kilometers downstream from Eagle Mountain Dam.
   LEAD-ACID BATTERY. A secondary or storage battery that uses lead as the
electrode and acid as the electrolyte and is used to generate electrical
current.
   LIQUID WASTE. Water-borne solids, liquids and gaseous substances located in
or removed from grease traps or grit traps, or septage located in or removed
from septic tanks, cesspools, portable toilets, Type III marine sanitation
devices or similar facilities. It does not include hazardous waste or Class 1
nonhazardous industrial solid waste.
   LIQUID WASTE FACILITY. A grease trap, grit trap, septic tank, cesspool,
portable toilet, Type III marine sanitation device or similar facility.
   LOW HAZARD. The classification assigned to a cross-connection that could
potentially allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to a
person’s health to backflow into the potable water supply.
   MAXIMUM DAILY AVERAGE. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a
discharge as determined from a laboratory test of a daily composite sample.
   MAXIMUM GRAB. The maximum concentration of a substance allowed in a
discharge as determined from a laboratory test of a grab sample.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   mg/l (MILLIGRAMS PER LITER). An expression of concentration as a weight-to-
volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall
be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
   MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING. Power washing, steam cleaning and any
other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces,
engaged in for commercial purposes.
   MONITORING WELL. An artificial excavation constructed to measure or monitor
the quantity or movement of substances, elements, chemicals or fluids below the
surface of the ground. The term shall not include any monitoring well which is
used in conjunction with the production of oil, gas or any other minerals.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of daily discharges
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
   MOTOR FUEL. A petroleum substance which is typically used for the operation
of internal combustion engines (including stationary engines and engines used
in transportation vehicles and marine vessels), and which is one of the
following types of fuels: leaded or unleaded gasoline, aviation gasoline,
Number 1 diesel fuel, Number 2 diesel fuel and any grades of gasohol.
   MOTOR VEHICLE FLUID. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission
fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/
alcohol blend and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, human- made channels or storm drains) owned and operated by
the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which
is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to
municipal, community, commercial, institutional or recreational activities, and
includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE. Waterborne liquid, gaseous or solid substances that result
from any discharge from a publicly owned sewer system, treatment facility or
disposal system.
   NEW SOURCE. As used in
Article VI of this chapter, means:
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants to the POTW, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water
Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of subsection (1)b. or (1)c. above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NON-POINT SOURCE. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
“point source.”
   NONRESIDENTIAL USE. Shall include all uses not specifically included in
“residential use.”
   NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user that
discharges into the Village Creek, Water Reclamation Facility or the Trinity
River Authority Central Regional Wastewater System, and who is subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and meets the criteria, as determined solely
by the director:
      (1)   Has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (2)   Annually submits the certification statement required in §
12.5-633(b) together with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and
      (3)   Never discharges any categorical process wastewater into the
sanitary sewer (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard).
   NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS). A system (updated
every five years) used by the federal government for collecting and organizing
industry-related statistics.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   OIL. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum,
fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with
waste.
   OPERATE. Drive, conduct, work, run, manage or control.
   OTHER WASTE. As that term is used in the definition of pollutant in this
section, means garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand,
lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dyestuffs, acids, chemicals, salt water
or any other substance, other than sewage, industrial waste, municipal waste,
recreational waste or agricultural waste.
   OVERLOAD. The discharge of BOD/COD, solids or wastewater volume in excess of
the POTW’s capacity.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state or
waters of the United States and which, alone or in conjunction with quantities
or concentrations from other sources, cause a violation of any requirement of
the POTW’s TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   PAY BAG. A specially designated garbage bag purchased from the city prior to
its use, for disposal of garbage and refuse and placed outside the cart.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   PETROLEUM SUBSTANCE. A crude oil or any refined or unrefined fraction or
derivative of crude oil which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature
and pressure. A PETROLEUM SUBSTANCE shall be limited to one or a combination of
the substances or mixtures in the following list except for any listed
substance regulated as a hazardous waste under RCRA:
      (1)   Basic petroleum substances - crude oils, crude oil fractions,
petroleum feedstocks and petroleum fractions;
      (2)   Motor fuels;
      (3)   Aviation gasolines - Grade 80, Grade 100 and Grade 100-LL;
      (4)   Aviation jet fuels - Jet A, Jet A-1, Jet B, JP-4, JP-5 and JP-8;
      (5)   Distillate fuel oils - Number 1-D, Number 1, Number 2-D and Number
2;
      (6)   Residual fuel oils - Number 4-D, Number 4-light, Number 4, Number
5-light, Number 5-heavy and Number 6;
      (7)   Gas-turbine fuel oils - Grade 0-GT, Grade 1-GT, Grade 2-GT, Grade
3-GT and Grade 4-GT;
      (8)   Illuminating oils - Kerosene, mineral seal oil, long-time burning
oils, 300 oil and mineral colza oil;
      (9)   Solvents - Stoddard solvent, petroleum spirits, mineral spirits,
petroleum ether, varnish maker’s and painter’s napthas, petroleum extender oils
and commercial hexane;
      (10)   Lubricants - Automotive and industrial lubricants;
      (11)   Building materials - Liquid asphalt and dust-laying oils;
      (12)   Insulating and waterproofing materials - Transformer oils and
cable oils;
      (13)   Used oils; and
      (14)   Any other petroleum based material having physical and chemical
properties similar to the previously listed materials and receiving approval by
the executive director of the commission for designation as a petroleum
substance.
   pH. The logarithm to the base ten of the reciprocal of the concentration in
grams per liter of hydrogen ions; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
solution, expressed in standard units.
   PLUMBING CODE. The plumbing chapter of the city code.
   PLUMBING HAZARD. An internal or plumbing-type cross-connection in a
consumer’s potable water system than may be either a pollution or a
contamination hazard.
   POINT OF USE ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention within a
consumer’s water system at the point at which a cross-connection exists.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernable, confined and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash;
sewage (including sewage from boats); garbage; sewage sludge; munitions;
medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials; toxic materials;
radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar
dirt; industrial, municipal, recreational, agricultural and other waste; and
certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). It shall not mean sewage sludge, rock,
sand, dredged spoil or cellar dirt when said material is used by the city for
fill or reuse.
   POLLUTED WATER. As used in
Article V, Division 2 of this chapter, means water or liquid waste containing
any of the following:
      (1)   Harmful quantities of free or emulsified grease or oil;
      (2)   Phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving
water;
      (3)   Harmful quantities of toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution;
      (4)   Noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases, liquids or solids;
      (5)   More than ten mg/l of total suspended solids (TSS), biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) or both;
      (6)   Color, either true or apparent, exceeding 50 units as measured by
the Platinum-Cobalt Method;
      (7)   More than 500 mg/l of dissolved solids, or more than 250 mg/l of
chlorides or more than 250 mg/l sulfates;
      (8)   A pH value of less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0; or
      (9)   Any water or wastewater not approved for discharge into the waters
of the state by the commission or the EPA.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or water of the
United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental or injurious to
humans, animal life, vegetation or property, or to the public health, safety or
welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any
lawful or reasonable purpose.
   POLLUTION HAZARD. As used in
Article V, Division 3, means an actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the public water system or the potability of the public or a
consumer’s potable water system but which would not constitute a health or
system hazard. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the
potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a
nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the
system or its appurtenances.
   POTABLE WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic use.
   POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water
Act, as amended, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) as amended, owned by the city or governing
entity, including any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any sewers, pipes and other conveyances which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant.
   PREMISES ISOLATION. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service
connection between the public water system and the water user.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user of the POTW, other than a pretreatment
standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act, as
amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), which applies to industrial users of the
POTW. It includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40
C.F.R. Part 403.5, § 12.610(c) of the city code and categorical pretreatment
standards and local limits.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Water that comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, waste product or wastewater.
   PUBLIC TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any can, box, tub or barrel placed on city right-
of-way by the city, by a person at the city’s direction, or by a person through
contract with the city, such receptacles being used for disposal of garbage or
rubbish by the general public.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Any public or privately owned water system which
supplies water for human consumption. The system includes all services,
reservoirs, facilities and equipment used in the process of producing,
treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Organic wastes, such as garbage, wastewater treatment
plant sludge and grease trap waste, that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause odors or gases or is
capable of providing food for or attracting birds, animals and disease vectors.
   PVB. Pressure vacuum breaker.
   RCRA. The Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C.A. §§
6901 et seq., as amended.
   RECREATIONAL WASTE. Waterborne liquid, gaseous or solid substances emanate
from any public or private park, beach or recreational area.
   RECYCLABLES. Material that has been recovered or diverted from the
nonhazardous solid waste stream for purposes of recycling a substantial portion
of which is consistently used in the manufacture of products which may
otherwise be produced using raw or virgin materials.
   RECYCLING. A process by which materials that are scrapped, discarded, used,
surplus or obsolete, are collected, separated or processed and returned to use
in the form of raw materials in the production of new products.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility in which recyclables are collected or removed
from the waste stream for transport off-site for recycling. It shall not
include facilities within a residential, commercial or industrial premises for
the collection of recyclables from solid waste generated on such premises.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or REDUCED PRESSURE
PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY or RP ASSEMBLY or RP. An assembly containing two
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-
operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The
assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off
valves at the end of the assembly.
   REGULATED ASBESTOS-CONTAINING MATERIAL (RACM). Has the meaning set forth in
40 C.F.R. § 61.141.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCE. As used in
Article I, Division 4 of this chapter, means an element, compound, mixture,
solution or substance that, when released into the environment, may present
substantial danger to the public health, welfare or the environment. A
REGULATED SUBSTANCE shall be limited to any petroleum substance, hazardous
substance, hazardous waste, and any mixture of two or more hazardous
substances, and/or petroleum substances, and/or hazardous waste.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into
groundwater, subsurface soils, surface soils, the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4), the water of the state, the waters of the United States.
   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE. A sample representative of the daily operations of a
user of the POTW. It may be obtained using 24-hour composite sampling, either
on a time proportional or a flow proportional basis. Grab samples may be used
if the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent discharged.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. Single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing and
apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in
cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time
dwellings.
   ROADWAY. That portion of city right-of-way designed for vehicular travel,
exclusive of the shoulder.
   RP. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of:
      (1)   Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar
materials; or
      (2)   Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600°F to 1800°F).
   SANITARY SEWER or SEWER. The system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances
which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, to the POTW (and to which stormwater, surface
water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
   SCRAP TIRE. A tire that can no longer be used for its original intended
purpose.
   SEPTAGE. Either liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank,
cesspool, portable toilet, Type III marine sanitation device or similar sewage
treatment system.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The point of delivery of water to a customer at which
the water purveyor loses control of the water.
   SERVICE UNIT. A dwelling unit and all occupants that currently set out their
household solid waste for collection by the city.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. As used in
Article VI of this chapter, means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the event of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   SIGNIFICANT CHANGE. As used in
Article VI of this chapter, means an increase or decrease in the volume of
wastewater discharged by 20% or greater from the data submitted in the permit
application, or the deletion or addition of any pollutant regulated by this
article or a permit issued pursuant to this article. Volumes shall be measured
by the water service meter, a verifiable estimate or a permanently installed
effluent flow meter approved by the director.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (2) of this definition,
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS means:
         a.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
         b.   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater); contributes a process
wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the
director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6)).
      (2)   Upon a finding by the director that an industrial user who meets
the definition of non-significant categorical industrial user but has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation by violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may at any time, on his
or her own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial
user, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such
industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
   SITE OPERATING PLAN. As used in
Article VIII of this chapter, means a document which provides guidance to city
solid waste facility management and operating personnel in sufficient detail to
enable them to conduct day-to-day operations throughout the life of the site in
a manner consistent with the site development plan and the regulations
established by the commission.
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE.
      (1)   Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a
violation of the discharge standards prescribed by law;
      (2)   Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through; or
      (3)   Any discharge which or in any other way violates the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   SMALL BUNDLED BRUSH. Brush that is cut, bundled and tied, with no limbs
exceeding four inches in diameter, and four feet in length and such bundle not
exceeding 40 pounds, but not including bulky waste items.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, recyclables, sludge from a waste
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control
facility, and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial,
mining and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional
activities, but does not include:
      (1)   Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or
dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject
to regulation by permit issued pursuant to the Tex. Water Code Chapter 26;
      (2)   Soil, dirt, rock, sand and other natural or human-made inert solid
materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land
suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or
      (3)   Waste materials which result from activities associated with the
exploration, development or production of oil and gas and are subject to
control by the railroad commission of Texas.
   SPECIAL WASTE. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that because
of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics, or
biological properties requires special handling and disposal to protect the
human health or the environment. If improperly handled, transported, processed
or disposed of or otherwise managed, it may pose a present or potential danger
to the human health or the environment. SPECIAL WASTES are:
      (1)   Hazardous wastes;
      (2)   Class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes;
      (3)   Infectious wastes;
      (4)   Municipal wastewater treatment plant sludges, other type domestic
sewage treatment plant sludges and water-supply treatment plant sludges;
      (5)   Septic tank pumpings;
      (6)   Grease and grit trap wastes;
      (7)   Wastes from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants;
air pollution control facilities; and tanks, drums or containers used for
shipping or storing any material that has been listed as a hazardous
constituent in 40 C.F.R., Part 261, Appendix VIII, but has not been listed as a
commercial chemical product in 40 C.F.R. § 261.33(e) or (f);
      (8)   Slaughterhouse wastes;
      (9)   Dead animals;
      (10)   Drugs, contaminated foods or contaminated beverages other than
those contained in normal household waste;
      (11)   Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide or rodenticide)
containers;
      (12)   Discarded materials containing asbestos;
      (13)   Incinerator ash;
      (14)   Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils or chemicals;
      (15)   Used oil;
      (16)   Light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated
biphenyl (PCB) compounds;
      (17)   Waste from oil, gas and geothermal activities subject to
regulation by the Texas railroad commission when those wastes are to be
processed, treated or disposed of at a solid waste management facility
permitted under Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 330;
      (18)   Waste generated outside the boundaries of Texas that contains any
industrial waste; any waste associated with oil, gas and geothermal
exploration, production or development activities; or any special waste;
      (19)   Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage,
refuse or rubbish;
      (20)   Lead-acid storage batteries;
      (21)   Used oil filters from internal combustion engines;
      (22)   Liquids;
      (23)   Automobile bodies and parts;
      (24)   Wastes in drums;
      (25)   Household hazardous wastes as follows: explosives, paints,
solvents, pesticides and household chemical products; and
      (26)   Used or scrap tires.
   SOURCE. As used in
Article II of this chapter, means a point of origin of air contaminants,
whether privately or publicly owned or operated.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE (SIC). A four-digit number used by
the Bureau of Census as part of a system to categorize and track the types of
business activities conducted in the United States. The first two digits of the
code represent the major industry group and the second two digits represent the
specific subset of that group.
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or a consumer’s potable water supply, or an
actual or potential threat of pollution or contamination that would have a
detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   TESTER. As used in
Article V, Division 3, of this chapter, means a person that is a certified
backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the
director of the department of water.
   THERMAL EXPANSION. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
   TPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by the state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group or general area-wide basis.
   TRANSFER STATION. A fixed facility used for transferring solid waste from
collection vehicles to long-haul vehicles.
   TRANSPORT. As used in
Article VII of this chapter, means to carry liquid waste by vehicle from one
place to another, or to cause such to be done.
   TRANSPORTER. As used in
Article VII of this chapter, means a person who collects or transports liquid
waste, or causes such to be done.
   TREATMENT FACILITY. Any plant, disposal field, lagoon, incinerator, area
devoted to sanitary landfills or other facility installed for the purpose of
treating, neutralizing or stabilizing waste.
   TREATMENT PLANT. See WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.
   TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface or,
are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are
generally removable by a laboratory filtration device. TSS is expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   UNACCEPTABLE COMMERCIAL PILE. Any commercial pile that is not an acceptable
commercial pile.
   UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK. Any one or combination of underground tanks and
any connecting underground pipes used to contain an accumulation of regulated
substances, the volume of which, including the volume of the connecting
underground pipes, is 10% or more beneath the surface of the ground.
   U.S.C. The United States Code.
   USED OIL or USED MOTOR OIL. Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or
a synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties.
   USED TIRE. Any tire that has been mounted upon a wheel and utilized for any
period of time, or any tire that cannot be legally described as new.
   USED WATER. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user’s system
after it has passed through the service connection.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway.
   VIOLATION BAG TAG. A tag placed on bags or boxes that are outside a garbage
or recycling cart and placed there by the city to indicate to the service unit
that a violation of
Chapter 12.5 has occurred and that a service charged shall be applied to that
service unit’s water bill.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of domestic sewage and industrial waste.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any groundwater, streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at
40 C.F.R. § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
   WHOLESALE CUSTOMER. A utility customer of the city which is a municipality,
town, village or other governmental entity, or a private firm contracting with
a governmental entity for the provision of water and/or wastewater treatment
service.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
15463, §§ 1, 2, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 15496, §§ 1, 2, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
16189, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-26-2004; Ord. 17074, § 1, passed 7-25-2006; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 1, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 1, passed 11-19-
2024, eff. 11-29-2024; Ord. 27966-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-
2025)
§ 12.5-104 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
AVB    Atmospheric vacuum breaker
BMP    Best management practices
BOD    Biochemical oxygen demand
°C    Degrees Celsius (Centigrade)
CERCLA Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
COD    Chemical oxygen demand
CWF    Combined wastestream formula
DC     Double check valve
DDC    Double detector check valve
EPA    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
°F    Degrees Fahrenheit
FWA    Flow weighted average
gpd    Gallons per day
mg/l   Milligrams per liter
MS4    Municipal separate storm sewer system
NPDES  National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW   Publicly owned treatment works
PVB    Pressure vacuum breaker
RCRA   Resource conservation and recovery act
RP     Reduced pressure principle
TAC    Texas Administrative Code
TCEQ   Texas commission on environmental quality
TOMP   Toxic organic management plan
TPDES  Texas pollutant discharge elimination system
TRA    Trinity River authority
TRC    Technical review criteria
TSS    Total suspended solids
TTO    Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
 
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 3, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-105 INCORPORATION OF FEDERAL AND STATE STATUTES, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   A reference within this environment code to a federal or state statute, rule
or regulation includes all amendments to such statute, rule or regulation made
after the adoption of the environment code.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
DIVISION 2: DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
§ 12.5-106 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT.
   There is hereby created a department of environmental management.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-107 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT.
   The department of environmental management shall be headed by a person to be
known as the director of environmental management. The director may also be
referred to as the environmental manager.
   (a)   With respect to the city’s compliance with environmental laws, the
director and the director’s authorized representatives may do the following:
      (1)   Monitor compliance with ambient air quality standards, and
coordinate efforts with the North Central Texas Council of Governments, the
Texas natural resource conservation commission and the Environmental Protection
Agency;
      (2)   Inspect city properties for the presence of asbestos,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and other hazardous substances, and develop
and administer whatever remediation programs are required;
      (3)   Audit city departments to determine whether the city is in
compliance with federal and state environmental laws; whether the city has
obtained all permits required by federal and state environmental laws; and
whether the city is in compliance with the permits it has;
      (4)   Audit use of hazardous substances and pesticides by city
departments to determine compliance with environmental laws and to recommend
alternative materials where practicable;
      (5)   Register and monitor underground and aboveground storage tanks
owned by the city, and implement any necessary remediation of leaking tanks and
contaminated soils and groundwater;
      (6)   Administer the transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of
hazardous wastes generated by the city; maintain a central filing system for
the manifests and other records created in response to such wastes; and monitor
hazardous waste facilities which receive the city’s RCRA hazardous waste for
treatment or disposal;
      (7)   Administer the city’s compliance with its NPDES permit to discharge
from the municipal separate storm sewer system;
      (8)   Provide assistance to the department of water regarding the
protection of drinking water and surface water bodies which are a source of the
city’s drinking water;
      (9)   Administer the collection, transportation and disposal of solid
waste and the “Keep Fort Worth Beautiful” Program, for the purpose of reducing
litter in the community to an acceptable level, coordinating activities with
the private sector and utilizing volunteers to carry out the objectives;
      (10)   Monitor the city’s compliance with all federal, state and local
environmental laws; except that:
         a.   Administering the city’s compliance with state and federal laws
relating to discharge from the POTW is the responsibility of the department of
water;
         b.   Administering the city’s compliance with state and federal laws
relating to the production and distribution of drinking water is the
responsibility of the department of water; and
         c.   Administering the alternate fuels program for the city’s fleet
vehicles is the responsibility of the property management department.
         d.   [Reserved.]
      (11)   Administer the storage and disposal of medical wastes generated by
the city’s health and fire departments; and
      (12)   Perform such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the
city manager.
   (b)   With respect to enforcement, the director and his or her authorized
representatives may do the following:
      (1)   Investigate violations of and enforce the Texas Clean Air Act,
being Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 382;
      (2)   Investigate violations of and enforce those aspects of the Tex.
Water Code Chapter 26, which are within the authority of local governments;
      (3)   Investigate violations of and enforce the Texas Litter Abatement
Act, being Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 365. This, however, does not
diminish the authority of the director of code compliance regarding litter
abatement as set forth in
Appendix B of the city code;
      (4)   Investigate violations of and enforce this chapter;
      (5)   Investigate violations of and enforce those provisions of the fire
prevention and protection chapter of the code of the city that relate to
hazardous substances and underground storage tanks, although primary
enforcement will remain with the fire chief;
      (6)   Investigate all other violations of and enforce environmental laws
within the city and within the city’s extended jurisdiction; and
      (7)   Perform other unlimited environmental activities as may be required
to ensure compliance of environmental regulations by city departments and
others within the city and its extended jurisdiction.
   (c)   With respect to other programs, the director and his or her authorized
representatives may do the following:
      (1)   Monitor and coordinate with other city departments on the city’s
response to releases of hazardous substances;
      (2)   Advise the zoning commission, board of adjustment and department of
planning and development regarding the location of facilities which have a
potentially significant impact on the city’s environment;
      (3)   Review and assess the environmental hazards of real property
involved in city land transactions;
      (4)   Monitor the use of city rights-of-way, property and easements by
persons with use agreements for environmental monitoring;
      (5)   Establish and supervise a program for the collection of household
hazardous waste; and
      (6)   Create educational programs on environmental protection.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
17522, § 5, passed 4-27-2007; Ord. 21650-02-2015, § 7, passed 2-17-2015)
§§ 12.5-108—12.5-110 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: ENFORCEMENT
§ 12.5-111 ENFORCEMENT OPTIONS.
   (a)   In this division the term DIRECTOR shall mean the director of the
department of environmental management, the director of the department of
water, the director of the department of city services, or the authorized
representative of any of said directors.
   (b)   The primary administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be
divided as follows:
      (1)   Department of environmental management:
         a.   
Article I, Division 4 - Environmental Use Agreements;
         b.   
Article II - Air Quality;
         c.   
Article III - Stormwater;
         d.   
Article IV - Groundwater and Surface Water Quality;
         e.   
Article IX - Fill Material; and
         f.   
Article X - Grading Permit.
      (2)   Department of water:
         a.   
Article V - Public Drinking Water;
         b.   
Article VI - Industrial Wastewater; and
         c.   
Article VII - Liquid Waste.
      (3)   Department of city services:
Article VIII - Solid Waste and Recycling.
   (c)   When a director determines that a violation of this chapter over which
the director has jurisdiction has occurred or is occurring, the following
remedies are available to such director. The remedies provided for in this
section or elsewhere in this chapter are not exclusive. A director may take
any, all or any combination of these actions against a violator, consecutively
or concurrently:
      (1)   Issuance of a warning notice;
      (2)   Issuance of one or more citations;
      (3)   Issuance of a notice of violation;
      (4)   Execution of a consent order;
      (5)   Issuance of a compliance order;
      (6)   A show cause hearing;
      (7)   A stop work order;
      (8)   Nuisance abatement, if applicable;
      (9)   Permit suspension or revocation proceedings, if applicable;
      (10)   Suspension of utility service or MS4 access as provided in
Articles III,
V and
VI;
      (11)   Request the city attorney to institute suit for civil remedies as
provided by this article, or state or federal law; or
      (12)   Any other remedy provided in this chapter.
   (d)   Nuisances as defined under this chapter may be enforced by any of the
above options with the exception of citations, unless the nuisance is also a
defined criminal offense.
   (e)   If two or more directors have concurrent jurisdiction over the
provisions of this chapter, they shall strive to coordinate their enforcement
efforts to the degree practicable.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
26964-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-1-2024)
§ 12.5-112 CRIMINAL CITATION.
   A director is authorized to issue citations for violations of those
provisions of this chapter over which he or she has enforcement authority. A
director is also authorized to issue citations for violations of state
environmental laws which are punishable only by a fine not to exceed the
jurisdictional limits of the Fort Worth municipal court, unless such authority
is denied under state law.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-113 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   When a director finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the director may
issue to such person a written notice of violation.
   (b)   No later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, the violator
shall submit to the issuing director an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention of a reoccurrence of the
violation. Such plan shall include specific actions to be taken by the
violator.
   (c)   If the violator denies that any violation occurred, or contends that
no corrective action is necessary, he or she shall submit to the director no
later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice, a written explanation of
the basis of any such denial or contention.
   (d)   Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves a violator
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.
   (e)   Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-114 CONSENT ORDER.
   (a)   A director may enter into a consent order, assurance of voluntary
compliance, or similar agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance
with any provision of this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder.
   (b)   Such agreement may include specific action to be taken by the violator
to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the agreement.
   (c)   Such agreements have the same force and effect of compliance orders
and remediation, abatement and restoration orders, and shall be judicially
enforceable.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-115 COMPLIANCE ORDER.
   (a)   When a director finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, or any permit or order issued
hereunder, such director may issue a compliance order to the violator,
directing the violator to come into compliance within a specified time limit.
   (b)   Compliance orders may contain other requirements to address
noncompliance, including additional management practices and self-monitoring to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged.
   (c)   A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established by a state or federal standard or requirement.
   (d)   A compliance order shall not relieve a violator of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation.
   (e)   A person receiving a compliance order may file a written notice of
appeal with the director, no later than the tenth day after receipt of the
order. Such notice of appeal shall include an explanation as to why the person
believes the enforcement action should not be taken.
   (f)   Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-116 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (a)   A director may order any person who has violated or who continues to
violate any provision of this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder,
to appear and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
   (b)   A hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 1, passed 3-25-2003)
§§ 12.5-117 RESERVED.
§ 12.5-118 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (a)   Whenever a director finds that any operator of a construction site has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any permit
or order issued thereunder, such director may order that a stop work order be
issued to the operator, posted at the construction site, and distributed to all
city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site.
   (b)   Unless express written exception is made by such director, the stop
work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and
shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a
building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development
plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy at the site.
   (c)   A person receiving an order under this section may file a written
notice of appeal with the director who issued it, no later than the tenth day
after receipt of the order. Such notice shall include an explanation as to why
the person believes the enforcement action should not be taken.
   (d)   Issuance of a stop work order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-119 RECONSIDERATION AND HEARING.
   (a)   Reconsideration.
      (1)   Any person subject to: a denial of a permit issued under this
chapter; a compliance order; a stop work order; an emergency suspension of
utility service; or any other enforcement action in this chapter which allows
for reconsideration and hearing under this section, may petition the director
who took such action to reconsider the basis for the action. In order for the
petition to be considered, it shall be filed with such director no later than
the tenth day after receipt of the notice/order.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative
reconsideration or reviews of the action.
      (3)   In its petition, the petitioner shall indicate the provisions of
the action objected to, and the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that
are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner’s view of the facts,
any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether
the petitioner requests a hearing on its petition.
      (4)   The effect of a compliance order or stop work order shall be stayed
pending the director’s reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing
thereon, unless the director expressly makes a written determination to the
contrary. The effect of an emergency suspension of utilities shall not be
stayed pending the director’s reconsideration or any hearing, unless the
director expressly and in writing stays the emergency order.
      (5)   Within a reasonable time of the submittal of a petition for
reconsideration, the director shall either grant the petition and withdraw or
modify the order or modify or grant the permit accordingly; deny the petition
if no material issue of fact is raised; or if a hearing has been requested and
a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
   (b)   Hearings.
      (1)   A director may also set a hearing if the director determines that a
show cause hearing should be conducted, if grounds exist to revoke or suspend a
permit issued under this chapter, or if grounds exist to terminate utilities on
a nonemergency basis.
      (2)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the petitioner/
violator at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   Notice that is mailed shall be deemed received five days after it
is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States postal service.
      (5)   No decision may be rendered at a hearing by reason of the
petitioner/violator’s failure to appear unless proof of actual service is
shown.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
      (7)   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a
Saturday, Sunday or a city- recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next
regular city business day.
      (8)   The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this
section shall be deemed to be the date it is signed.
      (9)   Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. The
city shall have the burden of proof in all hearings except permit denial
hearings. In permit denial hearings the burden of proof shall be on the
petitioner.
      (10)   The director shall act as the hearings officer.
      (11)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written
decision without undue delay.
      (12)   A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the
petitioner/violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-120 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (a)   Unless specifically stated otherwise, any nuisance as defined within
this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance if it exists within the corporate
limits of the city or within 5,000 feet of such limits.
   (b)   A director may give notice to cease, abate, remove or otherwise remedy
a nuisance immediately to:
      (1)   The owner of property upon which a nuisance is located or from
which a nuisance originated or is emanating. If the person creating, allowing
or maintaining the nuisance is not the owner of the property, notice shall also
be given to such person; and
      (2)   Any person creating, allowing or maintaining a nuisance.
   (c)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner/person in writing; or
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner/person at the owner’s/person’s
post office address and sent certified mail, return receipt requested. However,
if personal or certified mail service cannot be obtained or the owner’s/
person’s post office address is unknown, notice may be given:
         a.   By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least
twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the nuisance relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the nuisance relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (d)   The notice may order the owner/person to undertake and implement any
appropriate action:
      (1)   To remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the nuisance upon
the MS4, the waters of the state, the waters of the United States or any other
aspect of the environment; and/or
      (2)   To restore any part of the MS4, the waters of the state, the waters
of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment that has been
harmed.
   (e)   Such remedial, abatement and restoration action may include, but not
be limited to:
      (1)   Monitoring, assessment and evaluation of the adverse effects and
determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement and/or restoration action;
      (2)   Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment and disposal of any
discharged or released pollution or contamination;
      (3)   Prevention, minimization and/or mitigation of any damage to the
public health, welfare or the environment that may result from the nuisance;
and
      (4)   Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources
damaged by the nuisance.
   (f)   The notice may direct that the remediation, abatement and/or
restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this section
does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation.
   (g)   If the owner/person does not comply with the notice within ten days of
service, the director may enter any public or private property containing the
nuisance and do any work necessary to abate the nuisance, except the demolition
of buildings.
   (h)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by a
director to protect the environment or the public health, safety or welfare
from an imminent and substantial endangerment, such director may, without
complying with the notice provisions of this section or without waiting the
ten-day period, enter the subject property and do or cause to be done any work
necessary to abate the nuisance and remediate and restore the environment.
   (i)   After abating the nuisance, the director may inform the owner/person
in a notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner/
person commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger
to the environment or to the public health and safety on or before the first
anniversary date of the original notice, the city may without further notice
correct the violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the
owner’s property.
   (j)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance and remediate and
restore the environment, including the cost of giving notice as required, shall
be initially paid by the city and charged to the owner of the property.
   (k)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director causing the
abatement shall file a statement of expenses with the county clerk for the
county in which the property is located. The lien statement shall state the
name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The
lien shall be security for the costs incurred and interest accruing at the rate
of 10% on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
   (l)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
   (m)   A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead
provisions of the Texas Constitution.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-121 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (a)   A director may enter premises or vehicles regulated by this chapter at
all reasonable times, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this chapter, to inspect permits and records required
by this chapter, to collect air, water, waste or wastewater samples, or
whenever probable cause exists to believe that a violation of this chapter or
other environmental laws exists on such premises.
   (b)   A director shall first present his or her credentials and demand entry
if the premises are occupied. If the premises are unoccupied, he or she shall
first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or person in control of the
premises and demand entry.
   (c)   Where premises have security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person in
control of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will
be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
   (d)   If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the
director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure entry. Such
recourse shall include the right to obtain a search warrant under the
guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and for the purposes of
same, any person with enforcement authority under this chapter is hereby
declared to be a “health officer.”
   (e)   Facilities regulated under this chapter are subject to the authority
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under § 308 of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 3318), as amended, concerning access to
information and right of entry onto property for purposes of implementing and
enforcing the federal pretreatment program and other applicable provisions of
the Federal Clean Water Act.
   (f)   Facilities regulated under this chapter are subject to the authority
of the Texas commission on environmental quality (TCEQ) under the Tex. Water
Code §§ 26.014 and 26.015, as amended, and Tex. Health and Safety Code §§
361.032 and 361.037, as amended, concerning access to information and right of
entry onto property for purposes of implementing and enforcing the State of
Texas’ pretreatment program and other applicable provisions of the Texas Water
Code and Texas Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 2, passed 7-25-2006)
§ 12.5-122 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   (a)   Information and data obtained from reports, surveys, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from a director’s inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the owner, operator or permittee specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under the Texas Public Information Act.
   (b)   A person making an assertion of confidentiality shall do so at the
time the information or data is submitted as follows.
      (1)   A cover sheet, stamped or typed legend, or other form of written
notice shall be placed on or attached to the information, denoting it as “trade
secret,” “proprietary” or “confidential;”
      (2)   At the time of submission, the document must be stamped the words
“confidential business information” on each page containing such information.
If no claim is made at the time of submission, director may make the
information available to the public without further notice under applicable
laws, including but not limited to the Texas Public Information Act. If a claim
of confidentiality is asserted, the information will be made publicly available
only to the extent authorized, and under the procedures established, by the
applicable law;
      (3)   If only portions of a document are alleged to be confidential, such
portions shall be clearly identified, and may be submitted separately to
facility handling and identification by a director; and
      (4)   If the submitter wants the information to remain confidential only
to a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, this shall also
be clearly provided for in the request.
   (c)   All submitted records will be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the city’s TPDES programs or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.
   (d)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data
will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the
public without restriction.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 3, passed 7-25-2006)
§ 12.5-123 JUDICIAL REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Criminal remedies.
      (1)   An offense as defined under this chapter is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   If an offense defined under this chapter does not include a
culpable mental state, then intent, knowledge, or recklessness suffices to
establish criminal responsibility.
      (3)   An offense is so defined in this code by the phrase: "A person
commits an offense...."
   (b)   Civil remedies.
      (1)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.012 through
54.017 and petition the state district court or the applicable county court at
law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties
or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter
that relates to:
         a.   The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real property;
         b.   The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a
building or other structure or improvement;
         c.   The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or
construction of buildings, including street design;
         d.   Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
         e.   Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other
matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or
         f.   Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant
from a point source into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) or MS4.
      (2)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, the city may
obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
         a.   Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this chapter
that relates to any matter specified in subsection (b)(1) above; or
         b.   Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary
for compliance with any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (b)(1) above.
      (3)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017, the city may
recover a civil penalty of
not more than $1,000 per day for each violation of any provision of this
chapter that relates to any matter specified in subsection (b)(1)a. through (b)
(1)e. above, and a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 per day for each
violation of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified
in subsection (b)(1)f. above, if the city proves that:
         a.   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
chapter; and
         b.   After the defendant received notice of the chapter provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the chapter or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the chapter.
      (4)   The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement
and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or
at common law.
      (5)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator and any other
factors as justice requires.
      (6)   Whenever it appears that a violation or a threat of violation of
any provision of Tex. Water Code § 26.121, or any rule, permit or order of the
commission has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the City of
Fort Worth, exclusive of its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the
same manner as the commission, may have a suit instituted in a state district
court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties,
or both, against the person who committed or is committing or threatening to
commit the violation. In any suit brought under this subsection (b), the
commission is a necessary and indispensable party.
      (7)   Filing a suit for civil penalties or other remedies shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14401, § 1, passed 11-7-2000; Ord.
23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§§ 12.5-124—12.5-135 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: ENVIRONMENTAL USE AGREEMENTS
SUBDIVISION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-136 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this division, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of property upon which or from which there has
been a release or suspected release.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-137 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this division is to establish guidelines and rules
whereby, pursuant to
Chapter XXVII, § 13, of the Charter of the city, the city manager may execute
use agreements with property owners to allow subsurface environmental sampling
and the placement of monitoring wells in city right-of-way, other city
property, and in city easements, without the prior approval of the city
council. These guidelines and rules shall not be interpreted as creating any
rights in any property owners to do such subsurface environmental monitoring or
placement of monitoring wells.
   (b)   It is further the purpose of this division to protect the lives and
safety of the traveling public, to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the city, and to protect city property.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-138 AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   (a)   The city manager or the city manager’s designee may enter into use
agreements with property owners to allow such owners to perform subsurface
environmental monitoring and place monitoring wells in city right-of-way, other
city property and in city easements, if such sampling or wells are required by
the commission or the EPA, or requested by the property owner, and no
reasonable alternative site exists.
   (b)   The city manager may establish rules and procedures for the
administration of this division that are not inconsistent with the provisions
of this division, and which are necessary to protect city property interests
and the public health, safety or welfare.
   (c)   For the purpose of making subsurface environmental sampling or
installing monitoring wells on city easements, rights-of-way or other property,
the provisions of this division supersede any similar provisions in the
buildings chapter of the city code or other similar provisions in the city
code.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-139 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR USE AGREEMENTS.
   Any use agreement approved by the city manager as allowed by this division
shall at a minimum provide for:
   (a)   An insurance policy or policies naming the city as an additional
insured, with policy types and limits determined by a representative from the
risk management division of finance. When factors so warrant, and the risk
management division of finance believes the city will be properly protected,
the risk management division of finance may approve self-insurance;
   (b)   The indemnification of the city by the property owner for all claims
and damages arising from use agreement activities;
   (c)   The relocation of monitoring wells if required for street and utility
repair and maintenance;
   (d)   Minimal disturbance of traffic;
   (e)   Minimal disturbance of the peace of nearby residential neighborhoods;
   (f)   The protection of the city’s municipal separate storm sewer system and
the city’s sanitary sewer from use agreement activities;
   (g)   The proposed drilling depth for soil borings and monitoring wells,
locking caps on wells, and restoration of city property following completion or
abandonment of contract activities;
   (h)   Barricading during sampling and drilling of monitoring wells;
   (i)   Inspection of operations by the environmental manager and city traffic
engineer, and authority of same to halt use agreement activities when necessary
to protect the environment or traveling public;
   (j)   Drilling to be performed by a contractor licensed and bonded to work
in the public right-of-way, and licensed under Tex. Water Code Chapter 32;
   (k)   Certification of utility clearance prior to drilling; and
   (l)   Fees to offset the city’s cost of regulating and monitoring use
agreement activities as determined by a schedule set by the city council.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14934, § 4, passed 1-22-2002)
§ 12.5-140 PRIORITY OF PLACEMENT.
   It is the city’s position that the placement of subsurface environmental
sampling sites and monitoring wells shall follow the order of priority set
forth below, and that sampling sites and monitoring wells be permitted on city
roadways or in stormwater drainage channels only as a last resort. In declining
order of priority, sampling sites and monitoring wells shall be placed:
   (a)   On the property owner’s property, not within a public easement;
   (b)   On adjacent private property, not within a public easement;
   (c)   On the property owner’s property, within a public easement;
   (d)   On adjacent private property, within a public easement;
   (e)   On city-owned property, excluding rights- of-way;
   (f)   Within city right-of-way, excluding roadways, sidewalks and stormwater
drainage channels;
   (g)   Within city right-of-way, including roadways and sidewalks, but
excluding stormwater drainage channels; and
   (h)   Within city right-of-way, including stormwater drainage channels.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-141—12.5-144 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION II: SUB-SURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING
§ 12.5-145 INFORMAL REQUEST FOR SUBSURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING.
   (a)   A property owner seeking permission to conduct subsurface
environmental sampling on city right-of-way, property or easements shall submit
an informal written request to the environmental manager.
   (b)   The informal request shall include:
      (1)   A complete history of the release prompting the request;
      (2)   A scale drawing detailing: all adjacent property and improvements
within 100 feet of the proposed sampling site(s); and the location of other
soil borings made and monitoring wells placed in response to the release;
      (3)   The preliminary location, scope and details of all proposed
sampling operations; and
      (4)   Documentation which shows the commission’s or EPA’s directive
necessitating the request, if applicable.
   (c)   After receiving the request, the environmental manager shall review it
and either:
      (1)   Approve it for further processing and notify the requestor;
      (2)   Return it to the requestor for more information; or
      (3)   Deny the request.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-146 FORMAL REQUEST FOR SUBSURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING.
   (a)   If a preliminary request is approved for further processing, the
requestor shall submit a formal written request plus seven copies of same to
the environmental manager.
   (b)   The formal request shall:
      (1)   Document contacts with the following persons regarding the release:
         a.   T.U. Electric Company;
         b.   Lone Star Gas Company;
         c.   Southwestern Bell Telephone Company;
         d.   Sammons Cable;
         e.   Any other utility company with a city franchise or license;
         f.   Texas department of transportation (if applicable);
         g.   Tarrant County water control and improvement district (if
applicable);
         h.   Tarrant County department of transportation and public works (if
applicable);
         i.   Trinity River Authority (if applicable); and
         j.   The adjacent private property owner (if applicable).
      (2)   Contain detailed information regarding the proposed sampling,
including:
         a.   The exact location of all sampling sites, the type and depth of
the samples, the hours of operation and barricading;
         b.   The equipment to be used in the sampling;
         c.   The names and qualifications of the businesses involved in the
sampling, and the name, title and phone number of the project manager who will
oversee the sampling; and
         d.   The timetable for all sampling operations.
   (c)   After receiving the formal request, the environmental manager shall
send copies of the request to the following city officials/departments:
      (1)   City attorney;
      (2)   Risk management division of finance;
      (3)   City fire chief;
      (4)   City traffic engineer;
      (5)   Department of water, engineering services division;
      (6)   [Reserved];
      (7)   Department of planning and development; and
      (8)   Department of parks and recreation (if the request will involve use
of city parks land).
   (d)   The officials/departments listed in subsection (c) above may provide
the environmental manager with requirements to be imposed on the requestor, and
other recommendations including alternate sites. The environmental manager
shall review such requirements and recommendations and shall incorporate them
into the use agreement to the degree practicable, but shall have the approval
authority of the formal request. However, any sampling which will be done in
city right-of-way shall also require the approval of the city traffic engineer
on matters of traffic safety.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14934, § 5, passed 1-22-2002; Ord.
17522, § 5, passed 4-27-2007; Ord. 18319-09-2008, § 6, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 12.5-147 USE AGREEMENT FOR SUBSURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLING.
   (a)   If the environmental manager and city traffic engineer (if applicable)
approve the formal request, the environmental manager shall prepare a written
use agreement setting forth the city’s requirements, and shall deliver it to
the requestor.
   (b)   After the requestor returns the signed use agreement to the
environmental manager, along with the required fee and appropriate proof of
insurance or self-insurance and certification of utility clearance for all
city-franchised utility companies, and when applicable, of the other persons
listed in §
12.5-146(b)(1), the commission and the EPA, the environmental manager shall
present it to the city manager for final review. The city manager may then
approve or reject the use agreement.
   (c)   The use agreement shall take the place of any permits required by the
city elsewhere in this code, to do the work allowed by the agreement.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-148—12.5-154 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION III: MONITORING WELLS
§ 12.5-155 NECESSITY OF MONITORING WELLS.
   If subsurface environmental sampling or other tests indicate the possibility
of soil or groundwater contamination within city rights-of-way, property or
easements, and either the city, the commission or the EPA requires the
installation of monitoring wells, the city manager may enter into a use
agreement with a property owner for the placement of monitoring wells and
additional subsurface environmental sampling.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-156 INFORMAL REQUEST FOR MONITORING WELLS.
   (a)   A property owner seeking to place monitoring wells on city right-of-
way, property or easements shall submit an informal written request to the
environmental manager.
   (b)   The informal request shall:
      (1)   Provide documentation of the need for the well(s);
      (2)   Provide documentation of the requestor’s efforts to locate the well
(s) on property other than city right-of-way, property and easements; and
      (3)   Include a preliminary plan for the location of the well(s).
   (c)   If the environmental manager determines that the request should be
approved for further processing, the requestor shall be so notified. If the
environmental manager determines that the request should be denied, the
requestor shall be so notified. The requestor shall have ten days from the date
of the notice of denial to appeal the decision to the city manager.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-157 FORMAL REQUEST FOR MONITORING WELLS.
   (a)   If the preliminary request is approved, the requestor shall submit a
formal request and seven copies to the environmental manager.
   (b)   The formal request shall include:
      (1)   Documentation of coordination with:
         a.   T.U. Electric Company;
         b.   Lone Star Gas Company;
         c.   Southwestern Bell Telephone Company;
         d.   Sammons Cable;
         e.   Other holders of city utility franchises or licenses;
         f.   Texas department of transportation (if applicable);
         g.   Tarrant County water control and improvement district (if
applicable);
         h.   Tarrant County department of public works and transportation (if
applicable);
         i.   Trinity River Authority (if applicable); and
         j.   The adjacent private property owner (if applicable).
      (2)   A detailed scale drawing showing all property and improvements
located within 100 feet of the proposed well installation;
      (3)   The scope and details of all well improvements, including, but not
limited to, location and depth of the well(s), the size of the well(s), the
hours of operation and the construction details of the well(s);
      (4)   All equipment to be used in the construction, operation and
maintenance of the wells;
      (5)   The names, addresses, phone numbers and qualifications of all
businesses involved in the construction, operation and maintenance of the well
(s);
      (6)   The length of time the well(s) will be in service;
      (7)   The procedure to remove the well(s) after they are no longer
needed, including restoring the property to its original condition; and
      (8)   The monitoring procedures to be used, including frequency and time
of monitoring.
   (c)   After receiving the formal request, the environmental manager shall
forward copies to the following city officials/departments for review:
      (1)   City attorney;
      (2)   Risk management division of finance;
      (3)   City fire chief;
      (4)   City traffic engineer;
      (5)   Department of water, engineering services division;
      (6)   [Reserved];
      (7)   Department of development; and
      (8)   Department of parks and recreation (if the request will involve use
of the city parks land).
   (d)   The officials/departments listed in subsection (c) above may provide
the environmental manager with requirements to be imposed on the requestor, and
other recommendations including alternate sites. The environmental manager
shall review such requirements and recommendations and shall incorporate them
into the use agreement to the degree practicable, but will have approval
authority over the formal request. However, any wells which will be placed in
city rights-of-way shall also require the approval of the city traffic engineer
on matters of traffic safety.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14934, § 6, passed 1-22-2002; Ord.
18319-09-2008, § 6, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 12.5-158 USE AGREEMENTS FOR MONITORING WELLS.
   (a)   If the formal request is approved, the environmental manager shall
prepare a written use agreement setting forth the city’s requirements, and
shall deliver it to the requestor.
   (b)   After the requestor returns the signed use agreement to the
environmental manager, along with the required fee and certification of utility
clearance for all city-franchised utility companies, and when applicable, the
other persons named in §
12.5-157(b)(1), the commission and the EPA, the environmental manager shall
present it to the city manager for final review. The city manager may then
approve or reject the use agreement.
   (c)   The use agreement shall take the place of any permits required by the
city elsewhere in this code, to do the work allowed by the agreement.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-159—12.5-164 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION IV: MITIGATION OF CONTAMINATED SOIL
§ 12.5-165 CONFIRMATION OF CONTAMINATED SOIL.
   (a)   If subsurface environmental sampling and/or monitoring wells confirm
contamination of soil within city right-of-way, property or easements, the
property owner shall notify the environmental manager in writing within ten
days after learning of the confirmation of contamination.
   (b)   The property owner shall cooperate with the city in mitigating the
contamination as necessary.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-166—12.5-199 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: AIR QUALITY
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-200 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACT. The Texas Clean Air Act, as amended, codified as V.T.C.A. Health and
Safety Code Chapter 382.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of environmental management or the
director’s authorized representative.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-201 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to safeguard the city’s air from pollution,
by monitoring, controlling or abating air pollution and emission of air
contaminants, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-202 AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.
   The director is authorized to do the following:
   (a)   Enforce the provisions of this article and the Act, using either the
enforcement mechanisms found in
Article I of this chapter, those found in the act and the rules promulgated
pursuant to the act, or any combination thereof;
   (b)   Conduct surveys of ambient air quality;
   (c)   Evaluate the effect of proposed zoning changes on air pollution and
endeavor to coordinate the director’s activities with those of the city plan
commission and zoning board in order to achieve optimum management of the air
resources of the city;
   (d)   Cooperate with other governmental agencies concerned with air
pollution;
   (e)   Disseminate information on air pollution, inform and encourage
voluntary cooperation by persons and affected groups in the preservation and
regulation of the purity of the outdoor atmosphere;
   (f)   Require the owner, lessee or operator of any source or suspected
source to submit air pollution emission data for the purpose of evaluating the
air pollution potential of such source or suspected source;
   (g)   Make recommendations to the commission concerning a rule,
determination, variance or order of the commission that affects the city; and
   (h)   Establish rules and procedures for enforcing this article that are not
inconsistent with this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-203 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The director may enter public or private property, other than property
designed for and used exclusively as a private residence housing not more than
three families, at a reasonable time to inspect and investigate conditions
relating to emissions of air contaminants in the atmosphere. The right of entry
is further subject to the requirements of §
12.5-121 of this chapter.
§§ 12.5-204—12.5-209 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: AMBIENT AIR AND EMISSIONS STANDARDS
§ 12.5-210 ADOPTION OF STATE REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations, in their current form and as they may hereafter
be amended, are adopted and incorporated into this article as if they were set
forth at length:
   (a)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 101, General Rules;
   (b)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 106, Permits by Rules;
   (c)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 111, Control of Air Pollution
from Visible Emissions and Control of Particulate Matter;
   (d)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 112, Control of Air Pollution
from Sulfur Compounds;
   (e)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 113, Standards of Performance
for Hazardous Air Pollutants and for Designated Facilities and Pollutants;
   (f)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 114, Control of Air Pollution
from Motor Vehicles;
   (g)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 115, Control of Air Pollution
from Volatile Organic Compounds;
   (h)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 116, Control of Air Pollution
by Permits for New Construction or Modification;
   (i)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 117, Control of Air Pollution
from Nitrogen Compounds;
   (j)   Tex. Administrative Code 30 TAC Chapter 118, Control of Air Pollution
Episodes;
   (k)   Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 122, Federal Operating
Permit Program; and
   (l)   Any other regulations, including any amendments, as may be promulgated
by the commission.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-211 NUISANCE.
   (a)   An emission of an air contaminant in violation of the regulations
adopted under this division, in violation of the act, or in violation of any
permit issued thereunder, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (b)   An emission of one or more air contaminants, in such concentration and
duration that is or may tend to be injurious to or that does or may affect
human health or welfare, animal life, vegetation or property, or that
interferes with the normal use and enjoyment of animal life, vegetation and
property, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (c)   The operation of a motor vehicle which is required by federal motor
vehicle laws to have an emissions control system is hereby declared to be a
nuisance if the system is not working properly or if the system has been
removed or rendered inoperable.
   (d)   The operation of a motor vehicle is hereby declared to be a nuisance
if the vehicle emits air contaminants:
      (1)   As dark or darker in shade than that shade designated as number one
on the Ringlemann chart; or
      (2)   Of 20% or greater opacity for longer than five consecutive seconds.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-212—12.5-299 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: STORMWATER PROTECTION
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-300 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any stormwater runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands and other non-point source agricultural
activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal
production facilities as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.24.
   AQUATIC MONITORING ORGANISM. The Fathead minnow Pimephales promelas, the
bacterium Vibrio ficheri or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of the MS4 and waters of the United States. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   CELLAR DIRT. Construction site waste materials, such as natural rock and
soil overburden.
   C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CONTAMINATED. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   CONTAMINATION. The presence of or entry into a public water supply system,
the MS4, waters of the state or waters of the United States of any substance
which may be deleterious to the public health and/or the quality of the water.
   COSMETIC CLEANING. Cleaning done for cosmetic purposes. It does not include
industrial cleaning, cleaning associated with manufacturing activities,
hazardous or toxic waste cleaning, or any cleaning otherwise regulated under
federal, state or local laws.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of environmental management or the
director’s authorized representatives.
   DISCHARGE. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater or any
other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
or into waters of the United States.
   DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise
responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction-site or industrial facility.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said agency.
   FACILITY. As used in
Division 3 of this article, means any facility, including construction sites,
required by the Federal Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., to
have a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
   FIRE CODE. The fire prevention and protection chapter of the city code.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The fire department of the City of Fort Worth, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.
   FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or
extinguish a fire.
   HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of
waters in the state, waters of the United States, or that will cause lethal or
sub-lethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring
organisms belonging to the city, upon their exposure to samples of any
discharge into waters in the state, waters of the United States or the MS4.
   MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING. Power washing, steam cleaning and any
other mobile cosmetic cleaning operation, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces,
engaged in for commercial purposes.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. The national program for
issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and
enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under
§§ 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
   NOI. Notice of intent.
   NON-POINT SOURCE. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
“point source.”
   NOTICE OF INTENT. The notice of intent that is required by the NPDES
stormwater multi-sector general permit, the EPA Region 6 NPDES stormwater
construction general permit, or any similar general permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity that is issued by the EPA or the
TNRCC.
   NPDES. The national pollutant discharge elimination system.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   OPERATE. Drive, conduct, work, run, manage or control.
   OPERATOR. As used in
Division 3 of this article, means the party or parties that either individually
or taken together meet the following two criteria:
      (1)   They have operational control over the site specifications
(including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and
      (2)   They have the day-to-day operational control of those activities at
the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWPPP requirements and any permit
conditions.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   pH. The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration in
grams per liter of hydrogen ions; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
solution, expressed in standard units.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage;
sewage sludge; filter backwash; munitions; chemical wastes; biological
materials; toxic materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded
equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; and industrial, municipal, recreational and
agricultural waste discharged into water or into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or water of the
United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to
humans, animal life, vegetation or property, or to the public health, safety or
welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any
lawful or reasonable purpose.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into ground-
water, subsurface soils, surface soils, the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4), the water of the state, the waters of the United States.
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt.
   STORMWATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. The discharge from
any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which
is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas
at an industrial plant. The term does not include discharges from facilities or
activities excluded from the NPDES program under 40 C.F.R. Part 122. For the
categories of industries identified in subsections (1) through (10) of this
definition, the term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges
from industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or
traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste material or
by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse
sites; sites used for the application or disposal of process wastewaters (as
defined at 40 C.F.R. Part 401); sites used for the storage and maintenance of
material handling equipment; sites used for residual treatment, storage or
disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas
(including tank farms) for raw materials, and intermediate and finished
products; and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and
significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. For the categories
of industries identified in subsection (11) of this definition, the term
includes only stormwater discharges from all the areas (except access roads and
rail lines) that are listed in the previous sentence where material handling
equipment or activities, raw materials, intermediate products, final products,
waste materials, by-products or industrial machinery are exposed to stormwater.
For the purposes of this definition, material handling activities include the
storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product.
The term excludes areas located on plant lands separate from the plant’s
industrial activities, such as office buildings and accompanying parking lots
as long as the drainage from the excluded areas is not mixed with stormwater
drained from the above described areas. Industrial facilities (including
industrial facilities that are federally, state or municipally owned or
operated that meet the description of the facilities listed in this subsections
(1) through (10) of this definition) include those facilities designated under
the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(a)(1)(v). The following categories of
facilities are considered to be engaging in “industrial activity”:
      (1)   Facilities subject to stormwater effluent limitations guidelines,
new source performance standards, or toxic pollutant effluent standards under
40 C.F.R. Subchapter N (except facilities with toxic pollutant effluent
standards which are exempted under category (11) of this definition);
      (2)   Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 24
(except 2434), 26 (except 265 and 267), 28 (except 283), 29, 311, 32 (except
323), 33, 3441, 373;
      (3)   Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 10
through 14 (mineral industry) including active or inactive mining operations
(except for areas of coal mining operations no longer meeting the definition of
a reclamation area under 40 C.F.R. § 434.11(1) because the performance bond
issued to the facility by the appropriate Federal Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act (SMCRA) authority has been released, or except for areas of
non-coal mining operations which have been released from applicable state or
federal reclamation requirements after December 17, 1990) and oil and gas
exploration, production, processing or treatment operations, or transmission
facilities that discharge stormwater contaminated by contact with or that has
come into contact with, any overburden, raw material, intermediate products,
finished products, byproducts or waste products located on the site of such
operations; (inactive mining operations are mining sites that are not being
actively mined, but which have an identifiable owner/operator; inactive mining
sites do not include sites where mining claims are being maintained prior to
disturbances associated with the extraction, beneficiation or processing of
mined materials, nor sites where minimal activities are undertaken for the sole
purpose of maintaining a mining claim);
      (4)   Hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facilities,
including those that are operating under interim status or a permit under
subtitle C of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA);
      (5)   Landfills, land application sites and open dumps that receive or
have received any industrial wastes (waste that is received from any of the
facilities described under this definition) including those that are subject to
regulation under subtitle D of RCRA;
      (6)   Facilities involved in the recycling of materials, including metal
scrapyards, battery reclaimers, salvage yards and automobile junkyards,
including but limited to those classified as Standard Industrial Classification
5015 and 5093;
      (7)   Steam electric power generating facilities, including coal handling
sites;
      (8)   Transportation facilities classified as Standard Industrial
Classifications 40, 41, 42 (except 4221-25), 43, 44, 45 and 5171 which have
vehicle maintenance shops, equipment cleaning operations, or airport deicing
operations. Only those portions of the facility that are either involved in
vehicle maintenance (including vehicle rehabilitation, mechanical repairs,
painting, fueling and lubrication), equipment cleaning operations, airport
deicing operations or which are otherwise identified under subsections (1)
through (7) or (9) through (11) of this definition are associated with
industrial activity;
      (9)   Treatment works treating domestic sewage or any other sewage sludge
or wastewater treatment device or system, used in the storage treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal or domestic sewage, including land
dedicated to the disposal of sewage sludge that are located within the confines
of the facility, with a design flow of 1.0 mgd or more, or required to have an
approved pretreatment program under 40 C.F.R. Part 403. Not included are farm
lands, domestic gardens or lands used for sludge management where sludge is
beneficially reused and which are not physically located in the confines of the
facility, or areas that are in compliance with § 405 of the Federal Clean Water
Act;
      (10)   Construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation
activities except: operations that result in the disturbance of less than five
acres of total land area which are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale; and
      (11)   Facilities under Standard Industrial Classifications 20, 21, 22,
23, 2434, 25, 265, 267, 27, 283, 285, 30, 31 (except 311), 323, 34 (except
3441), 35, 36, 37 (except 373), 38, 39, 4221-25, (and which are not otherwise
included within subsections (2) through (10) of this definition).
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A plan required by a permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity, including
construction, and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices
that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges
associated with industrial activity at the facility.
   SWPPP. Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   TEXAS POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. The program delegated to the
State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b).
   TPDES. The Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   TSS (TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface, or
are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are
generally removable by a laboratory filtration device. TSS is expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   U.S.C. The United States Code.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATER IN THE STATE. Groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, wetlands,
marshes, inlets, canals inside the territorial limits of the state, and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-
navigable, and including the bed and banks of all watercourses and bodies of
surface water that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce;
all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at
40 C.F.R. § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground-water
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-301 ADMINISTRATION.
   The director of the department of environmental management and the
director’s authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-302 DISCHARGE TO MS4 PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be
introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for a violation
of subsection (a) above that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more
of the following categories of discharges:
      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an NPDES
permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
      (2)   A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire
department;
      (3)   A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain
oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code requires to be
contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to
remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge;
      (4)   Agricultural stormwater runoff;
      (5)   A discharge or flow from water line flushing or disinfection that
contains no harmful quantity of total residual chlorine (TRC) or any other
chemical used in line disinfection;
      (6)   A discharge or flow from lawn watering or landscape irrigation;
      (7)   A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
      (8)   A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or
rising groundwater;
      (9)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. §
35.2005(20)) to the MS4;
      (10)   Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl
space pump or footing drain;
      (11)   A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any
harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank
or other container;
      (12)   A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is
unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter
or any other source of pollutant;
      (13)   A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing;
      (14)   A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
      (15)   A discharge or flow from cold water (or hot water with prior
permission of the director) used in street washing or cosmetic cleaning that is
not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier,
dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance;
      (16)   Drainage from a private residential swimming pool containing no
harmful quantities of chlorine or other chemicals. Drainage from swimming pool
filter backwash is prohibited; or
      (17)   A discharge or flow of uncontaminated stormwater pumped from an
excavation.
   (c)   No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) above
if:
      (1)   The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the
director to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the
United States or to the MS4;
      (2)   Written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger; and
      (3)   The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given
in the notice to cease the discharge.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be
introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of any substance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-303 CONNECTION OF SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if the person connects a line conveying sewage
to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-304 NUISANCES.
   (a)   An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 that violates or would
violate this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (b)   A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is connected
to the MS4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-305 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF UTILITY SERVICE AND MS4 ACCESS.
   (a)   The city may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary
sewer service and/or MS4 discharge access to a person discharging to the MS4,
waters of the United States or POTW when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which:
      (1)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
      (2)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the MS4
or waters of the United States.
   (b)   When the director determines that city-provided water and/or sanitary
sewer service needs to be suspended pursuant to subsection (a) above, the
director shall request the director of the department of water to do so.
   (c)   As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or MS4
discharge access, the director shall notify the violator of the suspension in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested and shall order the
violator to cease the discharge immediately. When time permits, the director
should also attempt to notify the violator prior to suspending service or
access.
   (d)   If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under subsection
(c) above, the director may take such steps as the director deems necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to persons.
   (e)   The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the
violator until:
      (1)   The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the
noncomplying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and
corrected;
      (2)   The violator pays the city for all costs the city incurred in
responding to abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge;
and
      (3)   The violator pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service or access.
   (f)   A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected
may appeal such enforcement action to the director, in writing, within ten days
of notice of the suspension in accordance with §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (g)   The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its
response costs pursuant to the procedure set out in §
12.5-120 of this chapter.
   (h)   The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other
remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar
against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-306 NON-EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF UTILITY SERVICE AND MS4 ACCESS.
   (a)   The city may terminate the city-provided water supply, sanitary sewer
connection and/or MS4 access any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of
this article, if such termination would abate or reduce the illicit discharge.
   (b)   The director will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
water supply, sanitary sewer connection and/or MS4 access. The violator may
petition the director for a reconsideration and hearing pursuant to §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (c)   The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the
discharger until:
      (1)   The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the
noncomplying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and
corrected; and
      (2)   The violator pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service or MS4 access.
   (d)   The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other
remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar
against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service,
sanitary sewer service and or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this section, without the prior approval of the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-307—12.5-314 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: COSMETIC CLEANING
§ 12.5-315 PERMIT AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly engages in mobile
commercial cosmetic cleaning without a valid permit issued by the director.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly operates or causes
to be operated a mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle which is not
registered with the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-316 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A person required by §
12.5-315 to have a permit shall complete and file a permit application on a
form prescribed by the director.
   (b)   The director may require any information on an application that the
director believes is necessary to ensure that best management practices are
implemented by the permittee.
   (c)   The application shall include a description and the vehicle license
registration number of each vehicle to be registered under the permit. All
motor vehicles and trailers used to transport cosmetic cleaning rigs shall be
registered. However, a motor vehicle which is used to tow a trailer registered
with the director and which is not used to transport a cosmetic cleaning rig
itself, shall not be required to be registered.
   (d)   Any applicant who utilizes wash water recycling units shall list all
sanitary sewer discharge locations and other disposal sites the applicant
intends to use.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-317 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   (1)   The director may issue a permit and registration certificates
after the applicant pays all applicable fees, unless the director has cause to
deny such permit, as specified in §
12.5-320.
      (2)   The director shall provide for procedures to add registered
vehicles to a permit during its term.
   (b)   A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance,
unless suspended or revoked. Registration certificates shall be valid for the
term of the permit.
   (c)   Neither a permit nor a registration certificate shall be transferable.
   (d)   The city council shall set an annual fee for a permit and each
registration certificate issued under this division.
   (e)   The director will issue a registration number to each vehicle
registered under a permit, and listed on the permit. A registration number is
not transferable.
   (f)   The director will issue a registration certificate for each vehicle
registered under a permit. The certificate shall be of a size and design
determined by the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-318 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION NUMBERS AND CERTIFICATES.
   (a)   A permit holder shall have the registration numbers permanently
displayed on each of its vehicles registered under the permit as follows:
      (1)   The registration number shall be placed on both sides of the
vehicle in a location approved by the director; and
      (2)   The registration number shall be in numerals of a minimum height of
three inches, in a color contrasting to their background, and in a visible
location.
   (b)   A permit holder shall place a registration certificate on each
registered vehicle in a location approved by the director.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle which does not properly
display the registration number assigned to that vehicle by the director.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle which does not properly
display a valid registration certificate.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-319 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   As a condition of receiving and maintaining a permit under this division a
permit holder shall comply with the following.
   (a)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any
management changes in the business during the time the permit is in effect.
   (b)   A permit holder shall submit samples of wash water and/or waste water
to the director or to an authorized representative of the director of the
department of water, immediately upon their demand.
   (c)   A permit holder who utilizes wash water recycling units shall:
      (1)   Notify the director in writing of all changes in disposal sites it
wants to use during the permit period;
      (2)   Discharge washwater into the sanitary sewer only at those sites
listed in its permit application and its notices under subsection (c)(1) above;
and
      (3)   Before the end of each permit period:
         a.   Test or cause to be tested a representative sample of its
recycled wash water discharge to determine compliance with the discharge limits
and prohibitions of §
12.5-610 of this chapter;
         b.   Report the results of such tests in writing to the industrial
waste section of the wastewater treatment division of the department of water,
and send a copy to the department of environmental management; and
         c.   Sign and certify the report as required by §
12.5-633 of this chapter.
   (d)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director when it sells or
otherwise disposes of a vehicle registered under its permit.
   (e)   A permit holder shall ensure that all of its employees engaged in
mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning are knowledgeable of the discharge
prohibitions to the MS4 under this article, and shall require all its employees
to use best management practices when engaging in mobile commercial cosmetic
cleaning. For exterior cleaning, best management practices shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Accumulations of oil and grease which have not dried shall be
precleaned with absorbent clay (kitty litter) or a similar material and
properly disposed of prior to washing;
      (2)   Storm sewer entrances which will receive the wash water shall be
screened to catch leaves and other debris. Wash water discharge shall comply
with §
12.5-302(b)(15);
      (3)   Wash water discharged to the MS4 shall first pass through an oil
absorbent boom or pad to absorb hydrocarbons so that no oil sheen is present on
the discharge. Washwater discharge shall comply with §
12.5-302(b)(15); and
      (4)   Washwater which does not comply with §
12.5-302(b)(15) shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Discharge
shall be at the job site when possible. Washwater from recycle rigs which does
not comply with §
12.5-302(b)(15) shall be disposed of in compliance with subsection (c) of this
section. Grit and sludge shall not be disposed of through the sanitary sewer.
   (f)   A permit holder shall ensure that all of its vehicles registered under
the permit display the registration numbers and certificates as required by
this division, and shall not allow unregistered vehicles to engage in mobile
commercial cosmetic cleaning.
   (g)   A permit holder shall not discharge to the MS4 in violation of this
article.
   (h)   A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer
system in violation of §
12.5-610 of this chapter.
   (i)   A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater into the sanitary
sewer, either on a job site or off a job site, without the permission of the
owner of the property upon which the sewer inlet is located. The permit holder
shall provide proof of such permission to the director upon demand.
   (j)   A permit holder shall not create or maintain a nuisance in violation
of §
12.5-321.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-320 PERMIT DENIAL AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director may deny a permit, or after notice and hearing revoke a
permit if:
      (1)   The permit application contains a false statement of a material
fact;
      (2)   If the person engages in operations that do not consist solely of
cosmetic cleaning; or
      (3)   If the permit holder or an employee of the permit holder has
violated a permit condition.
   (b)   An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director,
in writing, of the denial and the grounds therefore. Such notice will be sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address listed on the
application.
   (c)   An applicant whose permit is denied may request a reconsideration no
later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice of denial, in accordance
with §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (d)   A permit may be suspended or revoked under the procedures of §
12.5-119(b) of this chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-321 NUISANCES.
   (a)   A vehicle transporting cosmetic cleaning wash water or wastewater
which is leaking or spilling from such vehicle is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
   (b)   Any premises upon which cosmetic cleaning wastewater has accumulated
and which is emitting noxious or offensive odors, or which is creating an
unsanitary condition, or which is injurious to the public health or the
environment is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-322—12.5-329 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY, INCLUDING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
§ 12.5-330 APPLICABILITY.
   This division applies to all facilities located within the city that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-331 ACCESS TO FACILITIES.
   (a)   The director is authorized by §
12.5-121 of this chapter to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation
under this article.
   (b)   Facility operators shall allow the director ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or TPDES
permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
   (c)   The director shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.
   (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
   (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A
person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the director reasonable access to the permitted facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-332 UNPERMITTED DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   A person who is the operator of a facility commits an offense if the person
discharges, or causes to be discharged, stormwater associated with industrial
activity without first having obtained a NPDES or TPDES permit to do so.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-333 SUBMISSION OF NOI TO CITY.
   (a)   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to
have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the director at
the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA or
the TNRCC as applicable.
   (b)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the director
either in person or by mailing it to:
 
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
Department of Environmental Management
1000 Throckmorton Street
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
 
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the director.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-334 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   (a)   A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the
requirements of its NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with industrial activity.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in
violation of a requirement of the facility’s NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
§ 12.5-335 MODIFICATION OF STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   (a)   The director may require any operator of a facility to modify the
facility’s stormwater pollution prevention plan if in the best professional
judgment of the director, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of
the facility’s NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity.
   (b)   The deficiencies in a facility’s SWPPP will be made in writing, and
the director will give the facility operator a reasonable amount of time, not
to exceed 30 days, to make the necessary changes in the SWPPP.
(Ord. 13808, § 1, passed 5-18-1999)
DIVISION 4: MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM
§ 12.5-336 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this
Division 4, the following definitions shall apply.
   ACT. Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 552, Subchapter C.
   BENEFITTED PROPERTY. A developed parcel to which stormwater service is made
available.
   CUSTOMER/OWNER. The person(s) or entity(ies) that is recorded as the
customer or user of utility services for a parcel as recorded in the records of
the city’s utility or tax billing system.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. A lot or tract that has been improved with impervious
surface.
   DIRECTOR. The director of transportation and public works or the designated
representative.
   DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE. The property, real, personal or mixed, that is used
in providing stormwater capabilities and capacity to manage and control
stormwater runoff for the drainage utility system, including bridges, catch
basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, retention ponds,
ditches, draws, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works and
appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force or
gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water
away, collect, store or treat the water, or divert the water into natural or
artificial watercourses.
   DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE. The charge, including interest and penalties paid by
the customer/owner of a benefitted property for services provided by the
drainage utility system including, but not limited to, the items described in
“cost-of-service” in § 402.044(2) of the Act and any charges for future funding
of the drainage utility system construction as described in § 402.044(4).
   DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM. The drainage utility system owned or controlled, in
whole or in part by the city, including the city’s existing stormwater and
drainage facilities, materials and supplies, and dedicated to the service of
benefitted properties, and including provision for additions, extensions and
improvements thereto and replacements thereof.
   DRAINAGE UTILITY ONLY ACCOUNT. A utility billing account that is established
for the sole purpose of billing applicable drainage utility fees where no other
utility services are provided through the city.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. Two thousand six hundred square feet of
impervious area or surface.
   HIGH OCCUPANCY RESIDENTIAL/ NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All developed
properties within the city that do not fall under the definition of Low
Occupancy Residential Property, generally consisting of commercial, industrial,
institutional, and apartment type land uses.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration
by water. IMPERVIOUS AREAS include, but are not limited to, compacted soils
with a surface treatment, buildings, pavement, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks and other human-made structure or surface that is built or laid on
the natural surface of the land which has the effect of increasing,
concentrating, or otherwise altering stormwater runoff so that flows are
increased.
   LOW OCCUPANCY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property platted, zoned or used for
one-family or two-family residential purposes including manufactured homes, or
any triplex or quadplex used for residential purposes.
   PARCEL. One or more lots or tracts, or portions of lots or tracts.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF POTENTIAL. Relative potential for causing stormwater
runoff quantities or velocities from a parcel based on the type of development
on the parcel.
   WHOLLY SUFFICIENT AND PRIVATELY OWNED DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Land and facilities
owned and operated by a person or entity other than the city’s drainage utility
system, the stormwater from which does not discharge under any storm frequency
event or conditions into a creek, river, slough, culvert or other channel or
facility that is part of the city’s drainage utility system.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 23884-10-2019, § 1, passed 10-15-2019,
eff. 1-1-2020; Ord. 26205-06-2023, § 1, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 12.5-337 FINDINGS; ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (a)   The city council finds, as required by Tex. Local Government Code §
552.046, Adoption of System; Rules that the city shall:
      (1)   Establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property
in the proposed service area subject to charges;
      (2)   Provide drainage service for all real property in the proposed area
upon payment of drainage charges (except real property that is exempt from such
charges); and
      (3)   Offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and
equitable terms.
   (b)   Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 552, Municipal Utilities,
Subchapter C, Municipal Drainage Utility Systems, is adopted, and this
Division 4 shall be administered in accordance with its provisions.
   (c)   The drainage utility system of the city is declared to be a public
utility. Existing facilities are incorporated in the drainage utility as
permitted by Tex. Local Government Code § 552.046, Incorporation of Existing
Facilities.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-338 SERVICE AREA.
   The drainage utility service area is the area of land located within the
city limits of the City of Fort Worth except as provided by §
12.5-346 of this
Division 4. Upon the effective dates of completed annexation of additional
lands into the City of Fort Worth, each such annexed additional land shall
become part of the service area. Land annexed for limited purposes shall become
part of the service area upon annexation for full purposes.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-339 ESTABLISHMENT OF A DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE.
   (a)   A drainage utility fee is hereby established.
   (b)   The drainage utility fee shall be paid by the user of each benefitted
property in the service area.
   (c)   The drainage utility fee is based on:
      (1)   The developed use of the benefitted property; and
      (2)   The measured or estimated amount of impervious area or surface on
the benefitted property.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-340 CATEGORIES OF DRAINAGE UTILITY RATES.
   (a)   The city council finds that impervious cover increases runoff and
associated pollutants. For the purposes of calculating the drainage utility
fee, an ERU shall be the established standard billing unit. One ERU shall be
billed at $7.29 per month. Each benefitted property shall be categorized as one
of the following:
      (1)   Low occupancy residential property. A low occupancy residential
property shall be placed in one of four billing tiers based on residential
square footage, identified below, with building permits or the most recent
appraisal district data used as a means of estimating the total amount of
impervious area on the property. The median single family residential parcel in
Fort Worth has been determined to have approximately 2,600 square feet of
impervious area or surface or one ERU.
      (2)   High occupancy residential/non-residential property. Fees for high
occupancy residential/non-residential properties shall be based on the total
estimated impervious area on each parcel, with building permit information,
aerial photography, or actual measurement used as a means of estimating the
total amount of impervious area on the property, divided by 2,600 square feet
to determine the number of ERUs or billing units.
   (b)   The city council finds that it is equitable to assess the drainage
utility fee to each low occupancy residential property user on the basis of
four low occupancy residential property billing tiers and such rates are hereby
established.
 
             Billing Unit -                            Proposed Monthly Rate,
Billing Tier Equivalent         Billing Basis          Effective January 1,
             Residential Units                         2026
             (ERU)
Tier 1       0.5 ERU            Up to 1,300 square     $3.65
                                feet
Tier 2       1.0 ERU            1,300 to 2,475 square  $7.29
                                feet
Tier 3       1.5 ERU            2,476 to 3,394 square  $10.94
                                feet
Tier 4       2.0 ERU            3,395+ square feet and $14.58
                                above
 
   (c)   The city council finds that it is equitable to assess the drainage
utility fee to each high occupancy residential/non-residential property on the
basis of the number of ERU’s in a parcel, which shall be obtained by dividing
the estimated impervious area or surface by 2,600 square feet. The calculated
number of ERU’s will be rounded to the nearest whole integer other than zero,
to determine the monthly fee.
   (d)   The city council finds it equitable to provide for funding of future
construction of the drainage utility system through a contribution from the
drainage utility fee.
   (e)   The city council may review the schedule of rates at any time and may,
by ordinance, increase or decrease said rates within the schedule, upon a
reasonable determination that said increase or decrease is warranted.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 16843, § 1, passed 3-7-2006; Ord.
17742, § 1, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 18381-12-2008, § 1, passed 12-2-2008; Ord.
18819-09-2009, § 1, passed 9-15-2009; Ord. 19908-09-2011, § 1, passed 9-20-
2011, eff. 1-1-2012; Ord. 23884-10-2019, § 2, passed 10-15-2019, eff. 1-1-2020;
Ord. 26205-06-2023, § 2, passed 6-13-2023; Ord. 26452-09-2023, § 1, passed 9-
19-2023, eff. 10-1-2023; Ord. 26561-10-2023, § 1, passed 10-31-23, eff. 1-1-
2024; Ord. 28003-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
§ 12.5-341 BILLING FOR DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE.
   (a)   The drainage utility fee shall be shown as a separate listing on the
monthly water utility bill from the city.
   (b)   The drainage utility fee will be charged to the customer/owner
currently established as the responsible party for city’s water utility
service.
   (c)   Where the city does not bill water, sewer or solid waste to a
customer/owner, the city is hereby authorized to establish a “drainage utility
only account” and to bill the drainage utility fee to either the customer/
owner.
   (d)   Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered
in an action at law by the city. In accordance with Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 552.050, failure of a user of the drainage utility system to pay the
charges promptly when due shall subject such user to any remedy or penalty
provided by law or in this section, including discontinuance of any utility
services provided by the city and placement of a lien against the property.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-342 DRAINAGE UTILITY FUND.
   (a)   A drainage utility fund is created.
   (b)   The drainage utility fund shall be administered in accordance with
Tex. Local Government Code § 552.049, Segregation of Income.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-343 ADMINISTRATION; RULES.
   (a)   The director shall administer this
Division 4.
   (b)   The director shall promulgate rules necessary to administer this
Division 4.
   (c)   The director may take into consideration those high occupancy
residential/non-residential properties on which stormwater runoff management
techniques are being used and may grant credits on their monthly billings for
such techniques.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 26205-06-2023, § 3, passed 6-13-2023)
§ 12.5-344 APPEAL.
   (a)   Subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, any customer/
owner who believes the calculation or determination of the drainage utility fee
assessed against them to be incorrect may appeal the fees to the director; and
the director shall evaluate the appeal based on the methodologies for
calculating the drainage utility fee set forth in this
Division 4.
   (b)   The appeal shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the relief
sought, the grounds upon which relief is sought and whether the petitioner
requests a hearing on its appeal.
   (c)   The appeal shall be filed with such director within 15 business days
of the customer/owner receiving the billing statement from the city. The
billing statement shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a
mail receptacle of the United States postal service.
   (d)   Failure to submit a timely written appeal for reconsideration shall be
deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or
reviews on such billing statement.
   (e)   The customer/owner requesting an adjustment may be required, at the
customer/owner’s cost, to provide supplemental information to the director,
including but not limited to survey data approved by a Texas licensed
professional land surveyor, engineering reports approved by a Texas licensed
professional engineer, or other documentation the director deems necessary.
Failure to provide requested information in a timely manner may result in the
denial of the adjustment request.
   (f)   Within a reasonable time of the submittal of an appeal, the director
shall either grant the petition and modify the drainage utility fee assessed;
deny the petition if no adjustment is warranted; or a hearing is deemed
necessary by the director, set a hearing on the petition for appeal.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-345 HEARINGS.
   (a)   If a hearing is deemed necessary by the director, then the director
shall set a hearing to determine if an adjustment should be made to the
drainage utility fee assessed to the customer/owner.
   (b)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the petitioner at
least 15 days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (d)   Notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail
receptacle of the United States postal service.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, the director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
   (f)   Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence and the
petitioner shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that the drainage
utility fee is not applicable, that the petitioner’s property is exempt from
the charge, that the drainage utility fee was calculated incorrectly or that
the determination of the value of the drainage utility fee was not calculated
according to the applicable drainage utility fee schedule or the guidelines
established in this
Division 4.
   (g)   The director shall act as the hearing officer.
   (h)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make written
findings and shall issue a written decision without undue delay.
   (i)   The decision of the director shall be final.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-346 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following entities or persons shall be exempt from this
Division 4:
   (a)   Any property to which a mandatory exemption under Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 552.053 applies, including without limitation:
      (1)   Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly
sufficient and privately owned stormwater system that does not discharge under
any storm frequency events or conditions to waterways controlled or maintained
by the city;
      (2)   Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time
that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed
has been accepted by the city for maintenance; and
      (3)   A subdivided parcel or lot, until a structure has been built on the
lot and a certificate of occupancy has issued, or the municipality has taken
another official action to release the property for occupancy.
   (b)   Any property to which a mandatory exemption under Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 580.003 applies, including without limitation:
      (1)   A state agency; and
      (2)   A public institution of higher education.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-347 NO WAIVER OF IMMUNITY.
   This
Division 4 does not warrant, guarantee or provide any assurance that a
benefitted property will be free from flooding or erosion, and does not create
additional duties on the part of the city. This
Division 4 does not waive the city’s immunity under any law.
(Ord. 16782, § 1, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 12.5-348 ACCESS TO STORMWATER DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   Absent the express permission of the director of the department of
transportation and public works, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter
or remain in any portion of city owned drainage infrastructure unless such
drainage infrastructure has been designated by the director of the department
of transportation and public works as open to the public. The director of the
department of transportation and public works shall have the authority to
designate city-owned drainage infrastructure as open to the public and to
determine the hours during which any such drainage infrastructure shall be open
to the public. Unless otherwise posted by the director of the department of
transportation and public works, any city-owned drainage infrastructure which
has been designated as open to the public shall be open to the public from dawn
until dusk.
   (b)   Absent the express permission of the director of the department of
transportation and public works, it shall be unlawful for any person to wade,
swim, boat, or fish in any city owned drainage infrastructure at any time.
   (c)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 23722-08-2019, § 1, passed 8-13-2019, eff. 8-22-2019)
ARTICLE IV: GROUNDWATER AND SURFACE WATER QUALITY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16259, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, amended Art. IV, in its
entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art.
IV pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table for
a detailed analysis of inclusion.
DIVISION 1: ENFORCEMENT OF THE TEXAS WATER QUALITY CONTROL ACT
§ 12.5-400 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACT. The Texas Water Quality Control Act, as amended, codified as Tex. Water
Code Chapter 26.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of environmental management or the
director’s authorized representative.
   PERMIT (n.). An order issued by the commission in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in the Act establishing the treatment which shall be
given to wastes being discharged into or adjacent to any water in the state to
preserve and enhance the quality of the water and specifying the conditions
under which the discharge may be made.
(Ord. 16259, § 1, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-401 DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the city and the purpose of this article to maintain the
quality of water in the city consistent with the public health and enjoyment,
the propagation and protection of terrestrial and aquatic life, the operation
of existing industries and the economic development of the city; and to require
the use of all reasonable methods to implement this policy.
(Ord. 16259, § 1, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-402 AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.
   The director of the department of environmental management and the
director’s authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this article and:
   (a)   Disseminate information on water pollution, inform and encourage
voluntary cooperation by persons and affected groups in the preservation and
regulation of the purity of the water; and
   (b)   Conduct water quality surveys.
(Ord. 16259, § 1, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-403 INSPECTION AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The director is authorized to inspect the public water and to enter
public or private property in accordance with § 26.014 of the Act, to determine
whether:
      (1)   The quality of the water meets the state water quality standards
adopted by the commission;
      (2)   Persons discharging effluent into the public water located within
the city and within 5,000 feet of the city have obtained permits for discharge
of the effluent; and
      (3)   Persons who have permits are discharging in compliance with the
requirements of the permits.
   (b)   The director may require the owner, lessee or operator of any
pollution source or suspected source to sample all parameters as designated by
the director for compliance with local, state and federal water pollution
standards. All such data shall be submitted to the director upon request.
   (c)   The director may require the owner or operator of a facility to
produce for the director’s inspection any permit to discharge effluent into the
water issued by the commission.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to submit water
pollution data to the director as required by this section.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to produce a discharge
permit for the director’s inspection as required by this section.
(Ord. 16259, § 1, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-404 NUISANCE.
   A discharge of any pollutant into or adjacent to water in violation of the
Act, regulations promulgated pursuant to the Act, or a permit issued pursuant
to the Act is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 16259, § 1, passed 1-11-2005)
§§ 12.5-405—12.5-410 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATIONS
§ 12.5–411 FINDINGS.
   The city council of the City of Fort Worth makes the following findings:
   (a)   Due to limited quantity and low quality, there are areas of shallow
groundwater within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction that are not
valuable as potable water sources, and therefore are not utilized for potable
water;
   (b)   Many commercial and industrial properties in Fort Worth and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction are underlain with unusable groundwater that has
become contaminated by historical on-site or off-site sources;
   (c)   The City of Fort Worth does not utilize groundwater as a source for
public drinking water, and less than 6% of all municipal water supplies in
Tarrant County come from groundwater sources;
   (d)   The use of municipal setting designations within Fort Worth and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction allows for a state-evaluated corrective action
process for groundwater that is directed toward protection of human health and
the environment balanced with the economic welfare of the citizens of the city;
   (e)   Where public drinking water is available, the potable use of
groundwater in designated areas should be prohibited to protect public health
and welfare when the quality of the groundwater presents an actual or potential
threat to human health; and
   (f)   People should have a say in decisions which affect their lives and
property, and public input should influence governmental decisions.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-412 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   AFFECTED COMMUNITY. Those persons entitled to notice in §
12.5-414(b)(7).
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. For purposes of signing an application, if the
applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a
general partner or proprietor, respectively; and if the applicant is a local
government, the chief executive officer or his or her authorized designee.
   CHEMICAL OF CONCERN. Any chemical that has the potential to adversely affect
ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution and mode
of toxicity.
   ENVIRONMENTAL RISK ASSESSMENT. The qualitative and quantitative evaluation
performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the
environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of pollutants.
   GROUNDWATER. Water below the surface of the earth.
   MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION (MSD). A designation as provided by Tex.
Health and Safety Code Chapter 361, Subchapter W, which authorizes the
executive director of the commission to certify municipal setting designations
in order to limit the scope of or eliminate the need for investigation of or
response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater that has been
restricted from use as potable water by ordinance or restrictive covenant.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human
consumption, drinking, showering, bathing or cooking purposes.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-413 USE OF GROUNDWATER IN MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION AS A POTABLE
WATER SOURCE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly or
with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a municipal setting designation as
a potable water source.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly or
with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a municipal setting designation
for a purpose prohibited in the ordinance creating that municipal setting
designation.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-414 APPLICATION FOR CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL OF MUNICIPAL SETTING
DESIGNATION.
   (a)   A person, including the City of Fort Worth, seeking city council
approval of a municipal setting designation (MSD) for property within the
corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth, or within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, shall file six copies of an application with the director. An
application may be filed in person, by United States mail, or by a document
delivery service.
   (b)   An application shall be on a form provided by the director, and shall
contain:
      (1)   Applicant’s name and address, and the name, address, daytime
telephone number and email address of a contact person;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries
of the MSD;
      (3)   A statement as to whether applicant has filed an application with
the executive director of the commission for an MSD for the property;
      (4)   A statement as to whether a public drinking water supply system
exists that satisfies the requirements of Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter
341 and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the property
for which the MSD is sought, and property within one-half mile of the property
for which the MSD is sought;
      (5)   A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including
the identified chemicals of concern therein and the levels of contamination
known to applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal area of the
contamination. If applicant has not documented groundwater contamination
offsite that originates from the property for which an MSD is sought, the
application shall include a statement as to whether contamination more likely
than not exceeds a residential assessment level offsite and the basis for that
statement;
      (6)   Identification of the person(s) responsible for the contamination
of the groundwater, if known;
      (7)   A listing of:
         a.   All owners of real property lying within one-half mile of the
subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll;
         b.   All state-registered private water wells within five miles from
the boundary of the property for which the designation is sought, including a
notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known),
and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the owners with notice as
provided in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.805;
         c.   Of each retail public utility that owns or operates a groundwater
supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the
MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the
utilities with notice as provided in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.805; and
         d.   Each municipality, other than the City of Fort Worth, with a
boundary located not more than one-half mile from the property for which the
MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not
more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought; and a
statement as to whether applicant has provided the municipalities with notice
as provided in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.805;
      (8)   A copy of the application to the executive director of the
commission, if filed;
      (9)   A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds
description of the property, the boundary of the proposed MSD, the location of
groundwater on the property, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the
limits that it has been defined. The map shall include a statement by a
professional land surveyor registered by the Texas board of professional
surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds property
description; and
      (10)   Any other information that the director deems pertinent.
   (c)   The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
applicant and shall contain the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to assure
that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (d)   An application shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of
persons listed in subsection (b)(7) above;
      (2)   An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in
subsection (b)(7) above, in a format acceptable to the director and compatible
with city information systems; and
      (3)   An application fee in the amount of $7,500.00.
   (e)   An applicant may withdraw its application in writing by letter sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the director, and shall forfeit
the application fee. If the director has not issued public notice prior to the
receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If
public notice has issued, a new application is subject to the limitations of §
12.5-420.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-2024,
eff. 10-1-2024)
§ 12.5-415 STAFF REVIEW.
   (a)   Upon receiving an application for an MSD approval, the director will
distribute a copy to his or her designee within the environmental management
department, and to the city’s water department, transportation and public works
department, and planning and development department for staff review. The
purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and
whether any current or future city property or other interests have the
potential to be impacted by the proposed MSD. City staff shall not be tasked
with conducting an environmental risk assessment of the application.
   (b)   City staff must send a written report to the director within ten
calendar days of receiving the application, noting any discrepancies in the
application, and advising of any city interests that may potentially be
impacted by the proposed MSD.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-27-2007; Ord.
18319-09-2008, § 7, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 12.5-416 DIRECTOR ACTION FOLLOWING APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (a)   Following staff review, if the director determines that the
application is complete, he or she will schedule a public meeting and a public
hearing. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing.
      (1)   A public meeting will be scheduled at a time no later than 45 days
following the day the application was received by the city; and
      (2)   A public hearing will be scheduled at a time no later than 60 days
following the day the application was received by the city.
   (b)   The date that an application is deemed to have been received by the
city is the date that the application was received by the director, as
indicated by the file date stamped on the application package by the department
of environmental management.
   (c)   If the director determines that the application is incomplete, he or
she will return the application to applicant, noting the deficiencies in
writing. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the deficiency
letter to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. If the
applicant fails to submit a corrected application within the allotted time, the
application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the application fee forfeited.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-417 NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING AND PUBLIC HEARING.
   (a)   Notice of the public meeting and the public hearing on an MSD
application may be combined and must include the date, time and location of the
two events, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description
of the property for which the MSD is sought, the purpose of the MSD, the type
of contamination identified in the groundwater of the property for which the
MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for
public viewing at a specified Fort Worth Public Library facility. Notice will
be made as follows:
      (1)   The director will provide published notice of a public meeting and
a public hearing for a proposed MSD by means of a legal advertisement appearing
in the official newspaper of the city, or a paper of general circulation, not
less than 15 days before the public meeting;
      (2)   The director will provide posted notice of a public meeting and a
public hearing by requesting that the city secretary post the notice at city
hall, in a place readily accessible to the general public at all times, not
less than 15 days before the public meeting; and
      (3)   The director will serve written notice of a public meeting and a
public hearing for a proposed MSD not less than 15 days before the date set for
the public meeting. Such notice shall be deemed served when it is deposited,
properly addressed and regular postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice
will be served to:
         a.   The applicant;
         b.   The list provided by applicant of owners of real property lying
within one-half mile of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the
last approved city tax roll;
         c.   The list provided by applicant of persons who own private
registered water wells within five miles of the subject property;
         d.   The list provided by applicant of each retail public utility that
owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles
from the property for which the MSD is sought; and
         e.   The list provided by applicant of each municipality with a
boundary located not more than one-half mile from the property for which the
MSD is sought or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not
more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought.
   (b)   The director will direct the erection of at least one sign upon the
property for which an MSD has been requested. Where possible such sign or signs
must be located in a conspicuous place or places upon such property at a point
or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare
adjacent to such property. Such sign(s) must be so erected not less than 15
days before the date set for the public meeting. Any such sign(s) will be
removed subsequent to final action by the city council on the MSD application.
The sign(s) must state that an MSD has been requested for the site and that
additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon
or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the
continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition
precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any
official action concerning the MSD application.
   (c)   The director will send a copy of the application to the Fort Worth
Public Library facility located nearest to the property that is the subject of
the application, and request that it be displayed for public review. The
librarian for the facility will display the application in a publicly
accessible area of the library until at least the completion of city council
action on the application, or the withdrawal of the application by applicant.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-418 CONDUCT OF PUBLIC MEETING.
   (a)   The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to provide
information to the affected community about MSDs and the application and to
obtain input on the application prior to a formal hearing before the city
council.
   (b)   The public meeting will be held in the evening at a location
convenient to the affected community.
   (c)   The applicant or applicant’s representative must appear at the public
meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in
person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the
application fee forfeited.
   (d)   The director will be responsible for the conduct of the meeting. He or
she will give the applicant or the applicant’s representative the opportunity
to present its reasons for requesting an MSD, and will give members of the
affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or make oral
comments on the application.
   (e)   The director will make a tape recording of the public meeting
available for the public.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-419 CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (a)   Prior to the hearing, the director will provide the city council with
a written report summarizing the request for the MSD approval, including any
concerns raised by the reviewing departments, and will attach a copy of the
application to the report.
   (b)   The applicant or applicant’s representative must appear at the hearing
and present the request for an MSD approval. If the applicant fails to appear
at the hearing either in person or by representative, the application shall be
deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited.
   (c)   Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application
will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city council rules or
guidelines for public hearings.
   (d)   Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may
deliberate the matter of the application, and then may either:
      (1)   Vote to approve or disapprove the application; or
      (2)   Postpone action on the application to a future date.
   (e)   In order to approve an application, the city council must:
      (1)   Adopt a resolution supporting the application to the Texas
commission on environmental quality; and
      (2)   Enact an ordinance prohibiting the potable use of designated
groundwater from beneath the property. The ordinance must include a metes and
bounds description of the property to which the ordinance applies; a listing of
the contaminants; and a statement that the ordinance is necessary because the
contaminant concentrations exceed potable water standards.
   (f)   In the ordinance enacted pursuant to subsection (e)(2) above, city
council may place other reasonable restrictions on the use of designated
groundwater from beneath the property.
   (g)   City council approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive
the city’s right to comment on an MSD application that has been filed with the
executive director of the Texas commission on environmental quality as provided
by Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.805.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-420 LIMITATION ON REAPPLICATION.
   If after public hearing the city council disapproves an application, or if
the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice has issued, no
new MSD applications for the property shall be accepted by the city or
scheduled for a hearing by the city council within a period of 12 months of the
date of disapproval or withdrawal.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§ 12.5-421 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A person who has received approval of an MSD from the city, shall,
upon issuance from the commission, provide the director with a copy of the
certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the property,
showing that response actions have been completed.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if they fail to provide the director with
the documentation required in subsection (a) above, within 30 days of its
issuance by the commission.
(Ord. 16259, § 2, passed 1-11-2005)
§§ 12.5-422—12.5-499 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: PUBLIC DRINKING WATER
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-500 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
      DEPARTMENT. The department of water of the City of Fort Worth.
      DIRECTOR. The director of the department of water or the director’s
authorized representative. In
Division 2 of this article, the term shall also mean the director of the
department of environmental management or the director’s authorized
representative.
      INSPECTOR. A person that is a certified cross-connection inspector
employed by or under contract with the city.
   (b)   If a word or term used in
Division 3 of this article is not defined in this chapter, it shall have the
definition provided for such word or term in the ninth edition of the Manual of
Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-501 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is the protection of the quality of city-
provided drinking water in furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-502 DRINKING WATER FACILITY STANDARDS.
   The physical condition of any plant furnishing water to the public for human
consumption in the city shall meet all drinking water standard requirements set
by the United States Public Health Service, the EPA and the commission.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-503 CITY DRINKING WATER ANALYSIS.
   The director shall perform analyses of water entering city distribution
lines and shall maintain records of such analyses, in compliance with
regulations promulgated by the commission.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-504 CONNECTION OF PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY TO CITY SYSTEM.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person connects any well, tank,
cistern or any other private water supply with the city’s water supply system
without written permission of the director.
   (b)   A well, tank, cistern or other private water supply connected to the
city’s water supply shall at all times meet all water hygiene standards
established by the commission. All connections shall comply with the plumbing
chapter of the city code and with
Division 3 of this article, regulating cross-connections.
   (c)   The director shall not be required to turn water on through a meter to
a private supply that does not meet the standards of this section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-505—12.5-510 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: PROTECTION OF LAKE WORTH
§ 12.5-511 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 551.002, the director is
authorized to safeguard and inspect the Lake Worth watershed.
   (b)   The director is further authorized to:
      (1)   Inspect premises discharging into the Lake Worth watershed;
      (2)   Order persons to cease discharging pollutants and/or polluted water
into the Lake Worth watershed;
      (3)   Inspect discharge permits issued by the EPA or the commission for
discharge into the Lake Worth watershed, and inspect any records maintained by
dischargers pursuant thereto;
      (4)   Take samples of water from the Lake Worth watershed, and samples of
any substances discharging into same, for analysis of their physical, bacterial
and chemical content;
      (5)   With the approval of the city council, protest the issuance of a
permit allowing discharge into the Lake Worth watershed;
      (6)   With the approval of the city council, request that the agency
issuing a permit to discharge into the Lake Worth watershed impose discharge
restrictions that are more stringent than those required by law; and
      (7)   With the approval of the city council, oppose the location of any
nonpoint source of pollution, mining operations or any landfill, compost
facility, or other solid waste processing or disposal facility which could
adversely impact the Lake Worth watershed.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-512 POLLUTION OF LAKE WORTH WATERSHED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person discharges or introduces any
pollutant or polluted water into the Lake Worth watershed.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person discharges or introduces any
harmful quantity of any substance into the Lake Worth watershed.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action of subsections
(a) or (b) above that the discharge was authorized by and in compliance with a
discharge permit issued by the commission or the EPA.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person is in control of premises
with a permit issued by the EPA or the commission to discharge into the Lake
Worth watershed and knowingly fails or refuses to allow the director to inspect
such permit or any records maintained pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-513 EXTENDED MUNICIPAL COURT JURISDICTION.
   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 552.002(c), the Fort Worth
municipal court has jurisdiction over violations of this article arising
outside of the territorial limits of the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-514 NUISANCE.
   The discharge of a pollutant, polluted water or a harmful quantity of any
substance into the Lake Worth watershed is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-515—12.5-524 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SUBDIVISION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-525 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, § 290.44, it is the
responsibility of the city to protect its drinking water supply by instituting
and enforcing a cross-connection program. The purpose of this division,
therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements and to
protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution due to any
cross-connections.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-526 COST OF COMPLIANCE.
   The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of
the property owners and their lessees. These costs include, but are not limited
to, purchasing, installation, testing and repair of the assembly. These costs
shall also include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. Any cost
incurred by the city to enforce this division is the responsibility of the
property owners and their lessees.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-527 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND RENTERS.
   (a)   It is the responsibility of all property owners and lessees to abide
by the conditions of this division. If changes are made to a premises plumbing
system, the property owner shall notify the director.
   (b)   The owner of leased premises is responsible for the installation,
testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on the premises. When the lessee
changes, the owner shall immediately notify the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-528 BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A certified cross-connection inspector employed by or under contract
with the city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be
installed within the city’s water service area. This does not include wholesale
customers or their water users.
   (b)   At a minimum, a backflow prevention assembly will be required in each
of the following circumstances:
      (1)   When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the
materials used in connection with any activity at a premises, or materials
stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply;
      (2)   When a premises has one or more cross-connections;
      (3)   When internal cross-connections are present that are not
correctable;
      (4)   When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it
impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist;
      (5)   When a premises has a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established;
      (6)   When entry to a premises is unduly restricted so that inspections
for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that
cross-connections do not exist;
      (7)   When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur,
a health hazard could result;
      (8)   When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is
deemed by an inspector to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these
regulations;
      (9)   When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not
been filed with the director;
      (10)   When a fire sprinkler system using nonpotable piping material is
connected to the city’s water system;
      (11)   In all new nonresidential construction there shall be installed an
approved backflow assembly at the service connection. The type of the assembly
will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by an inspector;
      (12)   When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end
use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service
connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the
most hazardous use of the building;
      (13)   If a premises is required to have backflow prevention assemblies,
but water cannot be turned off during the testing of such assemblies, the
premises shall be equipped with dual backflow prevention assemblies of the same
type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed;
      (14)   Any used water return system that has received approval from the
director;
      (15)   If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as
required by this division, a premises isolation assembly shall be required;
      (16)   If an inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have
been made to the plumbing system without the proper permits as required by the
plumbing code, premises isolation shall be required;
      (17)   All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or
elevated storage tank; and
      (18)   Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard connections and
wherever else the director deems retrofitting necessary.
   (c)   Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of
supply and/or fire protection shall have a backflow assembly on each service
connection. The assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of potential
hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the
buildings on the premises.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any
premises and knowingly fails to install and maintain backflow prevention
assemblies on said premises as required by this section.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages
any premises and backflow from the premises enters the public water supply
system.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-529 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   If the director determines that residential premises have a cross-
connection, said premises shall be equipped with an approved backflow
prevention assembly installed in accordance with this division.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-530 PLUMBING CODE.
   As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain and
operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the plumbing code.
If there is a conflict between this article and the plumbing code, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-531 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with
the following requirements, to ensure their proper operation and accessibility.
      (1)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the plumbing code and this division. The assembly installer shall obtain
the required plumbing permits prior to installation and shall have the assembly
inspected by a certified cross-connection inspector and as required by the
plumbing code.
      (2)   No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to
flooding. If a doublecheck valve assembly is installed in a vault, brass plugs
shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall
be provided.
      (3)   Assemblies shall be installed at the point of delivery of the water
supply, before any branch in the line, and on private property located just
inside the boundary of the city’s right-of-way. An inspector may specify other
areas for installation of the assembly.
      (4)   The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe
weather conditions.
      (5)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model
approved by the director.
      (6)   All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the
director prior to installation.
      (7)   The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for
maintenance and testing. Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least
a six-inch clearance on all sides of the assembly. All assemblies larger than
two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the back side, 24
inches on the test cock side, 12 inches below the assembly and 36 inches above
the assembly. “Y” pattern doublecheck valve assemblies shall be installed so
that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward.
      (8)   If the director grants written permission to install the backflow
assembly inside of a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible between
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
      (9)   If an assembly is installed pursuant to subsection (a)(8) above,
and is four inches or larger and is installed five feet or higher above the
floor, it shall be equipped with a rigidly and permanently installed
scaffolding acceptable to the director. This installation shall also meet all
applicable requirements set out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration and the State of Texas occupational safety and health laws.
      (10)   RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve
discharge can be drained to daylight through a boresight type drain. The drain
shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and
shall be screened on both ends.
      (11)   An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice
of RP assemblies. This air gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of
the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain
and in no case less than one inch.
      (12)   Upon completion of installation, the property owner shall notify
the director to test and inspect the assemblies. The property owner shall
register all backflow assemblies with the director. Registration shall consist
of date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial number of the backflow
prevention assembly, and initial test report.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person installs a backflow
prevention assembly in violation of this section.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to notify the director
to inspect a backflow prevention assembly after its installation as required by
this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to register a backflow
prevention assembly as required by this section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-532 TESTING OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (a)   The director will inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and
tested, all assemblies in each of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Immediately after installation;
      (2)   Whenever the assembly is moved;
      (3)   A minimum of once a year for all double check assemblies and
pressure vacuum breakers;
      (4)   Any premises that has RP assemblies as point-of-use protection
without high hazard premises isolation protection must be tested every six
months;
      (5)   Any premises that has an RP assembly as premises isolation without
high hazard point-of-use protection must be tested every six months; and
      (6)   Immediately after repair.
   (b)   Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the
director deems necessary.
   (c)   All assembly testing shall be performed by a certified and registered
backflow prevention assembly tester, in accordance with city-approved test
procedures.
   (d)   It is the responsibility of the property owner and the person in
control of the premises to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this
division.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any
premises and knowingly fails or refuses to have the backflow prevention
assemblies installed on said premises inspected or tested as required by this
section.
   (f)   The city shall not be liable for damage to an assembly that occurs
during testing, when such damage results from metal fatigue or deteriorated
metal, or when such damage occurs under standard testing procedures.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-533 MAINTENANCE OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (a)   A person who owns, operates or manages premises in which required
backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall maintain such assemblies in
proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All
maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all
applicable regulations of the commission and this chapter.
   (b)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that
allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the director.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to maintain
backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to comply
with a repair order issued by the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-534 THERMAL EXPANSION.
   It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility
of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation
of a backflow assembly.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-535 PRESSURE LOSS.
   Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly
shall not be the responsibility of the city. The department may give reasonable
assistance to a property owner regarding information on adequate sizing of
assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and
flows for fire protection.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-536 MOBILE UNITS.
   (a)   A person who owns or operates any vehicle that uses water from the
city’s public water system shall obtain a use permit from the director before
accessing the public water system. The director may require a fixed air gap or
backflow assembly mounted either on the vehicle or piping.
   (b)   The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with
this division shall be grounds for the city to revoke any permit or license
required under the city code to operate the vehicle or the business for which
such vehicle is used.
   (c)   The director may deny a use permit to any person who is not in
compliance with this division or who has a history of violating the
requirements of this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle in violation of this section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-537 WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS.
   Every wholesale customer that has a contract for water services with the
city shall have an active, ongoing cross-connection program approved by the
director. The city reserves the right to require a reduced pressure principle
assembly or air gap at the interconnect.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-538 RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly
upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided by this section.
   (b)   No encroachment agreement as required by the buildings chapter of the
city code will be necessary, but all other permits required by the city code to
perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained.
   (c)   A backflow prevention assembly required by this division may be
installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the
city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and
installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities.
The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure
and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
   (d)   Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends aboveground shall
be located no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb.
   (e)   A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner’s
sole expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any
city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility
construction or repairs or for purposes of public safety.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person installs or maintains a
backflow prevention assembly in violation of this section.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to relocate a backflow
prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a
written order from the city to do so.
   (h)   A backflow prevention assembly installed or maintained in city right-
of-way in violation of this section or an order issued pursuant to this section
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-539—12.5-542 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION II: CROSS-CONNECTION INSPECTORS
§ 12.5-543 CERTIFICATION OF CROSS- CONNECTION INSPECTORS.
   Inspectors performing cross-connection control duties within the city must
be certified by the director and shall meet the following requirements:
   (a)   Be employed by or under contract with the city;
   (b)   Attend a city cross-connection control inspectors certification
training course; and
   (c)   Successfully pass a written examination conducted by the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-544—12.5-547 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION III: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTERS
§ 12.5-548 REQUIRED LICENSE FOR A BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER.
   (a)   No person may operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within
the city unless that person has been licensed by the commission and has
registered with the city as required in §
12.5-549.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person changes the design or
operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly operates as a
backflow prevention assembly tester within the city without a valid license
issued by the commission.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20403-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 12.5-549 REQUIRED REGISTRATION OF A CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY
TESTER.
   (a)   A person licensed by the commission must then register with the water
department to operate as a test backflow prevention assembly tester within the
city; and must pay a backflow prevention assembly tester registration fee and
other applicable fees, as approved by the city council, which may be amended
from time to time.
   (b)   A registration shall remain in effect for a period of one year,
provided:
      (1)   The tester maintains eligibility for registration as provided for
in this chapter and license by the commission;
      (2)   The tester pays the registration fee as approved by city council;
and
      (3)   Registration is not revoked pursuant to §
12.5-550(c) by the director.
   (c)   Upon application for registration, a person must:
      (1)   Provide evidence to the director to establish that the applicant
has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow
prevention assemblies and identify all test gauges the applicant will use in
testing backflow prevention assemblies;
      (2)   Provide evidence to the director that the applicant has
successfully completed “Permit Confined Space Entry Training” as specified by
federal occupational safety and health agency’s 29 C.F.R. 1910.146;
      (3)   Provide a copy of the person’s valid driver’s license;
      (4)   Provide a copy of the person’s valid license from the commission;
      (5)   Provide documentation showing that the tester has maintained
liability insurance described in §
12.5-550(c);
      (6)   Provide a copy of the annual gauge calibration sheet;
      (7)   Provide copies of a valid sprinkler certificate of registration and
responsible managing employee licenses;
      (8)   Provide proof of general commercial liability insurance and
automobile liability insurance with the following minimum limits: $250,000 per
person and $500,000 per accident for bodily injury and $100,000 per accident
for property damage, or $500,000 if combined; and
      (9)   Any other documentation as requested by the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20403-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 12.5-550 REQUIREMENTS TO BECOME A REGISTERED CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION
ASSEMBLY TESTER.
   (a)   To be eligible to register as backflow prevention assembly tester, a
person must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Have a high school diploma, or equivalent;
      (2)   Meet all requirements as required by the commission, including
attending commission approved backflow prevention assembly tester certification
classes;
      (3)   Successfully pass a written examination conducted by the city or
its designee; and
      (4)   Successfully pass a hands-on proficiency examination conducted by
the city or its designee.
   (b)   To maintain registration as a backflow prevention assembly tester, a
person must:
      (1)   Maintain insurance as required in §
12.5-549(c)(8);
      (2)   Annually have each registered test gauge tested for accuracy and
calibrated to maintain a 2% accuracy factor and submit this information to the
director within three working days of the calibration;
      (3)   Perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow
prevention assembly tested. A test report and administrative fee for each
tested assembly shall be submitted as requested by the director. Test reports
that are incomplete, inaccurate or illegible shall not be accepted and will be
returned for resubmission; and
      (4)   List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and
maintenance reports prior to submitting them to the director.
   (c)   After notice and hearing pursuant to §
12.5-119 of this chapter, the director may revoke a registration if the
director determines that the tester:
      (1)   Has made false, incomplete or inaccurate assembly testing reports;
      (2)   Has used inaccurate gauges;
      (3)   Has used improper testing procedures;
      (4)   Has expired insurance;
      (5)   Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
      (6)   Has failed to register the serial numbers of his or her test kits
or failed to calibrate gauges annually; or
      (7)   Has failed to maintain a license from the commission, has failed to
pay fees as required by this article, or has violated any other provision of
this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person operates as a backflow
prevention assembly tester within the city without a valid registration issued
by the director.
(Ord. 20403-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-18-2012)
§§ 12.5-551—12.5-554 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION IV: INSTALLATION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 12.5-555 REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (RP).
   (a)   RPs may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that
would be hazardous to the public health if introduced into the potable water
system. An RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. An
RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
   (b)   RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure
for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult
manufacturer’s specifications for specific performance data.
   (c)   Premises where interruption of water supply is critical shall be
provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such
a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while
the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
   (d)   Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for
connecting a bypass line shall not be installed.
   (e)   (1)   The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and
maintenance and shall be located in an area where water damage to buildings or
furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge. An approved air gap
funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly;
this assembly will not control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain
lines to accommodate full relief valve discharge flow should be considered.
      (2)   RPs are typically installed above grade in well drained areas, but
may be installed below grade if an adequate drain to daylight is provided.
      (3)   Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow
for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures
are typically installed on the smaller assemblies. Daylight drain ports shall
be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
      (4)   All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of 12
inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve
opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal size of assembly above the
floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six feet is required in
vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 24 inches
square is required on all vault lids.
      (5)   Assemblies installed more than five feet above floor level must
have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel.
   (f)   The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather
conditions.
   (g)   Vertical installation is prohibited.
   (h)   Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer
with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
   (i)   The property owner assumes all responsibility for leaks and damage.
The owner shall also see that the vault is kept reasonably free of silt and
debris.
   (j)   All RP assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this division.
Any premises that have RP assemblies that are point-of-use protection without
high hazard premises isolation protection shall be tested every six months. Any
premises that have an RP assembly as premises isolation without high hazard
point-of-use protection assembly shall be tested every six months. Tests are
the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner shall notify the director
upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
   (k)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-
case basis. Any deviations shall be prohibited without prior written approval
of the director.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7121.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-555.1
   Reduced Pressures Principle Large Assembly
Notes:
   (1)   Large assemblies are those that are 2-1/2 inches and larger.
   (2)   Assembly shall not be subject to flooding.
   (3)   Drain lines shall be sized to accommodate full relief valve discharge
flow. See flow chart
12.5-555.2.
   (4)   Reduced pressure backflow assemblies are typically installed above
grade in well draining areas, but may be installed below grade if an adequate
drain to daylight is provided.
   (5)   The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer
with tapping blowout may be required. See standard detail
12.5-555.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7123.jpg]
   Standard Detail 12.5-555.2
   Relief Valve Discharge for Reduced Pressure Backflow Assemblies
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7125.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-555.3
   Strainers
   One of the most common causes of backflow prevention assembly failure is the
accumulation of sand, scale or debris trapped in the assembly. This debris can
cause the assembly to fail its required testing and can contribute to a shorter
working life span of the assembly.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7127.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-555.4
   Reduced Pressure Principle Small Assembly
Notes:
   (1)   Assembly must be protected from freezing.
   (2)   Removable insulated covers can be used.
   (3)   Enclosures shall be in an area not subject to flooding.
   (4)   The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer
with tapping blowout may be required. See standard detail no.
12.5-555.3.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-556 DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (DC).
   (a)   Double check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a
substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the potable water system.
   (b)   DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure
for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult
manufacturer’s specifications for specific performance data.
   (c)   Premises where interruption of water supply is critical shall be
provided with two assemblies installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such
a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while
the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
   (d)   Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for
connecting a bypass line shall not be installed.
   (e)   (1)   The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for
testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test
cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained,
constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum
clearances established below.
      (2)   Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a three-inch
clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault,
the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than 24 inches below grade. All
assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches
on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side and 12 inches below the
assembly. Headroom of six feet is required in vaults without a fully removable
top. A minimum access opening of 24 inches square is required on all vault
lids.
      (3)   Assemblies installed more than five feet above floor level shall
have a suitable platform for use by testing or maintenance personnel.
   (f)   Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four
inches that meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Internally spring-loaded check valves;
      (2)   Flow is upward through assembly;
      (3)   Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical
position; and
      (4)   Approved by director.
   (g)   The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather
conditions.
   (h)   Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer
with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
   (i)   The property owner assumes all responsibility for foundation or
basement wall penetration, leaks and damage. The owner shall also see that the
vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
   (j)   All DCs shall be tested in accordance with this division. Tests are
the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner shall notify the director
upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
   (k)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-
case basis. No deviations shall be permitted without prior written approval of
the director.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7129.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-556.1
   Double Check Valve Large Assembly
Notes:
   (1)   Large assemblies are those that are 2-1/2 inches and larger.
   (2)   Installations require the use of brass plugs in all test ports.
   (3)   The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer
with tapping blowout may be required. See standard detail no.
12.5-556.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7131.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-556.2
   Double Check Valve Small Assembly
Notes:
   (1)   Adequate space must be allowed for testing and maintenance.
   (2)   Area around assembly must drain well.
   (3)   Test cocks must be equipped with brass pipe plugs.
   (4)   “Y” pattern assemblies must be installed so that the test cocks are
pointed up. (See drawing above).
   (5)   Thoroughly flush the lines prior to installation of the assembly.
   (6)   Strainers may be required. See standard detail no.
12.5-556.3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7133.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-556.3
   Strainers
   One of the most common causes of backflow prevention assembly failure is the
accumulation of sand, scale or debris trapped in the assembly. This debris can
cause the assembly to fail its required testing and can contribute to a shorter
working life span of the assembly.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-557 DOUBLE DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DDC).
   Double detector check valve assemblies may be utilized in all installations
requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. DDCs shall
comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve
assemblies (DCs).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7135.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-557.1
   Double Detector Check
Notes:
   (1)   Brass plugs to be installed in all test cocks.
   (2)   If domestic service is installed off the fire service, a second gate
valve must be installed outside the vault. Joint restraint must be provided
between this valve and the main.
   (3)   Strainer may be required. See standard detail no.
12.5-557.2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7137.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-557.2
   Strainers
   One of the most common causes of backflow prevention assembly failure is the
accumulation of sand, scale or debris trapped in the assembly. This debris can
cause the assembly to fail its required testing and can contribute to a shorter
working life span of the assembly.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-558 PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB).
   (a)   PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a
substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage
only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure.
   (b)   The assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the
highest use outlet or overflow level downstream from the assembly.
   (c)   PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where
damage would occur from water discharge.
   (d)   The assembly shall be protected from freezing.
   (e)   The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance,
with a minimum clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly.
   (f)   PVBs shall be located between 12 inches and 60 inches above ground
level.
   (g)   A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
   (h)   All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this division. Tests are
the responsibility of the assembly owner. The owner shall notify the director
upon installation of any backflow prevention assembly.
   (i)   Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case by
case basis. No deviations shall be permitted without prior written approval of
the director.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7139.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-558.1
   Pressure Vacuum Breaker
Notes:
   (1)   Downstream control valves or shutoffs are allowed.
   (2)   Install assembly at no more than 60 inches above ground level.
   (3)   Install assembly at least 12 inches above highest use outlet.
   (4)   No pumps or backpressure source allowed.
   (5)   No chemical addition into system allowed.
   (6)   Pressure vacuum breakers must be tested by a certified backflow
prevention assembly tester upon installation and annually thereafter; also when
moved or repaired.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-559 ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (AVB).
   (a)   AVBs provide minimal protection and are approved for very low hazard
application only. AVBs protect against backsiphonage only and are prohibited
where there is potential for backpressure.
   (b)   The assembly shall be installed a minimum of six inches above the
highest use outlet or overflow level downstream from the assembly.
   (c)   Shutoff valves downstream from the assembly are prohibited.
   (d)   AVBs shall be allowed only for those applications where there is less
than 12 hours per day continuous use.
   (e)   AVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where
damage may occur from water discharge.
   (f)   AVBs shall be allowed for point-of-use protection only in accordance
with the plumbing code. AVBs are not recognized as adequate protection by the
director, so additional protection may be required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7141.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-559.1
   Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker
Notes:
   (1)   No control valves or shutoffs allowed downstream.
   (2)   Install assembly at no more than 60 inches above ground level.
   (3)   Install assembly at least six inches above highest downstream use
piping.
   (4)   No pumps or backpressure source allowed.
   (5)   No chemical addition into system allowed.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-560 AIR GAP SEPARATION.
   (a)   Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards
and may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be
hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
   (b)   An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the
supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel,
in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may
be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45 degree angle. The air gap
distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed.
   (c)   Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior
approval from the director, and shall be available for inspection at all
reasonable times.
   (d)   Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when
spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three
times the diameter of the effective opening for a single or a distance greater
than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
   (e)   In cases where there are three or more side walls, ribs or similar
obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane
of the spout opening other than as specified in subsection (d) above, the air
gap shall be measured from the top of the wall.
   (f)   The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the
seat of the control valve or the supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly
or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective opening shall
be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the
area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7143.jpg]
   Standard Detail No. 12.5-560.1
   Air Gap Separation
Notes:
   (1)   Provides maximum protection.
   (2)   The vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter
of the inlet pipe but never less than one inch.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-561 FIRE SYSTEMS.
   An approved double-check valve assembly shall be the minimum protection for
fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable
water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each
24-hour period, unless a variance has been issued in writing from the director.
An RP assembly shall be installed if any solution other than the potable water
can be introduced into the sprinkler system.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-562 OFFENSE.
   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly installs or maintains
backflow prevention assemblies or air gaps in violation of this subdivision.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-563—12.5-569 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION V: ENFORCEMENT
§ 12.5-570 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   (a)   Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly
shall during the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. permit the director to
enter their premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and
fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine compliance with
this division.
   (b)   If any water user refuses access to a premises during said times for
inspection by an inspector, the water user shall install a reduced pressure
principle assembly at the service connection to that premises.
   (c)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
premises to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the water user at the
written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs
of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to install a
reduced pressure principle assembly in accordance with this subsection (d)
after receiving notice from the director to do so.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-571 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF UTILITY SERVICE.
   (a)   The director may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any
premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
backflow which:
      (1)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
      (2)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
city’s public water supply.
   (b)   As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the
director shall notify the owner or person in charge of the premises of the
suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
order such person to correct the cross-connection which allowed the backflow to
occur. When time permits, the director should also notify the owner or person
in charge prior to suspending water service.
   (c)   If the person fails to comply with an order issued under subsection
(b) above, the director may take such steps as the director deems necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the public water supply or to minimize danger to
persons.
   (d)   The director shall not reinstate suspended services until:
      (1)   The person presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the
backflow has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
      (2)   The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in
responding to the backflow or threatened backflow; and
      (3)   The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service.
   (e)   A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement
action to the director, in writing, within ten days of notice of the suspension
in accordance with §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to
premises suspended pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
director.
   (g)   The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its
response, abatement and remediation costs pursuant to the procedure set out in
§
12.5-120 of this chapter.
   (h)   The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other
remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar
against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-572 NONEMERGENCY TERMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (a)   The director may terminate the city-provided water supply of any water
user who violates the following conditions:
      (1)   Refusing the director reasonable access to the water user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection;
      (2)   Hindering or denying the director access to backflow prevention
assemblies;
      (3)   Failing to install a reduced pressure principle assembly as
required by §
12.5-570;
      (4)   Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in
compliance with this division; or
      (5)   Failing to install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing
systems in accordance with the plumbing code.
   (b)   The director will notify a water user of the proposed termination of
its water supply. The water user may petition the director for a
reconsideration and hearing pursuant to §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (c)   Exercise of this enforcement option by the director shall not be a bar
to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user.
   (d)   The director shall not reinstate suspended services until:
      (1)   The person presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the
backflow has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
      (2)   The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-573 NUISANCE.
   Backflow entering or threatening to enter the public water supply from any
premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-574—12.5-599 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-600 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article and in any wastewater discharge permit issued
pursuant to this article shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water
Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
   BTEX. The sum of the concentrations of benzene, toluene, xylene and ethyl
benzene.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of water or the director’s
authorized representative. When used in the context of inspections and
enforcement actions, the term also means the DIRECTOR of the department of
environmental management or the director’s authorized representative.
   DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic
source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   MAY. Permissive or discretionary.
   PER- AND POLY-FLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES (PFAS). The following group of
synthetic chemicals used in industrial and consumer products which do not
degrade easily in the environment: Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA),
Perfluorooctane Sulfonic Acid (PFOS), Perfluornonanoic Acid (PFNA),
Perfluorohexane Sulfonate (PFHxS), Perfluorobutance Sulfonate (PFBS), and
Perfluorohexanoic Acid (PFHxA).
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS (TTOs). The specific list for each categorical industry
of the sum of the masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed
in 40 C.F.R. 122 Appendix D, Table II, excluding pesticides, found in
industrial users’ discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. Only
those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, if any, shall be analyzed
for non-categorical industries. TTOs are specific to each particular federal
category.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation. An affirmative defense to UPSET
applies only in causes of action brought in federal court pursuant to §
12.5-677.1 of this code.
   USER. A person is a source of an indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 4, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 2, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 26888-04-2024, § 1, passed 4-23-
2024, eff. 5-3-2024)
§ 12.5-601 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the POTW, to
enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act, as
amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations
(40 C.F.R. Part 403). The objectives of this article are:
   (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   (c)   To protect the health and safety of both POTW personnel and the
general public;
   (d)   To promote the reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the POTW;
   (e)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW;
   (f)   To provide for wastewater contracts between the city and other
municipalities or extra-jurisdictional users who discharge to the POTW; and
   (g)   To enable the city to comply with its TPDES permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
POTW is subject.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 4, passed 7-25-2006)
§ 12.5-602 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The director of the department of water and the director’s authorized
representatives are authorized to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article. Additionally, the director of the department of
environmental management and the director’s authorized representatives are
authorized to make inspections pursuant to this article and to take enforcement
action against violators.
   (b)   For the purpose of promoting consistency of enforcement throughout the
city’s jurisdiction and service area, the director shall promulgate an
enforcement response plan.
   (c)   The director shall have the authority to promulgate administrative
regulations which are consistent with this article and which are necessary for
the proper administration and enforcement of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-603 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for reimbursement of
costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permits;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collecting and analyzing a user’s discharge and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
      (4)   Fees for filing appeals; and
      (5)   Other fees as the director may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained within this article.
   (b)   Such fees shall relate solely to the matters covered by this
Article VI and are separate from and in addition to all other fees, fines and
penalties assessable by the city.
   (c)   The fee schedule may be amended from time-to-time as the city council
deems reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17075, § 1, passed 7-25-2006)
§ 12.5-604 INCORPORATION OF EPA OR TCEQ STANDARDS.
   All categorical pretreatment standards, sewage pretreatment rules, lists of
toxic pollutants, industrial categories, recordkeeping requirements and other
applicable regulations promulgated by the EPA or TCEQ, including all future
amendments of same, are hereby incorporated into this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 5, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 3, passed 1-10-2012)
§§ 12.5-605—12.5-609 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS
§ 12.5-610 DISCHARGES TO THE CITY OF FORT WORTH VILLAGE CREEK WATER RECLAMATION
FACILITY.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension;
      (4)   Oil and grease.
         a.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or non polar
products of mineral oil origin in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l;
         b.   Visible free floatable polar oils, fats or grease or a
concentration greater than 250 mg/l in wastewater discharged from industrial or
commercial facilities into the POTW; and
         c.   In no case shall discharges in amounts that cause interference or
operational problems with the POTW be allowed;
      (5)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (6)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (7)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (9)   Industrial waste.
         a.   Trucked or hauled industrial waste, except as approved in writing
by the director; or
         b.   Trucked or hauled waste from any industrial activities/processes
regulated by any specific category listed in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (40
CFR) Parts 405 - 471 with detectable quantities of PFAS;
      (10)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (11)   Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide in excess of ten
parts per million in water.
      (12)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (13)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (14)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
director;
      (15)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (16)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director
in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (17)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (18)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (19)   Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming
pool drainage from public and semi-public swimming pools may be discharged to
the POTW with the prior consent of the director. Swimming pool filter backwash
may be discharged to the POTW;
      (20)   BTEX concentration greater than 1.0 mg/l; or
      (21)   Any PFAS or PFAS-related substances above baseline collection
system concentrations of 25 ng/L without an approved plan of correction, as
defined in the dischargers permit, which employs “Best Management Practices”
(BMPs) to reduce or eliminate the pollutants within one year of detection/
notification.
   (c)   Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found
at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated
into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical
pretreatment standards.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can demonstrate, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA
when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
   (d)   Local limits.
      (1)   The following local pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. The limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may impose mass limitations
in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated
otherwise.
      (2)    No person shall discharge wastewater containing the following.
Pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations
exceeding the following:
Pollutant Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Pollutant                       Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Arsenic                         0.25
Cadmium                         0.15
Chromium                        5.0
Copper                          4.0
Lead                            2.9
Mercury                         0.01
Nickel                          2.0
Silver                          1.0
Zinc                            5.0
Cyanide or cyanogens compounds  1.0
(expressed as total CN-)
 
   (e)   The director may develop best management practices by ordinance
approved by the city council, or in individual wastewater discharge permits to
help implement local limits and other pretreatment standards and the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person
processes or stores pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this
section in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 6, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
17074, § 5, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 18428-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-6-2009; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 4, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 26888-04-2024, § 2, passed 4-23-
2024, eff. 5-3-2024; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 2, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-
2024)
§ 12.5-610.1 DISCHARGES TO THE TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY CENTRAL REGIONAL
WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension or fats, oil and grease measured as total
oil and grease in excess of 200 mg/l;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled waste except at discharge points designated by
the director;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair; hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous
oxide in excess of ten parts per million.
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
director;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director
in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or
      (16)   Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming
pool drainage from public and semi-public swimming pools may be discharged to
the POTW with the prior consent of the director. Swimming pool filter backwash
may be discharged to the POTW.
   (c)   Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found
at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby
incorporated into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
      (2)   When regulated, process wastewater subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard is mixed with non-regulated wastewaters prior to
treatment, the director or the industrial user with the written concurrence of
the director, shall derive fixed alternative discharge limits in accordance
with procedures and the combined wastestream formula found in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6
(e) or by a flow weighted average.
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
   (d)   Local limits.
      (1)   The following local pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. The limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may impose mass limitations
in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated
otherwise.
      (2)   No person shall discharge wastewater containing the following.
Pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations
exceeding the following:
Pollutant Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Pollutant       Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Arsenic         0.2
Cadmium         0.1
Chromium, total 2.1
Copper          1.8
Cyanide, total  0.4
Lead            1.2
Mercury         0.06
Molybdenum      0.5
Nickel          3.3
Selenium        0.2
Silver          0.8
Zinc            6.1
 
   (e)   Best management practices. The director may develop best management
practices by ordinance approved by the city council, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits to help implement local limits and other
pretreatment standards and the requirements of this section.
   (f)   Offense. A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the
person processes or stores pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by
this section in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 15496, § 7, passed 3-25-2003; Ord. 17074, § 6, passed 7-25-2006; Ord.
18428-01-2009, § 2, passed 1-6-2009; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 5, passed 1-10-2012;
Ord. 27308-11-2024, §§ 3, 5, 6, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024)
§ 12.5-610.2 DISCHARGES TO THE TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY DENTON CREEK REGIONAL
WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
regardless of whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (b)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.0, or
otherwise causing corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension or fats, oil and grease measured as total
oil and grease in excess of 200 mg/l;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled waste except at discharge points designated by
the director;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair; hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous
oxide in excess of ten one-hundredths mg/l;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
director;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director
in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or
      (17)   Swimming pool drainage from private residential pools. Swimming
pool drainage from public and semi-public swimming pools may be discharged to
the POTW with the prior consent of the director. Swimming pool filter backwash
may be discharged to the POTW.
   (c)   Categorical pretreatment. The categorical pretreatment standards found
at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated
into this article. A user shall not discharge in violation of categorical
pretreatment standards.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
      (2)   When regulated, process wastewater subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard is mixed with non-regulated wastewaters prior to
treatment, the director or the industrial user with the written concurrence of
the director, shall derive fixed alternative discharge limits in accordance
with procedures and the combined wastestream formula found in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6
(e) or by a flow weighted average.
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
   (d)   Local limits.
      (1)   The following local pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. The limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The director may impose mass limitations
in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated
otherwise.
      (2)   No person shall discharge wastewater containing the following.
Pollutants in the form of compounds or elements with total concentrations
exceeding the following:
Pollutant Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Pollutant       Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit mg/l
Cadmium         0.047
Chromium, total 10.0
Copper          3.51
Lead            0.22
Mercury         0.005
Nickel          2.98
Zinc            2.99
Cyanide, total  1.0
 
   (e)   The director may develop best management practices by ordinance
approved by the city council, or in individual wastewater discharge permits to
help implement local limits and other pretreatment standards and the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if with criminal negligence the person
processes or stores pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this
section in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ord. 15496, § 8, passed 3-25-2003; Ord. 17074, § 7, passed 7-25-2006; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 6, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 4, passed 11-19-
2024, eff. 11-29-2024; Ord. 27966-09-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-
1-2025)
§ 12.5-611 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW than those set forth above.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-612 DILUTION.
   (a)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (b)   The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-613 UPSET.
   When an upset occurs, a user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment equipment until the
equipment is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. The
user must also report the upset in accordance with §
12.5-656. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things,
the primary source of power of the treatment equipment is reduced, lost or
fails. A user may have an affirmative defense to upset under §
12.5-677.1 of this article only if the cause of action is brought in a federal
court.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 7, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-614 BYPASS.
   (a)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
   (b)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
   (c)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of
this section.
      (2)   The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-615—12.5-619 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 12.5-620 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (a)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in
Division 2 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA or
TCEQ, the state or the director, whichever is more stringent.
   (b)   The user shall provide, operate and maintain any facilities necessary
for compliance at the user’s expense.
   (c)   The director may require a user to submit detailed plans describing
such facilities and operating procedures to the director for review. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 9, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-621 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (a)   When necessary to prevent interference, pass through or sanitary sewer
overflow the director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak
flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions
as may be necessary to protect the POTW and to determine the user’s compliance
with the requirements of this article.
   (b)   The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control structure to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (c)   A user shall provide grease traps and/or grit traps when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater.
      (1)   Grease and grit traps shall not be required for residential users.
      (2)   Grease and grit traps shall be of a type and a capacity approved by
the city and shall be located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning,
maintenance and inspection. The installation of grease traps and grit traps
shall comply with the requirements of the plumbing code.
      (3)   Grease and grit traps shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at the user’s expense.
      (4)   
Article VII of this chapter provides additional requirements for the use,
servicing and maintenance of grease and grit traps. The wastes regulated by
Article VII do not include hazardous waste and Class 1 nonhazardous industrial
solid waste.
   (d)   The director may require users with the potential to discharge
flammable substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-622 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   The director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges at the
time of SIU determination, or at least by the first year. All the activities
associated with slug control evaluation and results are to be kept in the
industrial user file. The director may require any user to develop, submit for
approval and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be
necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop
such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan
shall, at a minimum, include the:
   (a)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
12.5-656 of this article; and
   (d)   Procedures as needed to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 8, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-623 HAULED SEPTAGE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   (a)   Septage and chemical toilet waste.
      (1)   Hauled septage and chemical toilet waste shall not be discharged
into the POTW except at such locations as are designated by the director, and
at such times as are established by the director.
      (2)   The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the hauler to
provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   (b)   Additional regulations. 
Article VII of this chapter provides additional regulations for the generation,
transportation and disposal of liquid waste.
   (c)   Industrial solid waste.
      (1)   In order to ensure that trucked industrial solid waste is not being
discharged into the POTW, the director may require any user who generates such
waste to report the type and amount of the waste, and the location and manner
of its disposal.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person generates industrial
solid waste and knowingly fails to make reports as required by the director
pursuant to subsection (c)(1) above.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-624—12.5-629 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
§ 12.5-630 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the director, a user shall submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within the time specified within
the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and
may periodically require users to update this information.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 10, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-631 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   All nondomestic users which discharge into the POTW shall be grouped
according to the following definitions:
      (1)   Group I significant industrial users;
      (2)   Group II commercial facilities and non-significant industrial users
(NSIU). Those commercial facilities and industrial users which are not included
in Group I. Examples include, but are not limited to, automotive service shops,
car washes, small food processors and photographic developing shops;
      (3)   Group III classed high strength users. Restaurants or other
businesses which can be classed according to any average strength or abnormal
strength of their wastewater;
      (4)   Group IV wastewater haulers. Septage and chemical toilet waste
haulers desiring to discharge into the POTW. Waste must be generated within the
city’s service area;
      (5)   Group V ground water remediation dischargers. Dischargers who are
retrieving contaminated underground water, pretreating such water, and then
discharging into the POTW; and
      (6)   Group VI non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU).
Facility that never discharges categorical wastewater even though categorical
process(es) are located on-site.
   (b)   No Group I, Group IV or Group V or Group VI user shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit
from the director.
   (c)   The director may require any Group II or Group III user to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit. Within 30 days after being notified by the
director that a wastewater discharge permit is required, the user shall submit
a completed application in compliance with this article. After 60 days from the
date a Group II or Group III user is notified by the director that a permit is
required, the user shall cease discharge to the POTW without a wastewater
discharge permit.
   (d)   Any violation of the terms and/or conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this chapter. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or
with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 11, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 9, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-632 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (a)   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such
permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. For significant
industrial users (SIU), an application shall be filed with the director at
least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence. Non-significant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) and non-
significant industrial users (NSIU) shall be required to submit applications at
dates specified by the director. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not
be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
   (b)   The director may require all users to submit as part of an application
the following information:
      (1)   All information required by §
12.5-651 of this article;
      (2)   Description of activities, structures, equipment and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 9, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-633 SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (b)   A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial
user by the director pursuant to §§
12.5-103 and
12.5-631(a)(6); must annually submit any report required by the director and
the following statement signed in accordance with requirements in 40 C.F.R. §
403.120(l).
      “Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R.
____________, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that
during the period from ____________,                  to ____________, [months,
days, year]:
      (1)   The facility described as ____________ [facility name] met the
definition and criteria of a non-significant categorical industrial user as
described in §§
12.5-103 and
12.5-631(a)(6) of this article;
      (2)   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
      (3)   The facility never discharged categorical process wastewater on any
given day during this reporting period.”
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 9, passed 1-10-2012)
§§ 12.5-634—12.5-638 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 12.5-639 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   (a)   The director will evaluate the data furnished by a user’s permit
application, and may require additional information.
   (b)   Within a reasonable period of time following receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether to
issue a wastewater discharge permit.
   (c)   The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit. A permit denial may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 1, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-640 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   (a)   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at
the discretion of the director.
   (b)   Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire.
   (c)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. A permit may be transferred to
the new owner in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
12.5-644 of this chapter.
   (d)   All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 8, passed 7-25-2006)
§ 12.5-641 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (a)   A wastewater discharge permit shall contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the permit’s duration;
      (2)   A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the city in accordance with §
12.5-644 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits and best management practices based on applicable
pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants (or best management practices) to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local
law;
      (5)   A statement of any civil and/or criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state or local law; and
      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
director to be necessary.
   (b)   Wastewater discharge permits may also contain the following
conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, flow
and sampling facilities and equipment;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure
compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 10, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-642 RESERVED.
§ 12.5-643 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city’s POTW, the city’s personnel or the receiving waters;
   (e)   To incorporate, revise or revoke new or existing best management
practices;
   (f)   A violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   (g)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
   (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 10, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-644 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (a)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives advance notice to the director and the
director approves the permit transfer. Failure to provide advance notice of a
transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.
   (b)   The notice shall include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 12, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-645 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director may deny or, after notice and hearing, revoke a
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed
conditions pursuant to §
12.5-655 of this article;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to meet best management practices, based on applicable
pretreatment standards;
      (9)   Failure to pay fines;
      (10)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (11)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (12)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (13)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
      (14)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit, this article or
Article VII; or
      (15)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance,
individual wastewater discharge permit.
   (b)   Petitions and hearings are subject to the requirements set forth in §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 10, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-646 PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   (a)   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with §
12.5-632 of this article, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the
user’s existing permit.
   (b)   If the user submits an application in compliance with subsection (a)
above, and the failure of the director to reissue a permit prior to the
expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act or omission of the
user, the expired permit shall continue to be effective and enforceable until
reissued.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-647 REGULATION OF WASTES FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (a)   A municipality which contributes wastewater to the POTW, shall enter
into an interlocal agreement with the city prior to contributing such
wastewater.
   (b)   Prior to the city entering into an interlocal agreement as provided in
subsection (a) above, the director may request the following information from
the contributing municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the director may deem necessary.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-648 EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS.
   (a)   An extrajurisdictional user shall apply for a permit in accordance
with this article at least 90 days prior to discharging to the POTW.
   (b)   This section does not apply to extrajurisdictional users in
jurisdictions which have an agreement with the city pursuant to §
12.5-647.
   (c)   A wastewater discharge permit issued to an extrajurisdictional user
shall be in the form of a contract, and must include, at a minimum, the
components found in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall require the approval
of the city council. An extrajurisdictional user shall agree to all the terms
of this article, the terms of
Article I, Division 3 of this chapter, and the terms of its wastewater
discharge contract in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
12.5-641 of this chapter prior to discharging into the POTW.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 9, passed 7-25-2006)
§§ 12.5-649—12.5-650 RESERVED.
DIVISION 6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 12.5-651 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (a)   Deadlines for submission or reports.
      (1)   Existing categorical users. Within either 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)
(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which
contains the information listed in subsection (b) below.
      (2)   New sources and new categorical users. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information
listed in subsection (b) below. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
   (b)   Information submittal. Users described above shall submit the
information set forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director,
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
12.5-660 of this article. In cases where the standard requires compliance with
a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard;
         c.   Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
12.5-661 of this article;
         d.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
(b)(5). However, the city may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
Historical data that can represent the current discharge only can be accepted
as a baseline report; and
         e.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment, best management
practices and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section shall meet the
requirements set out in §
12.5-652 of this article; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports shall
be signed and certified in accordance with §
12.5-633 of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-652 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
12.5-651(b)(7) of this article.
   (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (b)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (c)   The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (d)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the director.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-653 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.
   (a)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a
report containing the information described in §
12.5-651(b)(4) through (b)(6) of this article.
   (b)   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production
rate.
   (c)   For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual
production during the appropriate sampling period.
   (d)   All compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance
with §
12.5-633 of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-654 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS FOR FACILITIES DISCHARGING TO THE CITY
OF FORT WORTH VILLAGE CREEK WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY.
   (a)   All significant industrial users discharging to the City of Fort Worth
Village Creek Water Reclamation Facility shall, at a frequency determined by
the Director but in no case less than twice per year (once in July covering the
six-month period December 1 through May 31 and once in January covering the
six-month period June 1 through November 30), submit a report to the Director
containing at a minimum:
      (1)   The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards;
      (2)   The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period;
      (3)   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user; and
      (4)   Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for
water usage, materials recovery or disposal practices.
   (b)   All non-significant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) shall submit
a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be
completed according to the city’s current reporting requirements, including the
submittal of any applicable certification statements.
   (c)   If the director has determined that a non-significant industrial user
(NSIU) needs a permit, then the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the
month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the
city’s current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any
applicable certification statements.
   (d)   All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in
accordance with §
12.5-633 of this article.
   (e)   All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (f)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that
a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 C.F.R. Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
   (g)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the
procedures prescribed in §§
12.5-610,
12.5-661,
12.5-641 and
12.5-663 of this article, the results of this monitoring along with chain-of-
custody forms shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-
2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 7, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024)
§ 12.5-654.1 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS FOR FACILITIES DISCHARGING TO THE
TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY CENTRAL REGIONAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM.
   (a)   All significant industrial users discharging to the Trinity River
Authority Central Regional Wastewater System shall, at a frequency determined
by the Director but in no case less than twice per year (once in July covering
the six-month period December 1 through May 31 and once in January covering the
six-month period June 1 through November 30), submit a report containing at a
minimum:
      (1)   The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards;
      (2)   The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period;
      (3)   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user; and
      (4)   Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for
water usage, materials recovery or disposal practices.
   (b)   All non-significant categorical industrial users (NSCIU) shall submit
a report annually in the month specified by the director. The report shall be
completed according to the city's current reporting requirements, including the
submittal of any applicable certification statements.
   (c)   If the director has determined that a non-significant industrial user
(NSIU) needs a permit, then the NSIU shall submit a report annually in the
month specified by the director. The report shall be completed according to the
city's current reporting requirements, including the submittal of any
applicable certification statements.
   (d)   All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in
accordance with §
12.5-633 of this article.
   (e)   All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (f)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that
a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 C.F.R. Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
   (g)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the
procedures prescribed in §§
12.5-610.1,
12.5-610.2,
12.5-661,
12.5-641 and
12.5-663 of this article, the results of this monitoring along with chain-of-
custody forms shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 8, passed
11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024)
§ 12.5-654.2 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS FOR FACILITIES DISCHARGING TO THE
TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY DENTON CREEK REGIONAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   All significant industrial users discharging to the Trinity River
Authority Denton Creek Regional Wastewater System shall, at a frequency
determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (once in
July covering the six-month period December 1 through May 31 and once in
January covering the six-month period June 1 through November 30), submit a
report containing at a minimum:
      (1)   The nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards;
      (2)   The measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period;
      (3)   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by city or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user; and
      (4)   Contributing information as is determined necessary to account for
water usage, materials recovery or disposal practices.
   (b)   All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in
accordance with §
12.5-633 of this article.
   (c)   All wastewater samples shall be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (d)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the
procedures prescribed in §§
12.5-610.1,
12.5-610.2,
12.5-661,
12.5-641 and
12.5-663 of this article, the results of this monitoring along with chain-of-
custody forms shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 9, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024)
§ 12.5-655 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user shall notify the director of any planned significant changes to
the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume
of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
   (a)   The director may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under §
12.5-632 of this article.
   (b)   The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an
existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
   (c)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases or decreases of 20% or greater, the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants and the deletion of any pollutant
regulated by this article or a permit issued pursuant to this article.
   (d)   Significant industrial users that discharge wastewater to treatment
plants operated by the Trinity River Authority (TRA) shall provide prior
written notification to the city and the TRA of changes to its wastewater
discharges and any changes at its facility that affect the potential for a slug
discharge.
   (e)   Significant industrial users that discharge wastewater to treatment
plant operated by the city shall provide prior written notification to the city
of changes to its wastewater discharges and any changes at its facility that
affect the potential for a slug discharge.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-656 REPORTS OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (a)   In the case of any discharge, including upset, accidental discharges,
discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a nonroutine batch discharge or a
slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (b)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the director, submit to the director a detailed written report which
specifies:
      (1)   A description and cause of the discharge, including location of the
discharge, type, concentration and volume of water;
      (2)   Duration of noncompliance including exact dates and times of
noncompliance and, if the noncompliance is continuing, an immediate response to
cause the noncompliant discharge to cease; and
      (3)   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
continuation or recurrence of such an upset, slug load or accidental discharge,
spill or other conditions of noncompliance.
   (c)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.
   (d)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-657 REPORTS FROM NON-PERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the director as the director may require.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-658 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION BASED ON SELF-MONITORING.
   If a user’s monitoring and wastewater analysis indicates that a violation
has occurred, the user shall:
   (a)   Inform the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation; and
   (b)   Within ten days submit to the director a report which identifies:
      (1)   The time, date, location, processes, and operations associated with
the violation, and the personnel assigned responsibility and/or present during
the violation;
      (2)   The cause or probable cause of the noncompliance; and
      (3)   The actions taken and implemented to meet permit conditions.
   (c)   Repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and submit to the director
a written report of the results of this second analysis within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The use is not required to resample if the
director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the
director samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives
the results of this sampling.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-
2012; Ord. 24839-05-2021, § 1, passed 5-18-2021, eff. 5-27-2021)
§ 12.5-659 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (a)   Pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p), any user who commences the
discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the director, the EPA Region VI waste
management division director, and the TCEQ, in writing, of any discharge into
the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261.
      (1)   Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch or other).
      (2)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months.
      (3)   All notifications shall take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection (a) need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed conditions shall be submitted under §
12.5-655 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
12.5-651,
12.5-652 and
12.5-653 of this article.
   (b)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (c)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the director, the EPA
Region VI waste management division director, and the TCEQ of the discharge of
such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
   (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 13, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-660 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that 40 C.F.R. Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city
in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or TCEQ.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 14, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-661 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (a)   Except as indicated in subsection (b) and (c) below, the user shall
collect wastewater samples using 24 hour flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the
director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited
in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (c)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
12.5-651 and
12.5-653 and 40 C.F.R. §§ 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four grab samples
must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
city superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by
§§
12.5-654 and
12.5-654.1 and 40 C.F.R. §§ 403.12(e) and 403.12(h), the industrial user is
required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (d)   TTOs shall be sampled for as stipulated in each specific federal
category. The director may also sample any non-categorical user for TTOs and/or
any other parameters reasonably suspected to be present.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-
2012)
§ 12.5-662 DATE REPORTS DEEMED RECEIVED.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
receptacle serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-663 RECORD KEEPING.
   (a)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements
including documentation associated with best management practices established
under §§
12.5-610(e),
12.5-610.1(e) and
12.5-610.2(e).
   (b)   Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses.
   (c)   These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director.
(Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 11, passed 1-10-2012)
§§ 12.5-664—12.5-669 RESERVED.
DIVISION 7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 12.5-670 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (a)   At least once a year, the director shall inspect and sample each
significant industrial user. However, the director may inspect and sample each
SIU as frequently as needed during the pretreatment year. The director shall
evaluate and determine whether each SIU needs a plan to control slug
discharges. The director shall make the determination within a year from the
evaluation.
   (b)   Users must allow the director ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Users shall also comply
with all applicable provisions of federal and state law allowing authorized
representatives of the EPA and TCEQ access to all parts of the premises and
records for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of other authorized functions.
   (c)   User shall provide ample room in or near the monitoring facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples and analysis and whether
constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities should be
provided in accordance with the city’s requirements and all applicable local
construction standards and specifications, and such facilities shall be
constructed and maintained in such manner so as to enable the city to perform
independent monitoring activities.
   (d)   The director shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user’s operations.
   (e)   The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the user’s expense.
All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated as
determined by the director to ensure their accuracy.
   (f)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
   (g)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director, or authorized
representatives of the EPA and TCEQ, access to the user’s premises shall be a
violation of a wastewater discharge permit and of this article.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17074, § 10, passed 7-25-2006; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-671 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE FOR FACILITIES
DISCHARGING TO THE CITY OF FORT WORTH VILLAGE CREEK WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY.
   (a)   The Director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the city a list of the users discharging to the City of Fort Worth
Village Water Reclamation Facility which, during the previous 12 months, were
in significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Significant industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria
listed in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(8) below. Group II non-significant
industrial users that have been issued a permit shall be subject to SNC
criteria listed in subsections (b)(3) through (b)(8) below. Group VI non-
significant categorical industrial users shall be subject to SNC criteria
listed in subsections (b)(3) through (b)(8) below. All other industrial users
are subject to the SNC criteria listed in subsections (b)(3), (b)(4) and (b)(8)
of this section.
   (b)   For purposes of this Section, the term SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE
shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed a numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term
average or a narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director’s exercise
of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic reports (such as self-
monitoring reports), and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-
2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 10, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024)
§ 12.5-671.1 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE FOR FACILITIES
DISCHARGING TO THE TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY CENTRAL REGIONAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   The Director shall have published annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the city, a list of the users discharging to the City of Fort Worth
Village Water Reclamation Facility which, during the previous 12 months, were
in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Significant industrial users are subject to the SNC criteria
listed in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(8) below. Group II non-significant
industrial users that have been issued a permit shall be subject to SNC
criteria listed in subsections (b)(3) through (b)(8) below. Group VI non-
significant categorical industrial users shall be subject to SNC criteria
listed in subsections (b)(3) through (b)(8) below. All other industrial users
are subject to the SNC criteria listed in subsections (b)(3), (b)(4) and (b)(8)
of this section.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall
mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term
average or a narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise
of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation, which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 11, passed
11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024; Ord. 27966-09-2025, § 4, passed 9-16-2025, eff.
10-1-2025)
§ 12.5-671.2 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE FOR FACILITIES
DISCHARGING TO THE TRINITY RIVER AUTHORITY DENTON CREEK REGIONAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.
   (a)   The Director shall have published annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the city, a list of the users discharging to the Trinity
River Authority Denton Creek Regional Wastewater System which, during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall
mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term
average or a narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise
of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   Any other violation, which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 27308-11-2024, § 12, passed 11-19-2024, eff. 11-29-2024; Ord. 27966-09-
2025, § 5, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 12.5-672 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF WATER SUPPLY AND/OR DISCHARGE.
   (a)   The director may immediately and without hearing suspend a user’s
city-provided water supply and/or wastewater discharge when such suspension is
necessary in the opinion of the director to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which:
      (1)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment or to the health or welfare of persons;
      (2)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
POTW; or
      (3)   Causes or will cause pass through or interference of the POTW.
   (b)   If time permits, the director should notify the user prior to the
suspension.
   (c)   As soon as is practicable after the suspension of the water supply/
discharge, the director shall notify the user of the suspension in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order the user to cease the
discharge immediately.
   (d)   Any user notified of a suspension of its water supply/discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to comply immediately and voluntarily with the suspension order, the
director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage
to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. Such
steps may include immediate severance of the user’s water service and sewer
connection.
   (e)   The user shall not recommence its water service/discharge until the
director so authorizes and:
      (1)   The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the
noncomplying discharge has ceased;
      (2)   The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the
conditions creating the threat of imminent and substantial danger have been
eliminated;
      (3)   The user pays the city for all costs incurred by the city in
responding to the discharge or threatened discharge; and
      (4)   The user pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating services.
   (f)   A user may appeal the suspension in accordance with the procedures for
reconsideration and hearing set forth in §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (g)   The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its
response costs pursuant to the procedures set out in §
12.5-120 of this chapter.
   (h)   The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other
remedies set out in this chapter. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar
against nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-673 NON-EMERGENCY TERMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY AND/OR DISCHARGE.
   (a)   A user who violates the following conditions is subject to the
termination of its city-provided water supply and/or its discharge:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards of this article.
   (b)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its water
supply and/or discharge, and may petition for a reconsideration and hearing
pursuant to §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
   (c)   The user shall not recommence its discharge until the director so
authorizes and:
      (1)   The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the
noncomplying discharge has ceased;
      (2)   The user presents proof satisfactory to the director that the
conditions creating the threat of imminent and substantial danger have been
eliminated; and
      (3)   The user pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating services.
   (d)   Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, nor a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 1, passed 3-25-2003)
§ 12.5-674 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit
to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a
previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued pursuant to this chapter,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files
a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-675 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit
to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a
previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued pursuant to this chapter,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore
or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-676 ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or is in
control of any facility and there occurs a discharge from such facility to the
POTW in violation of this article, a permit issued pursuant to this article, or
any pretreatment standards.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or is in
control of any facility and fails to make any report to the director as
required by this article or a permit issued pursuant to this article.
   (c)   Other than subsections (a) or (b) above, a person commits an offense
if the person owns, operates or is in control of any facility and knowingly
violates a provision of this article, a provision of a permit issued pursuant
to this article, or any order issued by the director under authority of this
chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-677 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS FOR ACTION IN MUNICIPAL
OR STATE COURT.
   (a)   A person shall be entitled to an affirmative defense to violation of a
pretreatment standards or a permit under this article if a cause of action is
brought in municipal or state court and that person can establish that an event
that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit
issued under article was caused solely by an act of God.
   (b)   To claim an act of God, a user must control production of all
discharges to the extent possible until such time as the reduction, loss or
failure of it’s treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15496, § 15, passed 3-25-2003; Ord.
20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-677.1 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO UPSET ONLY IN FEDERAL COURT.
   A person shall be entitled to an affirmative defenses for a violation caused
by an upset only if a cause of action is brought in federal court and the user
demonstrates, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
   (a)   The user’s facility was at the time of the upset being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
   (b)   The user has submitted written notice with the information listed
below to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
notice is provided orally, a written notice must be provided within five days.
The written notice must state:
      (1)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
      (2)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if
not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
      (3)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
(Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-677.2 OTHER AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO SPECIFIC PROHIBITED DISCHARGE
STANDARDS ONLY IN FEDERAL COURT.
   A person shall be entitled to an affirmative defense for a cause of action
brought only in federal court for noncompliance with the general prohibition of
§§
12.5-610(a),
12.5-610.1(a) or
12.5-610.2(a) or a specific prohibition of §§
12.5-610(b)(3), (b)(5), (b)(6), (b)(7) or (b)(8),
12.5-610.1(b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6) or (b)(7) or
12.5-610.2(b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6) or (b)(7); or if the user can show
that the user did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through
or interference and that either:
   (a)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (b)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 20043-01-2012, § 12, passed 1-10-2012)
§ 12.5-678 NUISANCE.
   A discharge to the POTW in violation of any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-679—12.5-699 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: LIQUID WASTE
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-700 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of water or the director’s
authorized representative. When used in the context of inspections and
enforcement actions, the term shall also mean the director of the department of
environmental management or the director’s authorized representative.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-701 ADMINISTRATION.
   The director of the department of water and the director’s authorized
representatives are authorized to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article. Additionally, the director of the department of
environmental management and the director’s authorized representatives, are
authorized to make inspections pursuant to this article and to take enforcement
actions against violators.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-702 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is the regulation of the generation,
transportation and disposal of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage,
for the protection of the sanitary sewer system and the environment. The wastes
regulated by this article do not include hazardous wastes or class 1
nonhazardous industrial solid wastes.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-703 DISPOSAL FEE.
   City council shall set fees for the disposal of liquid waste.
(Ord. 13661, § 1, passed 12-15-1998)
§ 12.5-704 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: GENERATION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL
§ 12.5-705 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person collects or transports
liquid waste without a valid permit issued by the director.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement action for a violation
of subsection (a) above, that:
      (1)   The person was disposing of the person’s own waste from the
person’s own recreational vehicle, boat or travel trailer; or
      (2)   The person was transporting liquid waste through the city that was
collected outside of the city and which was disposed of outside of the city.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-706 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   A person required by §
12.5-705 to have a permit shall do the following:
   (a)   Complete and file a permit application on a form prescribed by the
director;
   (b)   Submit with the application a photocopy of applicant’s driver’s
license. If applicant is a person other than an individual, the driver’s
license shall be that of applicant’s chief operating officer or manager;
   (c)   Submit with the application a copy of the applicant’s current
registration issued by the commission, pursuant to Tex. Administrative Code
Title 30, § 312.142, to collect and transport liquid wastes;
   (d)   Submit with the application a copy of the state registration license
receipt issued to each vehicle that applicant wants to register under the
permit;
   (e)   Submit with the application a list of all disposers the applicant
proposes to use;
   (f)   Submit to the director proof that applicant’s vehicles which will be
registered under the permit are insured in at least the minimum amounts as
required by state law, or are self-insured as provided by state law to secure
payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of each
vehicle. A written statement from an authorized agent of the applicant’s
insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with
the director before a permit is issued. All such verifications of insurance
shall provide for a 30-day cancellation notice to the director;
   (g)   Provide any additional information requested by the director;
   (h)   Demonstrate to the director that applicant and applicant’s drivers
have sufficient knowledge of the vehicles they will be operating and the liquid
waste facilities they will be servicing, to collect and transport liquid waste
in a safe and competent manner; and
   (i)   Submit for inspection by the director each vehicle the applicant
proposes to register under the permit. Each vehicle shall meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   The business name, telephone number and address of applicant shall
be permanently displayed on both sides of the vehicle in letters of a minimum
height of three inches, in a color contrasting to their background. An address
is sufficient if it states city and state. If applicant’s business is not
within a municipality, the name of the county and state will be sufficient;
      (2)   The vehicle shall display current state vehicle registration tags
and inspection certificate;
      (3)   The vehicle shall display the commission-assigned registration
number in accordance with state regulations;
      (4)   The vehicle shall have a single waste tank which shall be of a
minimum 1,000 gallon capacity, permanently mounted on the vehicle and designed
to transport wastes. Portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed
in vehicles are prohibited. This subsection (i) does not apply to vehicles used
solely to transport chemical toilet wastes;
      (5)   The vehicle’s engine which powers its movement, drive train and
emissions system shall not be modified for the purpose of creating vacuum to
empty liquid waste facilities;
      (6)   The vehicle shall have a power take off (PTO) unit to create vacuum
sufficient to remove the entire contents of the liquid waste facilities it
services;
      (7)   The vehicle shall be clean and odor free;
      (8)   All piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to
the tank or vehicle;
      (9)   The tank shall be liquid tight;
      (10)   The tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior
portion can be easily cleaned;
      (11)   All piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to
clean;
      (12)   Any inlet, or opening of the tank shall be constructed so that
collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer or during transport;
      (13)   All outlet connections shall be constructed so that no waste will
leak, run or spill out of the vehicle;
      (14)   All outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the waste
handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue
spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use;
      (15)   All pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances
shall be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled; be
capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning; and operate without
spillage, spray or leakage;
      (16)   All tank valves shall have a safety plug or cap;
      (17)   All closed vehicles, tanks or containers used to transport liquid
wastes regulated by this division shall have sight gauges installed and
maintained in such a manner that they can be used to determine whether a
vehicle is loaded and the approximate capacity of the load. Gauges are not
required to read in gallons or liters, but shall show what percentage of the
tank capacity is filled. An alternate method to measure actual volumes may be
utilized if the transporter has received prior written approval from the
commission’s executive director and has provided a copy of that approval to the
director; and
      (18)   All discharge valves and ports shall be prominently marked. All
discharge ports shall be visible and readily accessible.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-707 ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue a permit after the applicant pays all
applicable fees, unless the director has cause to deny such permit, as
specified in §
12.5-708.
   (b)   A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance,
unless suspended or revoked.
   (c)   A permit shall not be transferable.
   (d)   The city council shall set a permit fee for each registered vehicle.
   (e)   The director shall issue a vehicle registration number to each vehicle
registered under a permit, and shall list these numbers on the permit. A
vehicle registration number is not transferable.
   (f)   A permit holder shall cause to be permanently displayed on both sides
of each of the vehicles registered under the permit the numbers assigned such
vehicles by the director. Such numbers shall be displayed prior to the vehicles
being operated under the permit.
   (g)   The vehicle registration number, preceded by the letters FW shall be
placed on both sides of the vehicle in numerals of a minimum height of three
inches and in a color contrasting to their background.
   (h)   The permit holder shall cause a copy of the permit to be kept in each
vehicle at all times and presented to the director or any peace officer upon
demand. A copy of the permit holder’s transporter registration issued by the
commission shall be kept in each vehicle at all times and presented to the
director or any peace officer upon demand.
   (i)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a liquid waste transportation vehicle without the vehicle registration
number assigned to that vehicle by the director displayed as required by
subsection (g) above.
   (j)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a liquid waste transportation vehicle which is not registered under a
city permit.
   (k)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste
transportation vehicle and fails to display to the director or any peace
officer upon demand, a copy of a valid city permit.
   (l)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a liquid waste
transportation vehicle and fails to display to the director or any peace
officer upon demand, a copy of a valid liquid waste transporter registration
issued by the commission.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 13661, § 2, passed 12-15-1998)
§ 12.5-708 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL.
   (a)   The director may deny the issuance of a permit if:
      (1)   The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the
applicant’s business, or applicant’s manager or operator has:
         a.   Within the five years preceding the date of the application been
convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine
exceeding $500, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in
operating a liquid waste transportation business; or
         b.   Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or
responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business;
      (2)   The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or
self insurance as required by this article;
      (3)   The applicant had a permit, that was issued under this article or
its predecessor, suspended or revoked within the 12 months preceding the date
of the application;
      (4)   The application contains a false statement of a material fact;
      (5)   The application or all required other information is incomplete;
      (6)   The applicant’s vehicles submitted for inspection do not meet the
criteria of §
12.5-706(i). However, the director may issue a permit but exclude from
registration those vehicles not meeting said criteria;
      (7)   The applicant has not shown proof that the applicant and the
applicant’s drivers are qualified under §
12.5-706(h);
      (8)   The applicant has violated a provision of this article within the
preceding 12 months; or
      (9)   The applicant does not have a valid liquid waste transporter
registration issued by the commission.
   (b)   An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director,
in writing, of the denial and the grounds therefore. Such notice will be sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address listed on the
application.
   (c)   An applicant whose permit is denied may request a reconsideration
within ten days after service of the notice of denial, in accordance with §
12.5-119 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-709 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   A person who has been issued a permit by the director shall comply with the
following:
   (a)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any
management changes in the business during the time the permit is in effect, and
shall provide the director with a photocopy of the new manager’s or chief
operating officer’s driver’s license;
   (b)   The permit holder shall notify the director of all changes in disposal
sites it wants to utilize during the permit period, and shall use only those
disposal sites permitted or approved by the commission and the director;
   (c)   The permit holder shall maintain insurance required by §
12.5-706(f) and immediately notify the director of any changes in its insurance
carrier or policy, and insured status or self-insured status;
   (d)   The permit holder shall maintain all vehicles registered under the
permit in compliance with the requirements of §
12.5-706(i);
   (e)   The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when it sells
or otherwise disposes of a vehicle registered under the permit;
   (f)   The permit holder shall maintain vehicle registration numbering in
compliance with §
12.5-707(f);
   (g)   The permit holder shall immediately notify the director when the
permit holder’s liquid waste transporter registration issued by the commission
expires or is suspended or revoked;
   (h)   A permit holder shall ensure that all of the permit holder’s employees
collecting and transporting liquid waste in vehicles registered under the
permit remain sufficiently knowledgeable of such vehicles and of the liquid
waste facilities they service, so that they are able to collect and transport
liquid waste in a safe and competent manner; and
   (i)   The permit holder shall ensure that none of the vehicles registered
under a permit exceed state weight limits while transporting liquid waste.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-710 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (a)   The permit holder may request a modification to the permit during the
permit year to register additional liquid waste transportation vehicles.
   (b)   A request to register additional vehicles shall be made to the
director in a manner determined by the director.
   (c)   Additional vehicles shall be submitted to the director for inspection,
and shall meet the requirements of §
12.5-706(i).
   (d)   The permit holder shall provide to the director proof of liability
insurance or self insurance for such additional vehicles in accordance with §
12.5-706(f).
   (e)   Before the director modifies the permit, the permit holder shall remit
a permit fee for each additional vehicle in an amount set by the city council.
   (f)   All additional vehicles are subject to the requirements of this
article.
   (g)   A permit modification shall not extend the term of the permit.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-711 TRANSPORTER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Before accepting a load of liquid waste, a transporter shall determine
the nature of the liquid waste and whether the transporter’s equipment is
sufficient to properly handle the transportation without spillage, leaks or
release of toxic, odorous or harmful gasses. Upon delivery of the waste to the
disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
   (b)   A transporter pumping waste from a liquid waste facility shall remove
100% of the contents of such facility. However, in the case of septic tanks, a
small residual of sludge may be left for seeding purposes.
   (c)   A transporter operating under a city permit shall not transport
hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste in a vehicle
registered under the permit.
   (d)   A transporter operating under a city permit shall not commingle
hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste with liquid
waste.
   (e)   A transporter shall not mix incompatible wastes within the same
container. A transporter shall not use the same container or pumping equipment
to collect or transport liquid waste which is incompatible with previously
handled waste, without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment.
A transporter may mix wastes with different characteristics if the disposer to
which the waste is being transported is authorized to store, process or dispose
of such mixed wastes.
   (f)   A transporter shall handle and dispose of grease trap wastes or grit
trap wastes commingled with septage at an authorized, licensed, disposal site.
This waste shall not be disposed of in a publicly owned treatment works.
   (g)   A transporter shall not operate a vehicle that fails to meet the
requirements of §
12.5-706(i).
   (h)   A transporter shall allow the director and any peace officer to
inspect vehicles registered under a permit, upon their request.
   (i)   A transporter shall allow the director and any peace officer to obtain
samples of liquid waste from the transporter’s vehicle, upon their request.
   (j)   A transporter shall not empty liquid wastes into a generator’s solid
waste receptacles.
   (k)   A transporter operating under a city permit shall use a manifest
system book consisting of five-part trip tickets, purchased from the director
for a fee established by the city council, in the following manner.
      (1)   Each manifest system book shall be used exclusively for a single
vehicle.
      (2)   A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each individual
collection, with the exception of chemical toilet companies servicing their own
units. Such companies shall be exempt from trip ticket requirements, but shall
be required to submit to the director a monthly total of volumes disposed of
and the locations of such disposal, no later than the tenth day of the month
following the month in which the disposal occurred.
      (3)   The transporter shall sign the original part of a trip ticket and
request the generator to do the same at the time of liquid waste collection.
The transporter shall not remove liquid waste from the generator’s premises
until the generator signs the trip ticket. The transporter shall leave the
first copy (yellow) of the trip ticket with the generator.
      (4)   The transporter shall have the disposer sign the original part of
the trip ticket at the time the waste is disposed of, and shall leave the
second copy (pink) of the trip ticket with the disposer.
      (5)   The transporter shall retain the third copy (green) of the trip
ticket for the transporter’s own records.
      (6)   The transporter shall return the fourth copy of the trip ticket to
the generator within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal
facility.
      (7)   The transporter shall deliver to the director all completed
original trip tickets no later than the tenth day of the month following the
month in which they were completed.
      (8)   The transporter shall retain its copies of all trip tickets for a
period of five years, and shall make such copies available to the director,
upon request, for inspection at all reasonable times.
   (l)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in the
transportation of liquid waste and fails to comply with any provision of this
section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-712 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   After notice and hearing the director may suspend for up to six months or
may revoke a permit if the director determines that:
   (a)   The permit holder, a partner of the permit holder, a principal in the
permit holder’s business, permit holder’s manager or operator, or an officer of
permit holder:
      (1)   Has within the five years preceding the date of the hearing been
convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine
exceeding $500, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in
operating a liquid waste transportation business; or
      (2)   Has been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty
or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business.
   (b)   The permit holder failed to comply with any of the permit conditions
stated in §
12.5-709;
   (c)   The permit holder or an employee failed to use the manifest system
book in compliance with this article, or to maintain manifests for five years,
or to allow the director to inspect the manifests;
   (d)   The permit holder or an employee improperly disposed of liquid waste;
   (e)   The permit holder or an employee commingled liquid waste with
hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste in a city-
permitted vehicle;
   (f)   The permit holder or an employee refused or failed to allow the
director or a peace officer to inspect a liquid waste transportation vehicle or
obtain liquid waste samples from such vehicle;
   (g)   The permit holder or any employee thereof, within the 12 months
preceding the hearing, was convicted of violating this article; or
   (h)   The permit holder’s liquid waste transporter registration issued by
the commission expired, or was suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-713 GENERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A generator shall have liquid waste removed from its liquid waste
facilities only by a transporter holding a valid permit issued by the director
to do so.
   (b)   Prior to liquid wastes being removed from its premises a generator
shall determine whether the disposer who will be disposing of the waste is
permitted or approved for such by the commission.
   (c)   A generator shall determine whether its liquid waste contains
hazardous waste or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste, and shall not
have hazardous wastes, class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid waste, or
hazardous wastes or class 1 nonhazardous industrial solid wastes combined with
liquid wastes removed from its premises by a transporter operating under a city
permit.
   (d)   Prior to a transporter leaving a generator’s premises with a load of
liquid waste, a generator shall sign the original of a city trip ticket
prepared by the transporter.
   (e)   A generator shall keep a copy of all city trip tickets for liquid
waste collected from its premises, for a period of five years, and shall make
such trip ticket copies available to the director for inspection at all
reasonable times.
   (f)   A generator shall install or provide liquid waste facilities on its
premises of such type and size as specified by the director.
   (g)   A generator shall maintain its liquid waste facilities as follows:
      (1)   Liquid waste facilities shall be maintained in continuous, proper
working condition;
      (2)   Pumping out of wastes:
         a.   Grease traps located upon the premises of food establishments
shall be 100% pumped out a minimum of every 90 days, and at all other times as
necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The director may order a generator
to have its grease traps pumped out more frequently than every 90 days if the
director determines such is necessary for the protection of the sanitary sewer.
         b.   Grit traps shall be 100% pumped out a minimum of once per year,
and at all other times as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. The
director may order a generator to have its grit traps pumped out more
frequently than once per year if the director determines such is necessary for
the protection of the sanitary sewer.
         c.   Septic tanks shall be pumped out as often as necessary to
maintain their effectiveness, and shall be inspected a minimum of once per
year. The tanks shall be 100% pumped out except for a small residual of sludge
left for seeding purposes.
      (4)   Liquid waste facilities shall be inspected for seepage into the
surrounding media whenever the trap has been pumped. The generator shall
repair, replace or install apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure the
proper operation and function of the liquid waste facilities.
   (h)   A generator shall supervise the servicing of the generator’s liquid
waste facilities, and shall ensure that they are completely emptied by the
transporter during such servicing.
   (i)   A generator shall maintain records of liquid waste facility
inspections for three years, and shall make such records available to the
director for inspection at all reasonable times.
   (j)   A generator shall report all spills occurring during collection to the
director within 24 hours.
   (k)   A generator shall immediately clean up or cause to be cleaned up all
spills of liquid waste and shall have the waste properly disposed of by a
transporter.
   (l)   A person commits an offense if the person is a generator of liquid
waste and fails to comply with any provision of this section or any order of
the director authorized by this section.
   (m)   A person commits an offense if the person is a generator of liquid
waste and allows liquid waste that emits noxious odors or offensive odors, or
that is creating an unsanitary condition or which is injurious to the public
health to accumulate upon premises under the person’s control.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-714 DISPOSER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A disposer shall sign the original of a city trip ticket prepared by a
transporter operating under a city permit for all liquid waste received on the
disposer’s premises from such transporter.
   (b)   The disposer shall note any significant discrepancies on each copy of
the trip ticket.
      (1)   Trip ticket discrepancies are differences between the quantity of
type of waste designated on the trip ticket, and the quantity or type of waste
a disposer actually received.
      (2)   Significant discrepancies in type are obvious differences which can
be discovered by inspection or waste analysis. Significant discrepancies in
quantity are:
         a.   For bulk weight, variations greater than 10% in weight; and
         b.   For liquid waste, any variation greater than 15% in gallons.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person disposes of liquid waste in
violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section.
   (d)   In order to retain city approval of its disposal site, a disposer
shall comply with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and shall:
      (1)   Maintain all valid federal, state and local permits required to
operate a disposal site;
      (2)   Comply with all federal, state and local laws pertaining to the
operations of the disposal site;
      (3)   Accept only those classes of liquid waste authorized under federal,
state and local laws; and
      (4)   Dispose of liquid waste in accordance with federal, state and local
laws.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-715 ADDITIONAL PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director in writing when
the liquid waste transportation business is sold or ceases to operate.
   (b)   In addition to the written notification required in subsection (a)
above, the permit holder shall immediately deliver to the director:
      (1)   All completed original trip tickets in permit holder’s possession;
      (2)   All unused trip tickets in permit holder’s possession; and
      (3)   Permit holder’s permit.
   (c)   The permit holder shall remove the city registration number from all
liquid waste transportation vehicles upon the sale or cessation of operation of
the liquid waste transportation business.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person has a permit to transport
liquid waste and violates any provision of this section.
   (e)   A permit shall be invalid upon the sale or cessation of operation of a
liquid waste transportation business.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-716 PREVIOUSLY ISSUED PERMITS.
   All permits issued by the director to liquid waste transporters pursuant to
the predecessor of this article shall remain valid until their expiration or
until their revocation pursuant to the ordinance under which they were issued.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-717—12.5-729 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: DISPOSAL OFFENSES
§ 12.5-730 INTERFERENCE WITH GREASE TRAP, GRIT TRAP OR SANITARY SEWER.
   A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or
blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a
grease trap, grit trap or the sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-731 BIOREMEDIATION OF GREASE TRAPS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes,
permits or suffers the introduction of any bioremediation media into a grease
trap.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection (a) above
that the use of the bioremediation media had been approved by the director, and
the media and the use of the media met all criteria of subsection (c) below.
   (c)   Bioremediation media may be used with the director’s approval if the
person has proved to the satisfaction of the director that:
      (1)   Laboratory testing which is valid for the type of grease trap to be
used has verified that:
         a.   The media is a pure live bacterial product and does not contain
any surfactants, emulsifiers or substances which act as solvents for fat; and
         b.   The media can perform 100% treatment/digestion of oil and grease
under controlled conditions in a set timeframe not to exceed two weeks.
      (2)   The use of the media meets the following operational criteria:
         a.   The volume of oil, grease and water discharged to the sanitary
sewer after use of the media will not exceed the volume of oil, grease and
water which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the
grease trap were being properly maintained;
         b.   The total mass of oil and grease discharged to the sanitary sewer
after the use of the media will not exceed the discharge limits for oil and
grease established in
Article VI of this chapter;
         c.   The total mass of oil and grease discharged after use of the
media shall be determined by the hourly collection of 24 samples per day over a
minimum two-week period prior to approval;
         d.   The BOD, COD and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use
of the media does not exceed:
            1.   The BOD, COD and TSS which would be discharged if the product
were not being used and the grease trap were being properly maintained; and
            2.   The discharge requirements for BOD, COD and TSS established in
Article VI of this chapter.
         e.   The pH of the discharge is not less than 5.0 nor greater than 12;
         f.   The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease
layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential of oil and grease
to be discharged to the sanitary sewer;
         g.   The media is not destroyed by the use of domestic or commercial
disinfectants and detergents, or by hot water;
         h.   Any waste pumped from the grease trap after use of the media is
acceptable at disposal sites for grease trap waste; and
         i.   The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the
sanitary sewer.
   (d)   All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection
(c) above shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to
determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH and other pollutant levels shall
use appropriate EPA test methods. Testing shall be open to inspection by the
director, and shall meet the director’s approval.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-731.1 NUISANCES.
   (a)   A vehicle transporting liquid waste which is leaking or spilling from
such vehicle is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (b)   Any premises upon which liquid waste has accumulated and which is
emitting noxious or offensive odors, or which is creating an unsanitary
condition, or which is injurious to the public health is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-732 CROSS-REFERENCE TO OTHER RESTRICTIONS IN THIS CHAPTER.
   (a)   
Article III of this chapter prohibits the discharge of liquid waste into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
   (b)   
Article VI of this chapter regulates the discharge into the POTW of trucked or
hauled septage and chemical toilet waste, and prohibits the discharge into the
POTW of trucked or hauled industrial waste.
   (c)   
Article VI of this chapter prohibits discharges into the sanitary sewer which
cause blockage, overflow or interference, or which exceed discharge
limitations.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-733—12.5-799 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12.5-800 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   COLLECTOR. An employee of the city or of a city contractor who engages in
the collection of solid waste for city customers.
   DIRECTOR. The city’s director of environmental management and the director’s
authorized representatives.
   NON CITY WASTE. Solid waste that is not collected through the city’s
household collection services as provided for in §
12.5-821 or the city’s commercial cart service provided for in §
12.5-830 by the city’s collector.
   PRIVATE COMMUNITY. Private condominium and/or town home developments where
the real property and all infrastructure are owned and maintained by a property
owners association representing the residents and home owners of that private
development.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
17655, § 1, passed 7-17-2007; Ord. 24533-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff.
1-1-2021)
§ 12.5-801 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The director of the department of environmental management and the director
of the department of code compliance and the directors’ authorized
representatives are authorized to administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
16189, § 3, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-802 OPERATION OF CONVENIENCE CENTERS.
   (a)   Convenience centers are operated in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the commission, with a concern for protecting the environment
and safeguarding the public health. Each site is operated in accordance with a
site operating plan that reflects operational standards of the commission and
provides guidance to site management in the safe handling, transportation,
recycling and disposal of municipal solid waste.
   (b)   The director is authorized to:
      (1)   Determine recycling and disposal procedures, authorized users and
methods of operation at convenience centers;
      (2)   Regulate traffic at convenience centers; and
      (3)   Inspect all incoming wastes at convenience centers and reject
materials that would in his or her judgment, be prohibited from disposal at the
site, interfere with facility operation, create a nuisance by reasons of
emission or disagreeable odor, or adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of facility operating personnel or the general public.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15463, § 3, passed 2-25-2003)
§ 12.5-803 SPECIAL WASTE NOT ACCEPTED.
   (a)   Special waste shall not be placed out for collection by the collector,
nor disposed of at any convenience center, except as provided by subsection (b)
below.
   (b)   Tires, dead animals and pesticide containers may be accepted as
follows.
      (1)   Fort Worth residents may bring a used or scrap tire that is an
incidental part of a load of household garbage and rubbish to a convenience
center. Truckloads of tires shall not be accepted. The director shall have the
right to refuse to accept any tire or load of tires.
      (2)   A dead animal weighing less than five pounds may be placed for city
household collection service if it is first wrapped securely in newspaper,
which is then taped or tied to prevent it from opening; placed in a disposal
trash bag; labeled as to its contents; and placed in the garbage cart. The
collector has the right to refuse any dead animal that might pose a health risk
to sanitation workers or the general public.
      (3)   Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide or rodenticide)
containers shall be triple rinsed and rendered unusable before being placed for
city household collection services, unless the type of container makes such
preparation not feasible. The collector has the right to refuse any pesticide
container that might pose a health risk to the collector or to the general
public.
   (c)   The director may establish other restrictions on the disposal of solid
waste at convenience centers. If such other restrictions are established, the
director shall post and maintain signs stating such restrictions. The signs
shall be posted at all affected facilities and shall be clearly visible to a
reasonable person.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if, in violation of this section, the
person:
      (1)   Places special waste for collection by the city’s collector;
      (2)   Allows special waste placed for collection on property under his or
her control to remain on such property; or
      (3)   Disposes of special waste at a city convenience center.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15463, § 4, passed 2-25-2003; Ord.
16189, § 4, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-804 VEHICLES AT CONVENIENCE CENTERS.
   (a)   Motor vehicles hauling solid waste into convenience centers shall be
properly covered or otherwise secured to prevent such waste from spilling,
leaking or blowing from the vehicle.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a motor vehicle at
a city convenience center in violation of subsection (a) above.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15463, § 5, passed 2-25-2003)
§ 12.5-805 ASSUMPTION OF RISK OF INJURY AT CONVENIENCE CENTERS.
   Any person entering upon a convenience center for any purpose shall be
conclusively presumed to know and appreciate the hazards and the extent of the
damage which accompanies the accumulation of scrap wood, glass, nails, trash,
brush, garbage and waste of every description and the use of trucks and other
vehicles to move or remove same, and every person entering upon a convenience
center shall be conclusively presumed to have assumed the risk of injury
connected with or resulting from such hazards and danger by his or her action
in entering upon such site, and for and in consideration of the permission
granted by the city to enter upon such every person shall covenant not to sue,
and to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its agents, officers or
employees, from and against any and all claims of any nature whatsoever for
injury or damage to person or property, whether real or asserted, arising out
of or resulting from the entry by such person upon any convenience center.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15463, § 6, passed 2-25-2003)
§ 12.5-806 WASTE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every owner, occupant or tenant occupying or using any structure
within the city shall provide and maintain waste containers of sufficient
number and size to hold the garbage and rubbish that accumulates on such
premises between regular collection days.
   (b)   Waste containers shall be leakproof, constructed of substantial
material, have a tight fitting lid or cover, and be maintained in good
condition. If stored outdoors, they shall also be weatherproof.
   (c)   Waste containers shall be kept secure and fastened with lids or covers
in place at all times to prevent access to their contents by insects, rodents
and other animals, to minimize fire hazard, and to prevent accumulation of
water and scattering of litter. When containers deteriorate so as to become
nonleakproof or otherwise hazardous to persons or property, they shall be
replaced.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if a person maintains, or allows on
property under his or her control the maintenance of, waste containers in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 16189, § 5, passed 10-26-2004)
§§ 12.5-807—12.5-820 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: HOUSEHOLD COLLECTION
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15463, § 7, adopted Feb. 25, 2003, amended Div. 2, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out in §§
12.5-821 through
12.5-828. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 12.5-821 CITY HOUSEHOLD COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (a)   The owners or occupants of single-family residences, duplex
residences, garage apartments and mobile homes or trailers occupied as dwelling
units, shall be required to use city household collection services. Occupants
of such premises may remove and transport their own solid waste, but shall
receive no credit on their accounts for doing so.
   (b)   The use of city household collection services shall be optional for:
      (1)   Multifamily dwelling buildings and complexes containing three or
more dwelling units;
      (2)   Any mobile home park whose drinking water supply is provided by
well water or is provided by the city through a common meter; and
      (3)   Private communities pursuant to subsection (f) below.
   (c)   Individual customers may choose between curb service and carry-out
service for household garbage and rubbish collection and recycling collection.
The director shall have the authority to designate the location for collection,
with consideration for such factors as: convenience for the collector;
convenience for customers; hazardous conditions such as cables, utility poles,
equipment clearance, animals; and collection costs.
   (d)   The director shall charge a fee for elective carry-out service in an
amount determined by the city council.
   (e)   A person requesting disabled carry-out service shall annually submit
an application to the director for approval. Such application shall be in a
form prescribed by the director. The application shall be certified by a
licensed physician stating that the applicant is disabled and unable to take
his or her garbage and recyclables to the curb for collection. If applicant’s
disability is blind, the certification may also be made by a doctor of
optometry.
   (f)   Private communities may request city household collection services
from the director.
      (1)   A private community seeking city household collection services must
submit proof that the infrastructure is or shall be designed, constructed and
maintained at a level that allows service performed by the city in a manner
substantially the same as the current service provide to single-family
residential service units.
      (2)   The director shall consider the following factors to determine
whether the private community is eligible for city household collection
services:
         a.   Type of access and accessibility of collection trucks to the
private community from city streets;
         b.   Whether the streets and/or alleys within the private community
are constructed to city standards;
         c.   Availability of access by collection trucks to each service unit
in the private community; and
         d.   Safety of the operation of the collection trucks while in the
private community.
      (3)   Provided that the director is satisfied that the factors in
subsection (f)(1) and (f)(2) above have been met, the director may enter into a
written agreement with the requesting private community to receive city
household collection services pursuant to certain terms and conditions.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 17655, § 2, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 12.5-822 PREPARATION OF HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE AND RUBBISH FOR COLLECTION.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) below, garbage and rubbish shall
be placed for city household collection service only in garbage carts provided
by the city. Within a cart, garbage and rubbish shall be contained in
disposable plastic bags.
   (b)   Plastic bags containing garbage and rubbish may be placed for
collection under the following circumstances, and only if the plastic bags are
designed specifically for use as trash bags, are leak proof, are of sufficient
strength to resist tearing under normal handling and are securely tied.
      (1)   A service unit that is utilizing and paying for two 96 gallon
garbage carts may place up to one-half cubic yard of garbage and rubbish, i.e.,
two 30-gallon plastic bags, that is bagged and weighing no more than 40 pounds
for collection next to the garbage carts, but only after the garbage carts have
been filled.
      (2)   Each service unit may purchase pay bags from the city and may place
such pay bags for collection next to the garbage carts, not withstanding
subsection (b)(1) above.
      (3)   Each service unit may place up to one-half cubic yard of garbage
and rubbish, i.e., two 30-gallon plastic bags, for collection outside the
garbage cart on the first scheduled collection day following Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day and New Years Day, provided such garbage and rubbish is in a
plastic bag or in a box weighing no more than 40 pounds.
   (c)   Yard trimmings shall not be placed in garbage or recycling carts or
plastic bags.
   (d)   Injurious materials shall be prepared for collection as follows.
      (1)   Broken glass, hypodermic needles, sawdust, ashes and other
potentially injurious materials that may cut sanitation workers or blow into
their eyes during loading shall be wrapped securely and labeled as to their
contents before being placed in carts for collection, so as to protect
sanitation workers from injury and disease.
      (2)   Animal excrement shall be placed in a plastic bag and securely
tied.
      (3)   Dead animals weighing less than five pounds shall be wrapped in
accordance with §
12.5-803(b)(2) before being placed in carts for collection.
      (4)   All ashes shall be allowed to stand until cold to the touch before
being placed in carts for collection.
      (5)   All refuse that is mixed with liquids and all containers of liquids
shall be drained before being placed in carts for collection.
      (6)   Containers that held household chemicals shall be triple rinsed and
rendered unusable before being placed in carts for collection.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places garbage or rubbish for collection in violation of this
section; or
      (2)   Allows garbage or rubbish placed on property under his or her
control to remain on such property in violation of this section.
   (f)   Except as provided in subsections (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3) above a
service unit which has placed on its curb for collection, garbage and rubbish
in plastic bags that are not city pay bags and are outside of a garbage or
recycling cart, may be subject to a service charge on the service unit’s water
bill for the collection of such garbage and rubbish. Nothing within this
subsection (f) shall prevent the city from issuing a citation for any violation
within this section.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 7, passed 10-26-2004)
§§ 12.5-822.1 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16189, § 6, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, repealed § 12.5-822.1, which
pertained to preparation of household garbage and rubbish for collection-text
of section effective on June 30, 2003. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 12.5-823 PREPARATION OF YARD TRIMMINGS AND SMALL BUNDLED BRUSH FOR
COLLECTION.
   (a)   Except as provided by subsection (d) below, yard trimmings shall be
placed for city household collection service either in kraft bags supplied by
the service unit, or in an optional yard trimmings cart purchased by the
service unit from the city.
   (b)   Kraft bags to be used for yard trimmings shall be designed
specifically for lawn and garden use, be of a 30 gallon capacity, and composed
of two-ply, multi-grade wet strength natural kraft paper. An unlimited amount
of kraft bags may be placed for city household collection service.
   (c)   Only yard trimmings shall be placed in kraft bags or yard trimmings
carts for city collection. Plastic bags shall not be used for the disposal and/
or collection of yard trimmings.
   (d)   An unlimited amount of small bundled brush may be placed for city
household collection service and each bundle shall be securely tied with one or
more bands of twine or string.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places yard trimmings or small bundled brush for collection in
violation of this section; or
      (2)   Allows yard trimmings or small bundled brush placed out for
collection on property under his or her control to remain on such property in
violation of this section.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places for collection, a kraft bag or a yard trimmings cart that
contains material other than yard trimmings; or
      (2)   Allows a kraft bag or a yard trimmings cart that contains material
other than yard trimmings and that is placed for collection on property under
his or her control to remain on such property in violation of this section.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 8, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-823.5 PREPARATION OF BRUSH FOR COLLECTION.
   (a)   Brush as defined in §
12.5-103, shall be placed at the curb for city household collection according
to the provisions of this section.
   (b)   No more than ten cubic yards of brush per household may be placed out
for collection per scheduled collection day.
   (c)   Brush must be free from hardware, nails and treated wood.
   (d)   Brush shall be collected as follows:
      (1)   Brush piles of up to three cubic yards placed at the curb on the
scheduled collection day within the set-out period described in §
12.5-825(a) will be collected on that scheduled collection day; and
      (2)   Brush piles in excess of three cubic yards but no more than ten
cubic yards placed at the curb on the scheduled collection day within the set-
out period described in §
12.5-825(a) will have three cubic yards collected on the scheduled collection
day and the remainder will be collected within 72 hours of the scheduled
collection day.
   (e)   A person may not set out additional brush on or nearby a brush pile
that is left by the city’s collector for collection as stated in subsection (d)
above.
   (f)   Uncontained leaves and yard trimmings shall not be placed out for
collection as brush.
   (g)   Brush must be separated and apart from garbage and recycling carts,
kraft bags, yard trimmings carts, plastic bags including pay bags, violation
bag tags and bulky waste.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places brush at the curb of a service unit for collection in
violation of this section; or
      (2)   Allows brush placed for collection in violation of this section on
property under his or her control to remain on such property.
   (i)   A person is subject to a service charge for collection of a brush pile
in excess of ten cubic yards or placed out for collection at a time not allowed
for by §
12.5-825(a). Such fee shall be assessed on the service unit’s water bill
pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the city council. Nothing herein shall
prevent the city from issuing a citation for a violation described in this
section.
   (j)   A person is subject to a service charge for collection of a brush pile
which contains garbage, recyclables, kraft bags, yard trimmings, plastic bags
including pay bags, violation bag tags and bulky waste, commingled with or on
top of the brush pile, or if such items are placed so close to the brush pile
that the items cannot reasonably be removed from the brush pile. Such service
charge shall be placed on the service unit’s water bill pursuant to the fee
schedule adopted by the city council. Nothing herein shall prevent the city
from issuing a citation for a violation described in this section.
(Ord. 16189, § 9, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-824 PREPARATION OF RECYCLABLES FOR COLLECTION.
   (a)   In order to help the city achieve its state-mandated recycling goal of
40%, in order to reduce the amount of material deposited in the city’s landfill
and thereby extend the life of such landfill, and in order to reduce the amount
of virgin materials being used in manufacturing, the city strongly encourages
its citizens to participate in the city’s household recycling program.
   (b)   Recyclables shall be placed for city household collection service only
in recycling carts provided by the city.
   (c)   Except as provided by subsection (d) below, the following materials
may be placed in recycling carts for collection:
      (1)   Paper.
         a.   Advertising circulars;
         b.   Carbonless paper;
         c.   Cardboard: cereal boxes (liners removed), soft drink and beer
cartons, dry goods packaging, corrugated cardboard, paper towel and toilet
paper cores. Large boxes must be broken down or cut to fit in the cart with the
lid securely closed;
         d.   Catalogues;
         e.   Envelopes: with or without windows;
         f.   Junk mail;
         g.   Magazines;
         h.   Newspapers: all sections;
         i.   Office paper: file folders, letterhead, sticky notes, printer
paper, calendars, school papers;
         j.   Paperback books;
         k.   Paper bags; and
         l.   Phone books.
      (2)   Metals.
         a.   Aluminum drink cans (not flattened);
         b.   Aluminum baking tins (cleaned);
         c.   Steel or tin food cans and lids;
         d.   Empty aerosol cans (leave spray nozzle on; remove plastic lid
unless part of can); and
         e.   Steel paint cans (empty and dry): remove lid, but recycle also.
      (3)   Glass and ceramics.
         a.   Bottles and jars: remove metal and plastic lids and recycle them;
         b.   Ceramics;
         c.   China;
         d.   Dishes;
         e.   Mirrors: must fit inside cart with lid closed; and
         f.   Windowpanes.
      (4)   Plastics.
         a.   Bottles, cups and jars with the #1 through #7 recycling symbols
on them;
         b.   Food trays, tubs and bowls with the #1 through #7 recycling
symbols on them; and
         c.   Plastic eating utensils.
   (d)   The following materials are prohibited materials and shall not be
placed in a recycling cart for collection:
      (1)   Aluminum foil;
      (2)   Auto glass;
      (3)   Drink boxes and straws;
      (4)   Gift wrap;
      (5)   Greeting cards;
      (6)   Hardcover books;
      (7)   Light bulbs;
      (8)   Paper milk and juice cartons;
      (9)   Plastic containers that held hazardous materials such as motor oil,
paint, pesticide or weed killer;
      (10)   Plastic grocery sacks;
      (11)   Pizza boxes;
      (12)   Polystyrene foam including cups, formed packing materials and
“peanuts;”
      (13)   Toys;
      (14)   Waxed paper and waxed food containers;
      (15)   Garbage;
      (16)   Yard trimmings; and
      (17)   All other material not specifically allowed for by subsection (c)
above.
   (e)   The director is authorized to add and delete materials to subsections
(c) and (d) above as the market for recyclables changes.
   (f)   The director is authorized to amend preparation requirements for
recyclables in accordance with market variables.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person removes or causes the
removal of recyclables from a recycling container placed for collection.
   (h)   It is an exception to an enforcement action brought for a violation of
subsection (g) above that the person was a member of the household that placed
the recyclables for collection, or a sanitation worker employed by the
collector who is engaged in city household collection service.
   (i)   A peace officer acting in his or her official capacity is exempt from
subsection (g) above.
   (j)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places prohibited material in a recycling cart for collection in
violation of this section; or
      (2)   Allows prohibited material placed in a recycling cart set out for
collection in violation of this section to remain on property under his or her
control.
   (k)   A person commits an offense if that person removes or causes the
removal of recyclables from a recycling cart that does not belong to that
person when that cart is placed for collection.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 10, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-825 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE, YARD TRIMMINGS, SMALL BUNDLED BRUSH, BRUSH AND
RECYCLABLES FOR CURBSIDE CITY HOUSEHOLD COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (a)   Garbage carts, plastic bags including pay bags and violation bag tags,
recycling carts, kraft bags, yard trimming carts, small bundled brush and brush
shall be placed at the curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection
day as determined by the director, and no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the scheduled collection day. All carts and plastic bags, including
pay bags and violation bag tags, shall be removed from the curb, and from
public sight, by 11:59:59 p.m. of the scheduled collection day unless a missed
collection is reported to the solid waste customer service section in
accordance with subsection (f) below.
   (b)   Carts, plastic bags including pay bags and violation bag tags, kraft
bags, small bundled brush and brush shall not be placed in the street, in an
alley on a sidewalk or on a vacant lot.
   (c)   Carts shall be placed for collection at the curb:
      (1)   With the lids closed;
      (2)   With the hinges facing away from the street; and
      (3)   With a minimum clearance of two feet to each side of the cart and a
half foot to the rear of the cart from any fence, gas or water meter, fire
hydrant, utility pole, utility box, tree or shrub that could be damaged by
collection equipment or other collection container, bundles of brush or other
obstruction.
   (d)   Carts placed for collection shall not exceed the following weights
when loaded:
 
32-gallon cart 150 pounds
64-gallon cart 200 pounds
96-gallon cart 250 pounds
 
   (e)   Kraft bags shall be placed for collection at the curb with their tops
rolled shut to prevent the contents from blowing out, and shall be at least two
feet from any cart.
   (f)   The owner and/or person in control of a service unit that does not
receive a regularly scheduled collection of garbage, recyclables, yard
trimmings, brush and small bundled brush by the city’s collector must call the
solid waste customer service section to report such missed pick-up by 7:00 p.m.
of the day following the collection day. An owner or person in control of a
service unit who fails to report a missed pick-up within such time above must
remove all carts, bags, brush and small bundled brush until the next regularly
scheduled collection day for that service unit.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places a cart, any garbage bag, kraft bag, small bundled brush or
brush for collection in violation of this section; or
      (2)   Allows a cart, any garbage bag, kraft bag, small bundled brush or
brush placed for collection in violation of this section to remain on property
under his or her control.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Blocks access to or causes access to be blocked to a cart that has
been placed for collection at the curb of a service unit; or
      (2)   Allows access to a cart that has been placed at the curb for
collection on property under his or her control to remain blocked.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 11, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-826 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLES FOR CARRY-OUT CITY HOUSEHOLD
COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (a)   Household garbage and rubbish shall be prepared for carry-out
household collection service as required by §
12.5-822, and the cart placed at a point adjacent to the dwelling with the lid
securely closed.
   (b)   Recyclables shall be prepared for carry-out household collection
service as required by §
12.5-824, and the cart placed at a point adjacent to the dwelling with the lid
securely closed.
   (c)   Yard trimmings shall be prepared for carry-out household collection
service as required by §
12.5-823, and the optional yard trimmings cart placed at the curb of the
service unit with the lid securely closed.
   (d)   Residents who use the city’s disabled carry-out collection service are
not required to remove their cart from public sight from the front of their
service unit.
   (e)   Carts placed for carry-out collection shall not exceed the following
weights when loaded:
 
32-gallon cart 150 pounds
64-gallon cart 200 pounds
96-gallon cart 250 pounds
 
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person places garbage and rubbish
and recyclables for carry-out collection in violation of this section.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 12, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-827 MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE OF CARTS.
   (a)   A garbage or recycling cart supplied to a person by the city for use
at their service unit remains the property of the City of Fort Worth. It is
assigned to a specific address, and may be removed from the service unit only
by the director or the director’s contractor.
   (b)   No person other than the director or the director’s contractor shall
alter any markings on a cart nor add markings to a cart.
   (c)   The owner and/or person in control of the service unit shall be
responsible for keeping clean all carts that have been supplied by the city for
the service unit’s use.
   (d)   An owner and/or person in control of a service unit shall promptly
notify the director of the theft of a garbage or recycling cart or any need for
repair or replacement of a garbage, recycling or yard trimmings cart.
   (e)   When not placed for collection, carts shall be stored by the service
unit in a secure place at that service unit. The carts shall be stored so as
not to be visible to a person standing in front of the service unit.
   (f)   A service unit may be charged for damage to the cart(s) which is not
caused by the ordinary use of the cart as reasonably determined by the
director.
   (g)   The director may require a larger cart to be used by the service unit
after an owner and/or person in control of a service unit has cumulatively
received three or more notices of violations of this chapter within a 90-day
period, based upon reasonable evidence to the director. A conviction for such
violation(s) is not mandatory. An owner or person in control of a service unit
may appeal such decision pursuant to §§
12.5-842.1 and
12.5-842.2.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains his or her cart in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 13, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-828 BULKY WASTE COLLECTION.
   (a)   Bulky waste items shall be placed at the curb for collection no later
than 7:00 a.m. on Monday of the scheduled bulky waste collection week for that
service unit and no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding the
scheduled bulky waste collection week for that service unit.
   (b)   No more than ten cubic yards of bulky waste per service unit may be
placed out for collection per scheduled bulky waste collection week.
   (c)   Bulky waste must be separated and apart from garbage, recyclables,
kraft bags, yard trimmings carts, plastic bags including pay bags and violation
bag tags and brush.
   (d)   Bulky waste shall be placed for collection as follows.
      (1)   To facilitate loading, materials shall be placed neatly and in as
tight a stack as possible at a point adjacent to the front curb. Materials
shall be stacked away from utility poles, water and gas meters, fences, mail
boxes, fire hydrants, trees, parked cars, power lines and other obstructions to
prevent damage by collection equipment and to allow the safe collection of the
materials.
      (2)   Materials shall not be placed in the street, in an alley, on the
sidewalk or on a vacant lot.
      (3)   Refrigerators, freezers, dehumidifiers, air-conditioning units and
other appliances must be free of CFCs/HCFCs. These items shall not be collected
until the service unit has provided proof to the collector that CFCs/HCFCs have
been removed from the appliance by a licensed technician.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if a person:
      (1)   Places bulky waste for collection in violation of this section; or
      (2)   Allows bulky waste placed for collection on property under his or
her control in violation of this section to remain on such property.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if a person alters, separates or removes
any bulky waste item from a pile other than his or her own.
   (g)   A person is subject to a service charge for collection of a bulky
waste pile that is greater than ten cubic yards. Such charge shall be assessed
on the service unit’s water bill pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the
city council. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from issuing a citation for
a violation described in this section.
   (h)   A person is subject to a service charge for collection of a bulky
waste pile which contains garbage, recyclables, kraft bags, yard trimmings,
plastic bags including pay bags and violation bag tags and brush commingled
with or on top of the pile, or if such items are placed so close to the bulky
waste pile that such items cannot reasonably be removed from the bulky waste
pile. Such charge shall be assessed on the service unit’s water bill pursuant
to the fee schedule adopted by the city council. Nothing herein shall prevent
the city from issuing a citation for a violation described in this section.
   (i)   A person is subject to a service charge for collection of a bulky
waste pile that is placed for collection during a time other than that service
unit’s set-out period described in subsection (a) above during the regularly
scheduled bulky waste collection week. Such charge shall be assessed on the
service unit’s water bill pursuant to the fee schedule adopted by the city
council. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from issuing a citation for a
violation described in this section.
(Ord. 15463, § 7, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 16189, § 14, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-829 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: COMMERCIAL SERVICES
§ 12.5-830 COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICE IN CARTS.
   (a)   Certain commercial premises, business premises, houses used for
nonresidential purposes, and multifamily dwelling buildings and complexes, as
determined by the director, may request city commercial collection services for
the collection of commercial garbage and rubbish.
   (b)   The provisions of
Division 2 of this chapter shall apply to any person using this service.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person places waste for collection
in violation of this section.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 15463, § 8, passed 2-25-2003)
§ 12.5-831 COMMERCIAL WASTE CONTAINERS.
   (a)   Every person who uses commercial waste containers, for city or private
collection services, shall maintain such containers in good mechanical
condition and shall repair such containers when necessary. Except while being
cleaned, the drain plugs of such containers shall be secured in the drain holes
to prevent leaking.
   (b)   Every person who uses commercial waste containers, for city or private
collection services, shall cause such containers to be emptied a minimum of
once every seven days. The directors of the departments of health and
environmental management, and their authorized representatives, may when
necessary to safeguard the environment or the public health, safety or welfare,
order users of commercial waste containers:
      (1)   To empty the containers more often than weekly;
      (2)   To increase the number of commercial waste containers on their
premises; and
      (3)   To increase the size of the commercial waste containers used on the
premises.
   (c)   Every person who uses commercial waste containers shall have such
containers emptied as often as necessary to prevent their contents from
overflowing or causing offensive odors, and shall be responsible for cleaning
the interior surfaces of such containers as often as necessary to keep the
surfaces free of garbage and other organic material.
   (d)   Every person who uses commercial waste containers for the disposal of
putrescible waste or who is in control of the premises where such containers
are located, shall keep all lids and doors of such containers securely closed
at all times, except when being emptied or filled. All putrescible waste shall
be placed in plastic bags which have been tied or otherwise secured, prior to
being placed in such containers.
   (e)   Every person who owns or who contracts for the use of a commercial
waste container, shall have the container placed on his or her premises in a
position where the doors and lids will not be obstructed when being opened or
closed, and where the container may be freely serviced or emptied.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person uses, maintains or places a
commercial waste container in violation of this section.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person violates a written order
issued pursuant to subsection (b) above.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person removes material from a
commercial waste container that has been placed in such container for
collection.
   (i)   It is an exception to an enforcement action brought for a violation of
subsection (h) above that the person owned or leased the container, or was the
collection contractor responsible for emptying it.
   (j)   A peace officer acting in his or her official capacity is exempt from
subsection (h) above.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001)
§ 12.5-832 NUISANCE CAUSED BY COMMERCIAL WASTE CONTAINER.
   A commercial waste container that is maintained, emptied or located in
violation of §
12.5-831 and which endangers the public health, safety or welfare, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§§ 12.5-833—12.5-839 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: DEPOSITS, RATES AND COLLECTION
§ 12.5-840 DEPOSITS.
   (a)   Household collection service customers shall be required to make a
minimum deposit of $15 prior to the start of service.
   (b)   Commercial collection service customers shall be required to make a
minimum deposit of $25 prior to the start of service.
   (c)   Prior to the start of service, a private community with a written
agreement for city household collection services shall make a minimum deposit
of the existing deposit rate listed in subsection (a) above multiplied by the
total number of households, whether occupied or unoccupied, in the private
community.
   (d)   The director is authorized to require a larger deposit from any
customer when, in his or her judgment, the larger amount is necessary to ensure
that the city is protected against loss for nonpayment of services.
   (e)   The director may refund deposits as an account credit to household
collection service customers whose accounts show no delinquent payments for a
period of 12 consecutive months.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 17655, § 3, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 12.5-841 BILLING.
   (a)   Household and commercial customers shall be billed for services on
their monthly water bills, according to the rates established by ordinance.
   (b)   No refunds of payments or credit for household collection service will
be made for occupied residences or residences that have city water service.
   (c)   Household and commercial customers who have been charged the incorrect
rate for collection services may be credited for up to six months of
overcharges. The credit given will be the difference between the correct
monthly rate and the monthly rate actually charged and paid, multiplied by the
number of months involved to a maximum of six months. No credit will be given
for overcharges that are more than 12 months old.
   (d)   Household and commercial customers shall not receive refunds or
credits for regular collections not made due to holidays, inclement weather,
emergencies, missed collection or any other reason except as set forth in
subsection (c) above. No proration of fees shall be made for partial months of
service.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 16188, § 1, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-841.1 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION FEES.
   The following residential collection fees are adopted:
Service Rate (Plus Sales Tax)
Service                          Rate (Plus Sales Tax)
Residential curbside—32 gallon $13.75 per month
cart
Residential curbside—64 gallon $19.50 per month
cart
Residential curbside—96 gallon $25.75 per month
cart
Elective carryout                Additional $30 per month above cart rate
Disabled carryout                Applicable residential curbside cart rate with no additional cost (based on
                                 qualification)
Excess bulky waste and brush     $75 per 5 cubic yards over 10 cubic yards (on a one time monthly basis) and
collection                       $65 per 5 cubic yards thereafter, up to 30 cubic yards
Excess bulky waste and brush     To be determined by the director based upon city collector’s fee and city
collection for piles over 30     administration costs
cubic yards
Out-of-cycle and contaminated    $123.52 per 5 cubic yards and $107.40 per 5 cubic yards thereafter, up to
bulky waste pile collection      30 cubic yards ($123.52 shall be minimum charged to household)
Cart delivery-exchange fee       One exchange per year per household at no cost; thereafter $5 per request
Pay bag                          $3 per bag with minimum purchase of 5 bags
Optional 96 gallon yard          $75
trimmings cart
Violation bag tag                $10 per bag
Nothing out trip charge          $45 per incident
 
(Ord. 16188, § 2, passed 10-26-2004; Ord. 17225, § 1, passed 10-3-2006; Ord.
21054-12-2013, § 1, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 25392-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-
2022, eff. 4-1-2022; Ord. 27977-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 12.5-841.2 COMMERCIAL GARBAGE COLLECTION FEES.
   The following commercial garbage collection fees are adopted based on
ninety-six-gallon carts:
 
Frequency of Service Monthly Rate (Plus Sales Tax)
1 × per week        $42.69
2 × per week        $54.14
3 × per week        $69.76
4 × per week        $87.46
5 × per week        $108.28
6 × per week        $133.27
 
(Ord. 15632, § 1, passed 8-7-2003, eff. 9-1-2003; Ord. 16188, § 3, passed 10-
26-2004; Ord. 25391-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022; Ord. 27977-
09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 12.5-842 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The owner, occupant or tenant of any premises receiving city household
or commercial collection services shall be responsible for the payment of the
fees incurred for such premises for services under this article.
   (b)   When an account becomes delinquent, the director may send the customer
a second bill. If the account is not brought current within ten days of the
date of the second billing, the city may suspend all city-provided utility
services until payment is made in full. The director is authorized to remove
all city-provided commercial waste containers from a delinquent customer’s
premises.
   (c)   After the city has terminated a customer’s service for nonpayment, the
director may file a lien against the property that received the services in the
amount of the delinquent fee. A lien may not be filed against any property that
is protected as a homestead by the Texas Constitution.
   (d)   A notice of lien authorized by this section shall be filed in the real
property records in the county in which such property is located. The lien
shall contain a legal description of the property and the collection service
account number.
   (e)   The director may add the amount of the lien filing fee to the lien.
The lien shall bear 10% per annum interest.
   (f)   A lien filed pursuant to this section is inferior to a bona fide
mortgage lien that is recorded before the recording of the city’s lien. The
city’s lien is superior to all other liens including previously recorded
judgment liens and any liens recorded after the city’s lien.
   (g)   The authority of the director to impose liens on real property for
nonpayment of collection service fees does not apply to property which has been
properly declared rental property pursuant to this subsection (g).
      (1)   The owner of any property which is rented to another person may
declare such property to be rental property not subject to lien if the
collection service account is in the name of the tenant.
      (2)   The declaration shall be in writing, specifically naming the
service address, declaring such to be rental property, and declaring that the
owner does not wish such property to be used as security for collection
services provided by the city.
      (3)   The declaration of rental property shall be valid only so long as
the person making the declaration owns the property, and rents the property to
another, and the tenant has collection services provided in his or her name. An
owner may revoke a declaration at any time by notifying the city in writing.
   (h)   A lien shall not apply to the collection services provided to the
tenant prior to the effective date of this section, nor shall it apply to
collection services provided a tenant in the tenant’s name after a declaration
is filed by the property owner.
   (i)   A lien may be appealed, modified and released as follows.
      (1)   Within 30 days after filing a lien pursuant to this section, the
director shall give notice to the property owner and the account holder that
such a lien has been filed on the property. Notice shall be delivered by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (2)   Within 30 days after receiving notice, the property owner may
appeal the filing of the lien to the director in writing. The director may hold
a hearing on the matter or may make a decision based upon the property owners
written appeal.
      (3)   The director shall authorize the release of the lien if the
property owner shows by a preponderance of the evidence that no bill for
collection services to the property is owing or that at the time the lien was
filed the property was protected as a homestead under the Texas Constitution.
      (4)   The director may modify or release the lien to reflect the true
amount of delinquency in payment for collection services to the property if the
owner proves by a preponderance of the evidence that a lesser bill is owing
than that alleged by the lien.
      (5)   The person last listed on the county tax rolls as being the owner
of the subject property shall be presumed to be the owner for purposes of this
subsection (i), and the address listed for the owner on the county tax records
shall be presumed to be the address of the owner.
      (6)   Whenever a person pays all interest, principal, and filing fees of
a lien validly filed pursuant to this section, the director shall execute a
release of that lien and surrender it to the paying party. The city shall not
be responsible for filing the release.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 12.5-842.1 APPEAL.
   (a)   A water bill customer objecting to the actions, policies or decisions
of the director with regard to a fee for a pay bag, violation bag tag, brush or
bulky waste collection may informally appeal to the director of environmental
management, or the designee, in person, or by telephone, to attempt a
resolution administratively. An appeal must be initiated by the water bill
customer within ten business days from the issuance of the water bill.
   (b)   If a resolution cannot be obtained by an informal appeal, then that
customer shall be advised in writing by regular mail, of the his or her right
to a formal appeal hearing pursuant to this subsection (b). Such notice shall
be sent to the name on the water bill account and to the billing address of the
account. Such notice shall indicate:
      (1)   The steps the customer must take to initiate the formal appeal
hearing;
      (2)   Whether failure to initiate the formal appeal within three days of
the date of the notice will result in termination of water service to the
account in question; and
      (3)   A copy of the rules for the formal hearing.
   (c)   A request for a formal appeal hearing before the designated hearing
officer will not be granted when the customer’s only complaint regards:
      (1)   The determination of reasonableness or the denial of a deferred
payment by the director of the water department;
      (2)   The customer’s financial inability to pay for services rendered,
and there is no dispute as to the accuracy of the billing or the customer’s
liability; or
      (3)   The design, application and fairness of the rate schedule
established by the city council.
(Ord. 16189, § 15, passed 10-26-2004)
Editor’s note:
   Prior to inclusion of Ord. 16189, §
12.5-842.1 pertained to commercial garbage collection fees and was repealed by
§ 4 of Ord. 16188, adopted October 26, 2004. See also the Code Comparative
Table.
§ 12.5-842.2 HEARINGS.
   (a)   The time, date and place of a formal appeal hearing shall be provided
to the customer requesting a formal hearing.
   (b)   The hearing shall be set by the hearing officer.
   (c)   The customer may appear in person or be represented by an attorney or
both, and shall be afforded the opportunity to question witnesses at the
hearing.
   (d)   The customer has the right to reschedule the hearing one time.
   (e)   The formal legal rules of evidence shall not apply; however, all
witnesses shall be placed under oath.
   (f)   The formal appeal hearing shall be before a hearing officer who is:
      (1)   Appointed by the city manager;
      (2)   Not under the supervision of the of the environmental management
department or the code compliance department; and
      (3)   Not a participant in the previous decision now under review.
   (g)   The hearing officer shall:
      (1)   Be the sole judge of the evidence and credibility of witnesses and
the facts as well as the applicability of the city’s rules and regulations;
      (2)   Render a final decision at the close of the hearing or within a
time period specified and agreed to by all parties if more research is
requested by the hearing officer; and
      (3)   On conclusion of the hearing, render a decision in writing to all
parties concerned within ten business days of the officer’s conclusion.
   (h)   Once the hearing officer has rendered a decision:
      (1)   If the decision reached at a formal appeals hearing is not in favor
of the customer, the hearing officer shall instruct the city and customer what
action, if any, must be taken by the customer to maintain water service; and
set a reasonable period of time in which the customer must take the action; or
      (2)   If the decision reached at a formal appeal hearing is in favor of
the customer, in whole or part, the hearing officer shall instruct the city and
customer what corrective action shall be taken and the city shall take such
action within a reasonable time, which time may be set by the hearing officer
and instruct the customer to pay or make acceptable arrangements for payment of
any amount of disputed billing found to be accurate, within five business days
or by the due date of the billing whichever is later.
(Ord. 16189, § 16, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-842.3 CONTINUATION OF WATER SERVICE DURING APPEAL.
   (a)   During the process of the formal appeal, the customer’s water service
shall be continued.
   (b)   In the event water service was terminated prior to a valid formal
appeal hearing, water service will be re-initiated upon payment of an
initiation fee. The initiation fee will be refunded if the hearing officer’s
decision is in favor of the customer in whole or part.
   (c)   Water service may not be continued nor reinstated if there is a
violation of the city’s electric code, building code, fire code or any city
ordinance that relates to the water service as deemed by the director of the
water department.
(Ord. 16189, § 17, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-842.4 RIGHTS AND REMEDIES OF THE CITY.
   The failure of the city to comply with any deadlines in this chapter does
not result in the city’s waiving its right to seek termination of water service
for the reasons specified in this chapter or otherwise specified by law.
(Ord. 16189, § 18, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 12.5-843 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION FEE.
   (a)   A separate fee at a rate established by the city council shall be
charged to persons within the city for solid waste disposal services as
authorized by Tex. Health and Safety Code § 364.034. Such fee shall be assessed
to each customer per service address and included on the monthly water bill.
Such fee shall be in addition to any fees for other services regulated by this
article, and shall be shown as “environmental protection fee.”
   (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 361.013(g), any revenues
generated by the fee which have accrued or which may accrue in the future,
shall be used for disposal or environmental programs or services that are
required by state or federal mandates.
   (c)   The payment of a fee charged under this section does not relieve any
person of the duty to comply with applicable environmental laws, regulations,
codes and ordinances. The city may enforce such laws, regulations, codes and
ordinances against a person who has paid such fee and may seek legal or
equitable relief against such person, including, but not limited to, recovery
of the city’s abatement, cleanup and protection costs.
(Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 25772-09-2022, § 1, passed 9-27-2022,
eff. 10-1-2022; Ord. 27977-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 12.5-844 NON CITY WASTE LANDFILL ENVIRONMENTAL FEE.
   All persons disposing of non city waste at the Southeast Landfill who do
have a current, valid Grant of Privilege Agreement with the city pursuant to §
12.5-850 and/or do possess a current, valid hauling permit pursuant to §
12.5-857 shall pay a Landfill Environmental Fee of $6.50 per ton. All persons
disposing of non city waste at the Southeast Landfill who do not have a
current, valid Grant of Privilege Agreement with the city pursuant to §
12.5-850 and/or do not possess a current, valid hauling permit pursuant to §
12.5-857 shall pay a Landfill Environmental Fee of $12.50 per ton. The Landfill
Environmental Fee shall be collected with the tipping fee assessed by the
operator of the Southeast Landfill.
(Ord. 24533-11-2020, § 2, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 26452-09-2023,
§ 1, passed 9-19-2023, eff. 10-1-2023; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-
2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 27977-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025, eff. 10-1-
2025)
§§ 12.5-845—12.5-849 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: PRIVATE COLLECTORS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 13555, § 1, adopted Aug. 25, 1998, amended Div. 5, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out in §§
12.5-850 through
12.5-863. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 5 pertained to similar
subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 12.5-850 AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person within the City of Fort Worth shall engage in the business
of collecting or transporting municipal solid waste produced in the city
without first entering into a non-exclusive privilege agreement (“privilege
agreement”) with the city.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person collects or transports
municipal solid waste in violation of subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Exemptions:
      (1)   The city, city employees and persons contracting with the city,
engaged in the collection and transportation of municipal solid waste on behalf
of the city are exempt from this section; and
      (2)   Persons transporting their own municipal solid waste that they
generated at their own homes are exempt from this division.
   (d)   Defenses:
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was using a vehicle
to gather only recyclable materials, salvageable newspapers or clothes.
Recycling shall be defined as collection of only source separated materials for
resale;
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was transporting
municipal solid waste that was generated in the person’s private business and
that the person only transports municipal solid waste at a maximum of two times
per year; and
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was collecting
source separated recyclables from a dumpster or roll-off container that is used
by private individuals or firms and contains only recyclables.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-851 PRIVILEGE AGREEMENT APPLICATION.
   (a)   A person required to enter a privilege agreement under this division
shall submit an application plus an application fee for a privilege agreement
at the City of Fort Worth's Code Compliance Department, Solid Waste Division.
   (b)   At a minimum the application shall include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The trade name under which the applicant does business or proposes
to do business;
      (3)   The estimated number of vehicles the applicant will operate under
this agreement;
      (4)   The make, model, year and license plate number, collection body
type (i.e. automated side loader, front end loader, rear loader, roll-off, and
grapple/boom) and fuel type (i.e. Diesel, CNG) of all vehicles to operate under
this agreement;
      (5)   The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to
render; and
      (6)   Any other information that may be relevant to the applicant's
fitness to render such services as may be required by the director of the code
compliance department.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998; Ord. 14699, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
24532-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021)
§ 12.5-852 GRANTING OF PRIVILEGE AGREEMENT.
   (a)   After receiving an application, the director may make such
investigation as he or she considers necessary to determine whether the
applicant meets the requirements of law and of this ordinance.
   (b)   The director may require the applicant to furnish additional
information to assist the director in his or her determination.
   (c)   After the director determines whether the applicant meets the
requirements of the law and this ordinance, the director or his or her duly
authorized representative shall recommend either:
      (1)   That the city council deny the privilege agreement; or
      (2)   That the city council authorize the privilege agreement in an
ordinance passed by a two-thirds vote of the city council.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-853 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The director or his or her duly authorized agent may recommend that the city
council suspend for up to six months or revoke a privilege agreement if he or
she determines that:
   (a)   The application contained a false statement of material fact;
   (b)   The local hauling company named in the privilege agreement or an
employee, agent or officer of the local hauling company named in the privilege
agreement is convicted of a violation of the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act,
being Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 361, the Texas Litter Abatement Act,
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or any other environmental law
applicable to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, which
allegedly occurred during the term of the privilege agreement;
   (c)   The grantee fails to maintain applicable solid waste vehicle hauling
permits required under this division;
   (d)   The grantee fails to pay all fees required under this division; or
   (e)   The grantee has violated any provisions of the privilege agreement.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-854 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Each grantee shall maintain, at a single location, business records of its
solid waste collection service. Such records shall include, but are not limited
to: inventory of all vehicles; a complete listing of all customers within the
city including name, address and telephone numbers; numbers of and location of
all dumpsters and roll-off containers; volumes of solid waste and recyclable
materials collected within the city limits of Fort Worth; and all quarterly and
annual reports prepared pursuant to the privilege agreement. A grantee shall
make its records available for the director or his or her duly authorized agent
at reasonable times upon request.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-855 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   An offense under this division is punishable pursuant to §
12.5-123, Judicial remedies and penalties.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-856 PAYMENT OF FEES/QUARTERLY REPORTS/ANNUAL REPORT.
   The grantee must make payment of all fees payable under the privilege
agreement on a quarterly schedule. Payments will be due on: April 30, July 31,
October 31 and January 31 for the preceding quarter. The amount due shall be
10% of the total gross hauling revenue of the grantee from the collection and
transporting of municipal solid waste produced in Fort Worth. An annual report
shall be due January 31 of each year and shall be a summary of the quarterly
reports for the preceding year.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998; Ord. 24532-11-2020, § 2, passed 11-17-2020,
eff. 1-1-2021)
§ 12.5-857 SOLID WASTE VEHICLE HAULING PERMIT.
   (a)   Every person who uses a vehicle to transport or collect municipal
solid waste produced in the city shall register each vehicle with the director
of city services and shall have affixed by the city a solid waste vehicle
hauling permit (“hauling permit”) to each vehicle.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly operates or causes
to be operated a vehicle used to transport or collect municipal solid waste in
violation of subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Exemptions:
      (1)   The city and its own employees engaged in the collection and
transportation of municipal solid waste on behalf of the city are exempt from
this division; and
      (2)   Persons transporting their own municipal solid waste that they
generated at their own homes are exempt from this division.
   (d)   Defenses:
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was using a vehicle
to gather only recyclable materials, salvageable newspapers or clothes;
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was transporting
municipal solid waste that was generated in the person’s private business and
that the person only transports municipal solid waste at a maximum of two times
per year; and
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person was collecting
municipal solid waste from a dumpster or roll-off container that is used by
private individuals or firms and contains only recyclables.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-858 HAULING PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   A person required to have a hauling permit under this division shall
submit an application plus an application fee at the City of Fort Worth's Solid
Waste Division.
   (b)   At a minimum the application shall include:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The trade name under which the applicant does business or proposes
to do business;
      (3)   The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate and for
each of which the applicant seeks to obtain permits under this application;
      (4)   Make, model, year and license plate number, collection body type
(i.e. automated side loader, front end loader, rear loader, roll-off, and
grapple/boom) and fuel type (i.e. Diesel, CNG) of each vehicle that the
applicant will use to collect or transport municipal solid waste;
      (5)   The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to
render; and
      (6)   Any other information as may be relevant to the applicant's fitness
to render such services as may be required by the director of the code
compliance department.
   (c)   Each applicant in the business of transporting solid waste shall sign
a solid waste transportation certification as required by the Texas
Administrative Code.
   (d)   Before a hauling permit is issued, each vehicle must satisfactorily
pass inspection for the following items:
      (1)   The vehicle must be constructed to ensure no spillage of solid
waste;
      (2)   A non-enclosed vehicle must have a proper tarp or other
satisfactory cover to prevent blowing of materials being transported;
      (3)   Where applicable, all drain plugs and seals must be intact; and
      (4)   The vehicle must be clean and odor free.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998; Ord. 24532-11-2020, § 3, passed 11-17-2020,
eff. 1-1-2021)
§ 12.5-859 ISSUANCE OF A HAULING PERMIT.
   (a)   After receiving a hauling permit application, the director may make
such investigation as he or she considers necessary to determine whether the
public convenience and necessity warrant the granting of the hauling permit(s).
   (b)   The director may require the applicant to furnish additional
information to assist the director in his or her determination.
   (c)   The director may require the applicant to furnish information as to
the financial responsibility of the applicant in the event of claims against
him or her for death or injuries to persons or damage to property by reasons of
the negligent operation of vehicles used in providing solid waste collection
and transportation services.
   (d)   If the director is satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements
of this division and after the applicant pays all applicable fees, the director
or his or her duly authorized agent may issue and affix a hauling permit to
each appropriate vehicle.
   (e)   The hauling permit shall be a size and design determined by the
director.
   (f)   If the director determines that there is cause to deny a hauling
permit application, he or she may notify the applicant of same in writing and
deliver by certified mail, return receipt requested to the address listed on
the application. The applicant may petition for reconsideration pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-860 DISPLAY OF HAULING PERMIT.
   (a)   A hauling permit shall be displayed on each registered vehicle in a
location approved by the director or his or her duly authorized agent. The
director’s duly authorized agent shall place the permit on the vehicle.
   (b)   A hauling permit holder commits an offense if the hauling permit
holder operates or causes to be operated a vehicle collecting or transporting
municipal solid waste which does not properly display a valid hauling permit.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-861 HAULING PERMIT FEES; TERMS.
   (a)   Each hauling permit holder shall pay the city an annual permit fee for
each vehicle in an amount set by the city council.
   (b)   A hauling permit issued pursuant to this division for each vehicle is
valid for up to one year, but shall expire no later than 12 months from the
original date of issuance. Subsequent hauling permits added for additional
vehicles to be used by the same permit holder during the term shall not be
prorated, but shall expire at the same time as the first hauling permit. There
shall be no proration of fees for late renewal, nor any refund for vehicles
taken out of service before the end of the term.
   (c)   A hauling permit shall not be transferable from one individual or
entity to another, nor from one vehicle to another.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-862 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A HAULING PERMIT.
   The reasons for which the director or his or her duly authorized
representative may suspend and/or revoke a hauling permit include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   (a)   The application contained a false statement of material fact;
   (b)   The hauling permit holder does not maintain a permitted vehicle in the
condition that allowed it to pass its last inspection; or
   (c)   The local hauling company named in the privilege agreement or an
employee, agent, of officer of the local hauling company named in the privilege
agreement is convicted of a violation of the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act,
being Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 361, the Texas Litter Abatement Act,
being Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 365, the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., or any other environmental law
applicable to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, which
allegedly occurred during the term of the privilege agreement.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
§ 12.5-863 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   An offense under this division is punishable pursuant to §
12.5-123, Judicial Remedies and Penalties.
(Ord. 13555, § 1, passed 8-25-1998)
ARTICLE IX: FILL MATERIAL
DIVISION 1: DEFINITION OF FILL MATERIAL
§ 12.5-864 DEFINITION.
   FILL MATERIAL. Fill material shall be defined as soil, dirt, rock, sand and
other natural or human-made inert solid materials used to fill the land.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
DIVISION 2: REGISTRATION, NOTICE, AND PLACEMENT OF SIGN
§ 12.5-865 REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
12.5-870, no fill material may be placed on any tract, parcel or platted lot
within the city limits unless a valid registration and site map is filed with
thedevelopment services department of the city, the registration fee in the
amount of $168.75 is paid to the city, notification is provided to all
applicable property owners within 300 feet of the property and registered
neighborhood associations within one-quarter mile of the property, and a sign
is posted on the property as required by this article.
   (b)   All registrations must be renewed annually with city prior to the
expiration of the current registration, but shall be exempted from the notice
requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Placement of fill material is used for landscaping purposes on
improved property is exempted from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-27-2007; Ord.
27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
§ 12.5-866 NOTICE.
   (a)   Upon registration and prior to the placement of fill material upon any
tract, parcel or platted lot, the city shall send written notice of the
registration to the owners of real property lying within 300 feet of the
property upon which the placement or import of fill material is proposed. Such
notice shall be given to all such owners who have rendered their said property
for city taxes, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
Notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage
paid, in the United States mail. Notice shall also be sent to all registered
neighborhood associations within one-quarter mile of the proposed fill material
site.
   (b)   Placement of fill material used for landscaping purposes on improved
property is exempted from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 12.5-867 PLACEMENT OF SIGN.
   (a)   After registering with the city and prior to placement of fill
material upon any tract, parcel or platted lot, at least one legible sign, no
less than three feet by three feet and no greater than four feet by eight feet
must be placed by the registrant on the premises. The sign or signs shall be
located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points
nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent and
entry to such property. The sign(s) shall indicate that:
      (1)   The site is a registered fill material site;
      (2)   The date the registration was filed with the city; and
      (3)   The registration number provided by the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   Signs must be maintained as so to remain legible and graffiti free.
All sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to the completion of all fill material
from the tract, parcel or platted lot.
   (c)   Placement of fill material used for landscaping purposes on improved
property is exempted from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
DIVISION 3: RESTRICTIONS ON PLACEMENT OF FILL MATERIAL
§ 12.5-868 HEIGHT AND SLOPE RESTRICTIONS.
   The placement or import of the fill material must meet the following
conditions:
   (a)   The purpose of the fill material is to make the land suitable for the
construction of surface improvements;
   (b)   The fill material shall not be higher than the highest elevation along
the perimeter of the adjacent tracts, parcels or platted lots, however; fill
material placed on pad sites shall not exceed three feet in height above the
highest elevation along the perimeter of the adjacent tracts, parcels or
platted lots;
   (c)   The slope of the fill material is a maximum ratio of three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, unless a retaining wall system built in
compliance with the city code and regulations is in place; and
   (d)   Fill material must be leveled and graded for positive drainage no less
than every 30 days.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 12.5-869 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   The placement of fill material may not:
      (1)   Causes the release of nuisance dust, noise and/or odor;
      (2)   Damage any public improvements or public infrastructure;
      (3)   Be placed in a floodplain or floodway without a valid permit; or
      (4)   Result in flooding or significant increase in runoff to adjacent
properties in accordance to state law.
   (b)   Erosion control measures must be implemented to prevent any off site
migration of silt and sediment.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
DIVISION 4: EXEMPTIONS FROM REQUIREMENTS OF DIVISION 2
§ 12.5-870 EXEMPTIONS.
   The registration, notice and sign requirements of
Division 2, §§
12.5-865,
12.5-866 and
12.5-867 for placement of fill material on any tract, parcel or platted lot are
not required if:
      (1)   A valid building permit has been issued by the city for
construction activity on the tract, parcel or platted lot where the fill
material is to be placed;
      (2)   The fill material is placed on a landfill permitted by the State of
Texas;
      (3)   The fill material is incidental to on-site filling operations
necessary for governmental or utility construction projects; or
      (4)   The fill material is part of a development that is final platted,
has approved infrastructure plans or is being developed under an active
community facilities agreement.
   (b)   The placement of the fill material under this section is not exempted
from the requirements of any other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
DIVISION 5: PLACEMENT OF FILL MATERIAL IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 12.5-871 PLACEMENT OF FILL MATERIAL IN EXISTING OR PROPOSED RIGHTS-OF WAY.
   Prior to the city infrastructure inspection, fill material placed in any
existing or proposed dedicated right-of-way should be tested and certified by
an independent soils laboratory to show that it meets the requirements of the
City of Fort Worth Standard Specifications for Street and Storm Drain
Construction. If testing and certification is not performed prior to a city
infrastructure inspection, the city may require testing and certification by an
independent soils laboratory and/or removal of the fill material.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
DIVISION 6: FEMA AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
§ 12.5-872 FEMA AND CITY STORM DRAINAGE STANDARDS.
   It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that the placement
of fill material complies with all applicable FEMA standards, the City of Fort
Worth Standard Specifications for Street and Storm Drainage Construction, the
City of Fort Worth’s Storm Drainage Criteria and Design Manual, the City of
Fort Worth building code, the City of Fort Worth’s ordinance(s) pertaining to
floodplains and any other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 12.5-873 EXISTING DRAINAGE PATTERN.
   It is the responsibility of the property owner not to change the existing
drainage pattern in such a way as to result in flooding or significant increase
in runoff to adjacent properties and the property owner shall assume all
liability concerning the same.
(Ord. 15789, § 1, passed 12-9-2003)
ARTICLE X: GRADING PERMIT
§ 12.5-874 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CAPITAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT (CIP). Public infrastructure design and
construction that is funded and managed by the City of Fort Worth.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in
the Stormwater Criteria Manual.
   DRAINAGE STUDY. A drainage study performed in accordance with the Stormwater
Criteria Manual.
   HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   LAND DISTURBANCE or DISTURBANCE OF LAND. Any construction or other activity
caused by a person, which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not
limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, development,
demolition activities, the moving, depositing, stockpiling, staging or storing
of fill material, soil, rock or earth materials, regardless of whether the
activity is related to a public or private infrastructure project.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT (SRIP). Public
infrastructure design and construction for a single-family residential
development project in the City of Fort Worth that will submit construction
plans to the city's Infrastructure Plan Review Center.
   STORMWATER CRITERIA MANUAL. The current edition of the Fort Worth
Stormwater, Criteria Manual, and all subsequent revisions and amendments
thereto.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-875 INCORPORATION OF STORMWATER CRITERIA MANUAL.
   The Stormwater Criteria Manual is incorporated herein by reference and made
a part of this article for all purposes.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-876 CONSTRUCTION OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX HOMES.
   (a)   An applicant for a detached single-family or duplex building permit
shall submit the grading pattern of the land to be disturbed to the city at the
time of building permit application.
   (b)   The applicant shall identify one of the following grading patterns:
      (1)   HUD Type A grading - all drainage to the front;
      (2)   HUD Type B grading - drainage to the front and rear; or
      (3)   HUD Type C grading - all drainage to the rear.
   (c)   The applicant shall affirm that the drainage pattern conforms with any
approved subdivision grading plans. If the applicant cannot affirm that the
proposed grading pattern of the land to be disturbed conforms to one of the HUD
drainage patterns in this section and an approved subdivision grading plan, the
Transportation and Public Works Department shall review the proposed lot
grading prior to approval of the building permit.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-877 GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS FROM GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by this article, no person may commence
with the Disturbance of Land of 1.0 acre or more, or commence with the
disturbance of land that is part of a Common Plan of Development, unless a
grading permit has been approved by the city for the land disturbance.
   (b)   A grading permit shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Construction of detached single-family or duplex homes that will
disturb less than 1.0 acre and are not a part of a Common Plan of Development;
      (2)   Disturbance of land activities that consist of only agricultural
plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities,
routine channel maintenance or utility maintenance;
      (3)   A CIP that disturbs one acre or more, or is part of a Common Plan
of Development if the CIP complies with the review and approval process defined
by the City Engineer for a CIP and is reviewed and approved by the
Environmental Services Department, the Urban Forestry and Gas Well Sections of
the Development Services Department, the Water Department, the Park and
Recreation Department, and the Transportation and Public Works Department; or
      (4)   A SRJP that disturbs one acre or more, or is part of a Common Plan
of Development if the SRIP complies with the review and approval process
defined by the Infrastructure Plan Review Center for a SRIP and is reviewed and
approved by the Environmental Services Department, the Urban Forestry and Gas
Well Sections of the Development Services Department, the Water Department, the
Park and Recreation Department, and the Transportation and Public Works
Department.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person is required to obtain a
grading permit and causes a disturbance of land without a grading permit that
is approved by the city. A person commits an offense if the person is required
to obtain a grading permit and allows a disturbance of land to remain without a
grading permit that is approved by the city.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-878 APPLICATION FOR A GRADING PERMIT; APPROVAL.
   (a)   Applications for a grading permit shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department. The approval of any grading permit by the city
shall require the consent of the Environmental Services Department, the Urban
Forestry and Gas Well Sections of the Development Services Department, the
Water Department, the Park and Recreation Department, and the Transportation
and Public Works Department.
   (b)   Submission of grading and drainage plans. An applicant for a grading
permit must submit grading and drainage plans prepared by a professional
engineer with the permit application. The grading permit application shall
require an approved Drainage Study. Grading and drainage plans must conform to
the approved Drainage Study. The Transportation and Public Works Director or
his or her designee shall review these documents for conformance with
stormwater design policies contained in the Stormwater Criteria Manual.
   (c)   Submission of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). An
applicant for a grading permit must submit a SWPPP prepared by the applicant
with the grading permit application. The grading permit application shall
require an approved SWPPP. The SWPPP must comply with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Stormwater Construction General Permit. The
Environmental Services Department shall review SWPPP for conformance with the
current State Construction General Permit as required under the city's
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit issued by TCEQ.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-879 EARLY GRADING PERMITS.
   (a)   The city may issue an early grading permit for a land disturbance that
involves only earthwork, prior to the issuance of a grading permit in
accordance with the Stormwater Criteria Manual. An SRIP may obtain an early
grading permit.
   (b)   An applicant who has obtained an early grading permit must obtain a
grading permit for any land disturbance beyond earthwork.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person has been issued an early
grading permit and performs, or allows to be performed, land disturbance
activity that consists of more than earthwork.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-880 ADDITIONAL GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All grading activities performed pursuant to a grading permit or early
grading permit must conform to all applicable city, state, and federal policies
including, but not limited to the city's stormwater management, floodplain
management, urban forestry, water department, and stormwater pollution
prevention policies.
   (b)   All fill material placed in existing or proposed right-of-way pursuant
to a grading permit or early grading permit must conform to the requirements of
the city's standard specifications for street and storm drain construction. If
testing and certification of fill material is not performed in conjunction with
city infrastructure inspection, the city may require testing and certification
by an independent soils laboratory, removal of the fill material at the expense
of the applicant or property owner, or both.
   (c)   The placement of fill material pursuant to a grading permit or early
grading permit shall comply with
Chapter 12.5, Article IX of the City Code.
   (d)   The removal of trees pursuant to a grading permit or early grading
permit shall comply with section
6.302 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person fails to grade property in
conformance with the construction plans approved by the city or in conformance
with the grading permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-881 GRADING CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   A grading certificate certifying that all grading and related
stormwater infrastructure construction was completed in compliance with this
article, the grading permit, and the early grading permit if applicable, must
be prepared by the land owner or owner's representative and submitted to the
Development Services Department prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building permit involving a disturbance of land of 1.0 acre
or more, or that is part of a Common Plan of Development for which the city
issues certificates of occupancy.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if a person fails to submit the Grading
Certificate upon completion of all grading and related stormwater
infrastructure construction in compliance with this Article.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-882 PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   For all land disturbance involving 1.0 acre or more, or that is part
of a Common Plan of Development, for which an early grading permit or grading
permit is required, a permit fee, as established by the City Council, shall be
assessed to the applicant.
   (b)   No fees will be charged for review of information concerning grading
patterns for detached single-family or duplex residences pursuant to §
12.5-876.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
§ 12.5-883 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   A violation of any provision of this article is a Class C misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each separate occurrence of a
violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   The issuance of a citation shall not limit the city's ability to
pursue civil remedies or take other actions as set forth in
chapter 12.5, Article I, Division 3 of the City Code.
(Ord. 26964-06-2024, § 2, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 7-15-2024)
CHAPTER 13: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
Cross-reference:
   Buildings generally, see
Ch. 7
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Emergency management, see
Ch. 11.5
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Signs, see
Ch. 29
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Section
Article I: In General
   
13-1   2021 Edition of the International Fire Code adopted
   
13-2   Amendments
   
13-3   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
13-4   Compliance with chapter required; penalty
   
13-5—13-20   Reserved
Article II: Fire Department
Division 1: Generally
   
13-21—13-23   Reserved
   
13-24   Fire appointees
   
13-24.1   Fire EMS appointees
   
13-25   Members to be selected in accordance with civil service regulations;
exception of chief; appointment of additional firefighters and officers in
times of emergency
   
13-26   Bureau of fire prevention; enforcement of the fire code
   
13-27   Assignment pay for the performance of specialized duties within the
fire department
   
13-28—13-35   Reserved
Division 2: Reserved
   
13-36—13-40   Reserved
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Cross-reference:
   International Building Code, see §§
7-46 et seq.
   International Electrical Code, see §§
11-1 et seq.
   International Mechanical Code, see §§
7-166 et seq.
   International Plumbing Code, see §§
26-1 et seq.
   Minimum building standards code, see §§
7-66 et seq.
§ 13-1 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   Code. The Fire Code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform to the 2021 edition of the International Fire Code, of the
International Code Council, as amended hereby, and the same as amended hereby
is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Fort Worth from the effective
date thereof.
   (b)   Appendices. The following provisions of the Appendices to the 2021
edition of the International Fire Code, as amended hereby, are hereby
specifically adopted as amended as part of the Fire Code of the City of Fort
Worth:
      (1)   Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings;
      (2)   Appendix E - Hazard Categories;
      (3)   Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents;
      (4)   Appendix H - Commercial Inspections, Operational Permits and False
Alarms (local amendment);
      (5)   Appendix I - Installation of Fire Service Features, Fire Protection
Systems, and Other Construction Permits (local amendment);
      (6)   Appendix J - Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks (local
amendment);
      (7)   Appendix K - Mobile Fueling Permit Fees (local amendment); and
      (8)   Appendix L - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and
Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions (published Appendix
H from the 2021 IFC).
   (c)   One copy of the 2021 edition of the International Fire Code, including
the Appendices thereto, marked Exhibit "A," is incorporated herein by reference
and shall be filed in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and
inspection.
   (d)   Any errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Fire Code, as they are discovered, are considered as
part of this code.
(Ord. 9281, §§ 1, 3, passed 1-3-1985; Ord. 10105, § 1, passed 4-26-1988; Ord.
10328, § 1, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 11389, § 1, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13636, §
1, passed 11-3-1998; Ord. 14652, § 1, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 14688, §§ 1, 2,
passed 7-10-2001; Ord. 16027, § 1, passed 7-6-2004; Ord. 18443-1-2009, § 1,
passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 19607-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-2-2011; Ord. 22524-12-2016,
§ 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 25388-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-
2022, eff. 3-24-2022)
§ 13-2 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The 2021 edition of the International Fire Code, including the
Appendices thereto (Exhibit "A") is hereby amended as provided in this Section.
One (1) copy of such amendments is specifically incorporated herein by
reference and shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary for permanent
record and inspection.
   (b)   The 2021 edition of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by
revising the following sections as follows:
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 101
GENERAL
   Section 101.1-Change to read as follows:
   101.1 These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Fort
Worth, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
SECTION 102   
APPLICABILITY
   Section 102.3 Change to read as follows:
   Section 102.3 Change of use or occupancy. Changes shall not be made in the
use or occupancy of any structure that would place the structure in a different
division of the same group or occupancy or in a different group of occupancies,
unless such structure is made to comply with the requirements of this code, the
Building Code and other codes as applicable. Subject to the approval of the
code official, the use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be permitted
to be changed and the structure is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other
groups without conforming to all the requirements of this code, Building Code,
and other applicable codes for those groups, provided the new or proposed use
is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use.
      Exception: {'{'}Delete.{'}'}
   Section 102.4 - Change to read as follows:
   102.4 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new
structures shall comply with this code, the Building Code, and other codes as
applicable; and any alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in
structures required by this code which are within the scope of other codes,
shall be made in accordance therewith.
   Section 102.7 - Change to read as follows:
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80, and such codes, when
specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and
as further regulated in Section 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. Whenever amendments have
been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code
and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any
reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code
as adopted.
SECTION 103   
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION
   Section 103.1 - Change to read as follows:
   103.1 Creation of agency. The Fort Worth Fire Department Bureau of Fire
Prevention is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the fire code official. The function of the agency shall be the
implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   Section 103.2 - Delete.
SECTION 104
GENERAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES
   Section 104.6 - Change to read as follows:
   104.6 Official records. The code official, as authorized, shall maintain
official records as required by this section for a minimum period of time as
required by the laws of the State of Texas.
SECTION 105
PERMITS
   Section 105.1.1 - Add the following sentence to read as follows:
   Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the Fire Department.
Permit fees shall be as defined in Appendix H, Appendix I, and Appendix K. Any
work that is conducted without a required approved permit(s) shall be subject
to doubling of the applicable required fee(s) upon application for such
required permit(s), as well as citation for code violation, as per Section 112.
   Section 105.1.6 Annual permit - Delete.
   Section 105.1.6.1 Annual permit records - Delete.
   Section 105.1.7 - Add to read as follows:
   105.1.7 Operational permit fees. A fee as specified in Appendix H,
Commercial Inspections, Operational Permits and False Alarms, shall be charged
for permits required by Section 105.5 or permit renewal. Operational permit
fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Any person, business owner,
or manager who fails to pay the required permit fees within a forty-five (45)
day period from the statement date shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
issued a citation as prescribed by the Fire Code. Each day that the charges are
delinquent shall constitute a separate offense.
   Section 105.3.3 - Change to read as follows:
   105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure
shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit, if
required by this code, and conducting associated inspections indicating the
applicable provisions of this code have been met, unless otherwise approved by
the fire code official.
   Section 105.3.4 Conditional permits - Delete.
   Section 105.4 Revocation - Add to bottom of list to read as follows:
   8.   The installer or contractor has failed to make reasonable progress on
work for which a construction certificate previously has been issued.
   9.   A permit holder has failed to pay all prior fees assessed in accordance
with this code.
   10.   Any of the provisions set forth in Appendix H, I, or K have been
violated.
   Section 105.5 Change to read as follows:
   105.5 Required operational permits. The fire code official is authorized to
issue operational permits for the operations set forth in this section.
   Section 105.5.5- Carnivals and Fairs - Delete.
   Section 105.5.10 - Covered and Open Mall Buildings - Delete.
   Section 105.5.13 Dry Cleaning - Delete.
   Section 105.5.14 - Exhibits or Trade Shows - Delete.
   Section 105.5.17 Fire Hydrants and Valves - Delete.
   Section 105.5.18 - Flammable and combustible liquids - Delete number 11.
   Section 105.5.29 - Change to read as follows:
   105.5.29 LP-gas. An operational permit is required for:
   1.   Storage and use of LP-gas.
      Exceptions:
         1.   A permit is not required for individual containers with a 500-
gallon (1893 L) water capacity or less or multiple container systems having an
aggregate quantity not exceeding 500 gallons (1893 L), serving occupancies in
Group R-3.
         2.   An operational permit is not required for temporary use of
individual containers with one hundred twenty-five (125) gallon (473 L) water
capacity or less.
   2.   Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas.
   Section 105.5.32 Mobile food preparation vehicles - Delete.
   Section 105.5.34 Open burning - Change to read as follows:
   105.5.34 Trench burning. An operational permit is required for all trench
burning and such burning shall be conducted in accordance with Section 307.
Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to.
   Section 105.5.38 Outdoor assembly event - Delete.
   Section 105.5.39 Places of assembly - Add an Exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Churches and places of worship used solely for worship.
   Section 105.5.44 Refrigeration equipment - Delete.
   Section 105.5.53 - Add to read as follows:
   105.5.53 Special operational permit. The fire code official is authorized to
require and issue a special operational permit for any operation not listed
elsewhere in this section if it is determined by the fire code official that an
operation has the potential for presenting a hazardous condition and should
continue only with the ability to track and monitor the situation that a permit
will provide.
   Section 105.5.54 - Add to read as follows:
   105.5.54 Mobile fueling. To utilize a site for the dispensing of liquid
fuels from tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, marine craft
and other special equipment, or on-demand mobile fueling operations, where
allowed by this code.
   A separate permit is required for each mobile refueling apparatus utilized
for the purpose of transferring fuel in accordance with this section. A
separate permit is required for each site where mobile refueling operations
take place in accordance with this section. Notwithstanding the requirements
set out in Section 105, the fees for mobile fueling permits are as set forth in
Appendix K.
   Section 105.6 - Change to read as follows:
   105.6 Required construction permits. The fire code official is authorized to
issue construction permits for work as set forth in this section. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to perform installation or
modification of any system requiring a construction permit without first having
obtained a permit from the fire department. Permits for fire protection systems
shall only be issued to licensed fire protection system contractors in
accordance with Appendix I and as required by State law. Permits shall not be
required for maintenance.
      Exception: Permits shall not be required for installation of tenant
finish (add/relocate) of fire sprinkler systems when not more than ten (10)
sprinklers are installed or relocated for tenant finish only. This does not
apply to fire sprinkler system installations for new systems, additions, or
special systems, such as for a spray paint booth or industrial oven.
   Section 105.6.11 Gates and barricades across fire apparatus access roads -
Delete.
   Section 105.6.20 Solar photovoltaic power systems - Delete.
   Section 105.6.25 -Add to read as follows:
   105.6.25 Private underground fire main. A construction permit is required
for the installation or modification of a private underground water main that
supplies a fire protection system and/or private fire hydrants. This includes
underground piping that serves both fire and domestic purposes (such as to an
apartment building sprinkler system). Maintenance performed in accordance with
this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
   Section 105.6.26 - Add to read as follows:
   105.6.26 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are
required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control
system for security gates or egress doors. A separate construction permit is
required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may
be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance
with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
SECTION 106
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
   Section 106.1 - Change to read as follows:
   106.1 Submittals. Construction documents and supporting data shall be
submitted with each application for a permit and in such form and detail as
required by the fire code official. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of
the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed.
   With regard to fire protection systems, submittals are required for the
following:
   1.   Fire sprinkler systems with one (1) or more sprinklers installed for
new systems or any special hazard.
      Exception: Fire sprinkler systems with less than twenty (20) sprinklers
installed for a tenant finish (add/relocate).
   2.   Fire alarm systems with one (1) or more devices installed for new
systems of any kind.
      Exception: Fire alarm systems with less than five (5) devices installed
for a tenant finish or renovation on an existing system.
   3.   Underground fire mains for all private underground fire mains serving,
or with the intent to serve, private fire hydrants or fire protection systems.
   4.   Alternative fire extinguishing systems with one (1) or more nozzles
installed.
   5.   Standpipe systems with one (1) or more risers installed.
   6.   Smoke control or exhaust systems.
   7.   Electronic access control systems.
   8.   Kitchen hood extinguishing systems.
   9.   Emergency responder radio coverage equipment/systems.
   Section 106.2 Examination of documents - Delete, but retain Sections 106.2.1
through 106.2.4.1.
SECTION 107
FEES
   Section 107.3 Permit valuations - Delete.
SECTION 108
INSPECTIONS
   Section 108.2.3 - Add to read as follows:
   108.2.3 Certificate of fire inspection. A valid certificate of fire
inspection is required for commercial and residential occupancies requiring a
Certificate of Occupancy per the conditions specified in Appendix H.
   Section 108.2.4 - Add to read as follows:
   108.2.4 Penalty. Fire inspection fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a
certificate of fire inspection. Any person, business owner, or manager who
fails to pay the required inspection fees within a forty-five (45) day period
from the statement date shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be issued a
citation as prescribed by Section 112.
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
   Section 111.1 - Change to read as follows:
   111.1 Board of appeals established. The Construction and Fire Prevention
Board of Appeals shall act on fire code related matters commensurate with the
provisions of the Fort Worth Building Code. Applications for appeals shall be
made to the Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals. All references
to the "Board" shall be deemed to refer to the Construction and Fire Prevention
Board of Appeals. (Delete rest of this section.)
   Sections 111.2 through 111.4 Limitations on authority, Qualifications, and
Administration - Delete.
SECTION 112
VIOLATIONS
   Section 112.4 - Change to read as follows:
   112.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for all violations involving fire safety, or
public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or
continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall
be punishable as herein provided. (Delete rest of this section.)
SECTION 113
STOP WORK ORDER
   Section 113.4 - Change as follows:
   113.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine
of not more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00).
SECTION 114
UNSAFE STRUCTURES OR EQUIPMENT
   Section 114.3 through 114.6 - Delete and replace as follows:
   114.3 Restoration or abatement. The owner, the owner's authorized agent,
operator or occupant of a building or premises deemed unsafe by the fire code
official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions
either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective
action.
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
   Section 202 - Add or change the following definitions to read as follows:
   [B] ATRIUM. (Change number of stories from two to three. Rest of definition
remains unchanged.)
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   [B] CHANGE OF USE OR OCCUPANCY. A change in the purpose or level of activity
within a building that involves a change in application of the requirements of
this code. The definition shall also apply to usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction. (Delete rest of definition.)
   ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purposes of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 and the ICC Electrical Code shall be assumed to mean the Electrical
Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Code as adopted
by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas Code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE. Storage of combustible materials where the
top of storage is greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) in height. High-piled
combustible storage also includes certain high-hazard commodities, such as
rubber tires, Group A plastics, flammable or combustible liquids, idle pallets,
Class 2 through 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified
detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, Class
2 or 3 water-reactive materials, and similar commodities, where the top of
storage is greater than 6 feet (1829 mm) in height.
   Also, any building classified as a Group S Occupancy (S-1 or S-2, other than
a Repair Garage or noncombustible storage only) or Speculative Warehouse
Building, exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) sq. ft. that has an
average clear height in excess of fourteen (14) feet, making it possible to be
used for storage in excess of twelve (12) feet, shall be considered to be high-
piled storage and shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   In all cases, the fire protection system shall be designed to accommodate
the maximum building height available for storage, as approved by the fire code
official.
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION. For the purposes of this code, certain occupancies
are defined as follows: {'{'}Change as follows:{'}'}
   [B] Business Group B. {'{'}Add the following uses to this definition{'}'}
      Educational occupancies above the 12th grade with less than 50 occupants
per room
      Fire stations
      Police stations (includes an area to confine or restrain up to five
individuals)
      Training and skill development not within a school or academic program
with an occupant load less than 50.
   High-hazard Group H-2. {'{'}Add the following uses to this definition{'}'}
      Aircraft paint hangars, in accordance with Section 412.6 of the Building
Code.
   [B] Group I-1. {'{'}Add the following use to this definition{'}'}
      Orphanage for children over 2 1/2 years of age
      Foster home with more than 16 care recipients, exclusive of the primary
family
   [B] Group I-2. {'{'}Add the following use to this definition{'}'}
      Orphanage for children under 2 1/2 years of age
      Foster home for more than five children 2 1/2 years of age or less,
exclusive of the primary family
      All I-1 and Group R uses, not regulated by the IRC, in which the
occupants are not capable of responding to an emergency situation without
physical assistance from staff.
   [B] R-l. {'{'}Add the following use to this definition{'}'}
      Bed and Breakfast Inn as defined in the Zoning Code
   [B] R-2. {'{'}Add the following use to this definition{'}'}
      Townhouse Apartments
   [B] R-3. {'{'}Add the following paragraph and use to this definition{'}'}
      This use shall include not more than two dwelling units that are an
attached part of another use, e.g. caretaker unit for self-storage facility,
residence over a commercial business, etc. Unless in separate detached one- or
two-family structures, structures with three or more dwelling units on a single
property shall constitute a Group R-2 apartment or Townhouse Apartment
regardless of whether divided by fire walls or party walls.
      Bed and Breakfast Home as defined in the Zoning Code
   [B] R-4. {'{'}Add the following uses to this definition{'}'}
      Community Home as defined in the Zoning Code.
      Group Home I as defined in the Zoning Code
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one (1) combined code.
   PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE MAIN. Private fire service main, also known as
underground fire main, is that pipe and its appurtenances on private property:
   1.   Between a source of water and the base of the riser for water-based
fire protection systems.
   2.   Between a source of water and inlets to foam making systems.
   3.   Between a source of water and the base of private hydrants or monitor
nozzles.
   4.   Used as fire pump suction and discharge piping.
   5.   Beginning at the inlet side of the check valve on a gravity or pressure
tank.
   REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing
or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall not include motor fuel-
dispensing facilities, but shall include any auto repair bays. This occupancy
shall also include facilities involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, wind-
shield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such
minor repair.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage and removing personal property
on a self-service basis.
   TENANT FINISH. The relocation of existing devices or addition of new devices
which are necessary to maintain an existing level of protection in an area.
This does not include projects with the installation of new fire sprinkler
risers or fire alarm control panels. The addition of new devices into
previously unprotected areas is considered a new installation.
Chapter 3
GENERAL PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE
SECTION 307
OPEN BURNING
   Section 307.1 and 307.1.1 - Delete and replace as follows:
   307.1 Open burning. It shall be unlawful to burn or cause to be burned any
combustibles including uncut grass, weeds, timber, rubbish, leaves, or other
natural or synthetic materials on any street, alley, lot, or premises. Such
prohibited fires shall include bonfires and fires used for ceremonial purposes.
Any open burning or burning in an approved device that results in atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances that make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Burning may be conducted for purposes of cooking or heating in a
device designated for such purpose by the manufacturer, in accordance with
applicable sections of this code. Solid fuel shall be limited to seasoned wood
and charcoal. Incinerators shall comply with Section 605.8.
      2.   When approved by the fire code official, burning with an approved
trench burner may be permitted provided a standby firefighter is present if
required by the fire code official. A permit shall be acquired as specified in
Section 307.2.2 and approved safety measures shall be employed.
      3.   When approved by the fire code official via Special Operational
Permit for a certain time period and along with any applicable safety
precautions established by the fire code official.
   Section 307.2 - Delete and replace as follows:
   307.2 Trench burns. Trench bums shall be conducted in air curtain trenches,
in accordance with this section, or as required by the fire code official.
   Section 307.2.1 - Delete and replace as follows:
   307.2.1 Attendance. Trench bums shall be constantly attended until the fire
is extinguished. A minimum of one (1) portable fire extinguisher complying with
Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water
truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
   Section 307.2.2 - Add to read as follows:
   307.2.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code
official in accordance with Section 105.5 prior to trench burning. Application
for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the
representative or the owner of the land upon which the trench burn is to be
kindled.
   Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this
section may include but not be limited to the following:
      1.   Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or
restrictions.
      2.   State, county or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
      3.   Local written policies as established by the fire code official.
   Section 307.2.3 - Add to read as follows:
   307.2.3 Location. The location for trench burning shall not be less than
three hundred (300) feet from any structure and three hundred (300) feet from
any property line, or as approved by the fire code official. Burning material
shall be separated from any susceptible vegetation by a minimum fire break of
fifty (50) feet.
   Section 307.3 - Change to read as follows:
   307.3 Extinguishment Authority. The fire department is authorized to order
the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible, or the
fire department of open burning or burning in an approved device that creates
or adds to a hazardous situation.
   Section 307.4 - Delete and replace as follows:
   307.4 Outdoor fireplaces. Permanent outdoor fireplaces or firepits
constructed of noncombustible materials shall be located a minimum of ten (10)
feet from a structure or shall meet the requirements of the Building Code as an
indoor fireplace. Such devices shall comply with the Building Code via an
approved Building Permit.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Outdoor fireplaces at one- and two-family dwellings.
      2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system.
   Section 307.4.1 and 307.4.2 - Delete.
   Section 307.4.3 - Change to read as follows:
   307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be
operated within ten (10) feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Portable outdoor fireplaces at one- and two-family dwellings.
      2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system.
   Section 307.5 - Change to read as follows:
   307.5 Attendance. Where approved, open burning, and use of portable and
permanent outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is
extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with
Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-
extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water
truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
SECTION 308
OPEN FLAMES
   Section 308.1.4 - Change to read as follows:
   308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, such as
charcoal and propane grills and other similar devices used for cooking shall
not be stored, located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within ten
(10) feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
   Exceptions:
      1.   One- and two-family dwellings.
      2.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system.
      3.   LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity
not greater than 2-1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity].
   Section 308.1.6.2 - Change Exception Number 3. to read as follows:
   3.   Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3.
   Section 308.1.6.3 - Change to read as follows:
   308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released
an unmanned free- floating device containing an open flame or other heat
source, such as but not limited to a sky lantern.
   Section 308.3.1 - Change Number 5 to read as follows:
   5.   The flame shall be enclosed, except where openings on the side for air
supply are not more than 0.375 inch (9.5 mm) diameter or where openings are on
the top.
   The candle must be located in the holder so that there is a minimum of 2
inches (50.8 mm) between the top of the flame and any combustible material that
might be placed on top of the holder.
SECTION 311
VACANT PREMISES
   Section 311.4 - Change to read as follows:
   311.4 Removal of combustible and hazardous materials. Upon vacating or
abandoning any premises, the owner and occupant thereof shall be jointly and
severally responsible for removing any and all noxious and hazardous material
or waste matter which has been deposited, allowed to come to rest, or permitted
to accumulate thereon, and such premises shall be left in a clean and neat
condition.
   When the fire department initiates removal of such materials described in
this section, the owner and occupant shall be liable for any and all expenses
accrued for this service.
   Exception: This section shall not apply to materials in heating, air
conditioning, and refrigeration systems installed in accordance with Chapter 6
or exempted herein.
   Section 311.5 - Change to read as follows:
   311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of
any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe
pursuant to Section 114 of this code relating to structural or interior
hazards, as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5.
SECTION 315
GENERAL STORAGE
   Section 315.3.1 - Deleted exceptions, to read as follows:
   315.3.1 Ceiling clearance. Storage shall be maintained 2 feet (610 mm) or
more below the ceiling in non-sprinklered areas of buildings or not less than
18 inches (457 mm) below sprinkler head deflectors in sprinklered areas of
buildings.
   Section 315.3.5 - Add to read as follows:
   315.3.5 Agricultural products and combustible fibers. The outdoor storage of
hay, straw, combustible fibers or other similar product within 50 feet of a
building or other combustible storage is prohibited. All exposed surfaces of
such agricultural product storage shall be covered by a tarpaulin or similar
cover which has been rendered flame retardant.
SECTION 319
MOBILE FOOD PREPARATION VEHICLES
   Section 319.2 Permit required, 319.3 Exhaust hood, and 319.4.1 Fire
protection for cooking equipment - Delete these sections in their entirety.
   Section 319.4.2 - Change to read as follows:
   319.4.2 Fire extinguishers. A minimum of one Class ABC fire extinguisher
shall be provided for all mobile food preparation vehicles in accordance with
Section 906, as well as a Class K extinguisher that is sized as per Section
906.4 when cooking equipment involves solid fuels or vegetable/animal oils or
fats.
SECTION 322
Section 322 - Add to read as follows:
   322.1 Removal of debris or partially burned building after a fire. The owner
or person having under his control or in his possession upon any premises any
hay, straw, bales of wool, cotton, paper, or other substances which have been
rendered useless or unmarketable by reason of any fire on such premises, or any
debris resulting from such fire shall remove the same from such premises within
forty-eight hours after notice to do so has been given by the code official.
   322.2 Burned or partially burned structure. Whenever any building or other
structure is partially burned, the owner thereof or the person in charge or
control thereof, within ten (10) days after notice from the code official,
shall remove from the premises all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned
lumber, and material. If such building or other structure is burned to such an
extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner of the
property upon which same is located or the person in control thereof, within
ten (10) days after notice from the code official, shall remove from the
premises all of the remaining portion of the building or structure.
Chapter 4
EMERGENCY PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS
SECTION 401
GENERAL
   Section 401.3-Change to read as follows:
   401.3 Reporting of emergencies and false alarms. In the event of a fire or
discovery of a fire, smoke, or unauthorized release of flammable or hazardous
materials on any property, the owner or occupant shall immediately report such
condition to the fire department. The code official shall be immediately
notified when an unauthorized discharge becomes reportable under state,
federal, or local regulations.
   Provisions shall be made for controlling and mitigating unauthorized
discharges. Any person, firm, or corporation responsible for any unauthorized
discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the
effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost
to the City of Fort Worth. When deemed necessary by the code official, clean-up
may be initiated by the fire department or by an authorized individual or firm.
All costs associated with such clean-up shall be borne by the owner, operator,
or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge. Reference Section
5003.3 (Release of Hazardous Materials).
   {'{'}Delete remainder o f section.{'}'}
   Section 401.5 - Add sentence to read as follows:
   Reference Section H105 with regard to fees for false alarms.
   Section 404.2.3 - Change to read as follows:
   404.2.3 Lockdown plans. Lockdown plans shall be submitted to the fire code
official, shall include the type and arrangement of security devices to be
utilized, and shall comply with Sections 404.2.3.1 and 404.2.3.2.
   {'{'}No change to remainder of section.{'}'}
   Section 405.5 - Change to read as follows:
   405.5 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any
time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to
simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire.
   Exceptions:
      1.   {'{'}No change.{'}'}
      2.   {'{'}No change.{'}'}
      3.   Notification of teachers/staff having supervision of light- or
sound-sensitive students/occupants, such as those on the autism spectrum, for
the protection of those students/occupants, shall be allowed prior to
conducting a drill.
Chapter 5
FIRE SERVICE FEATURES
SECTION 501
GENERAL
   Section 501.4 - Change to read as follows:
   501.4 Timing of installation. When fire access roadways, fire lanes, and
fire hydrants are required to be installed for any structure or development,
they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which
construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any
structure, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. Reference
Section 503.2.3 (Surface). {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Exception: For tilt-wall and noncombustible construction, construction
access roads shall accommodate all fire lane requirements of this code, with
the exception of surface type and marking. Fire lanes and fire hydrants shall
be complete and approved prior to any combustible materials storage at the
construction site or combustible construction, including, but not limited to,
roofing materials.
SECTION 503
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
   Section 503.1.1 - Add the following sentence to the first paragraph as
follows:
   Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be
along a minimum of a five (5) feet wide unobstructed pathway around the
external walls of the structure. This is not a building setback requirement.
   Section 503.1.2.1 - Add to read as follows:
   1.1.1.2.1 Remoteness. Where two fire apparatus access roads are required,
they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the
length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be
served, measured in a straight line between accesses. The fire code official is
authorized to approve a reduced remoteness dimension, based on topography,
flood plains, intervening structures or properties, etc.
   Exception: One- or two-family dwelling and multiple-family residential
developments - the location of the secondary access must be approved by the
fire code official.
   Section 503.1.4 through 503.1.8 - Add to read as follows:
   503.1.4 Buildings more than 55 feet in height. A building where the topmost
occupied floor level is more than fifty-five (55) feet in height above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be accessible by a public
street or fire apparatus access road that is not less than fifteen (15) feet
nor more than twenty-five (25) feet from the inside curb to the building face
along at least one-half of the length of two sides of the building. Such tall
buildings shall also be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus
access roads.
   503.1.5 Hazardous materials. The fire code official is authorized to require
more than one fire apparatus access road based on the existence of a Group H
occupancy or facility, hazardous materials storage, tank farms, or other
hazardous operations that might affect fire department access.
   503.1.6 One- or two-family dwelling residential developments. Developments
of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceed
thirty (30) units shall be provided with at least two separate and approved
fire apparatus access roads.
   Exception: The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access
road shall be allowed to increase to forty (40) if the development will connect
to future developments as determined by the fire code official.
   503.1.7 Multiple-family residential developments. Multiple-family
residential projects having more than one hundred (100) dwelling units shall be
provided with at least two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.
   503.1.8 Group E. All Group E occupancies shall be provided with at least two
separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.
   Section 503.2.1 - Change to read as follows;
   503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed
width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of shoulders, and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm).
   Exceptions:
      1.   Multi-family residential developments that are served by fire
apparatus access roads shall require minimum 26 feet (7925) width.
      2.   Where medians and/or gates are provided at entrances/exits to
residential developments, fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum
clear width of 20 ft. for both the entrance and exit on each side of such gate
and/or median.
   Section 503.2.3 - Change to read as follows:
   503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and
maintained to support imposed loads of 85,000 lbs. for fire apparatus and shall
be constructed/surfaced of asphalt or concrete, so as to provide all-weather
driving capabilities, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. When
approved by the fire code official, other surfaces may be utilized for the
purpose of vertical construction only to accommodate the requirements of
Section 501.4 (Timing of Installation) with signed/sealed design by a Licensed
Professional Civil Engineer in the State of Texas indicating compliance with
all Fort Worth Fire Code requirements for Fire Department Apparatus Access
Roads with the exception of surface type. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Section 503.2.4 - Change to read as follows:
   503.2.4 Turning radius. The minimum inside turning radius shall be twenty-
five (25) feet, and the minimum outside radius shall be either fifty-one (51)
feet in multifamily complexes or forty-five (45) feet otherwise. {'{'}Delete
rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Section 503.2.5 - Change to read as follows:
   503.2.5 Dead ends. All dead-end fire lanes in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) feet in length shall be provided with a turnaround meeting the
requirements of Figure 503.2.5. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9873.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9871.png]
 
   * Reference Sections 503.2.1 and 4 with regards to required widths and
radii, which are different for multi-family residential developments.
   Section 503.2.7 - Change to read as follows:
   503.2.7 Grade. Grade incline of fire lanes in any direction shall not exceed
six (6) percent. The fire code official shall have the authority to approve an
increase in the grade incline up to ten (10) percent when adequate
justification is presented, such as topographical constraints. {'{'}Delete rest
of paragraph.{'}'}
   Exception: When such portions of the fire lane are not potentially necessary
for aerial operations of any kind and when approved by the fire code official.
   Section 503.3 - Change to read as follows:
   503.3 Marking. Approved striping or signs shall be provided and maintained
for fire apparatus roads to identify such roads and prohibit the obstruction
thereof. Signs and striping shall be maintained in a clean and legible
condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide
adequate visibility. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   1.   Striping. Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked by painted lines
of red traffic paint six (6) inches in width to show the boundaries of the
lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" shall appear in four (4) inch white
letters at twenty-five (25) foot feet intervals on the red border markings
along both sides of the fire lane. Where a curb is available, the striping
shall be on the vertical face of the curb. See Figure 503.1.
   2.   Signs. Shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" and shall be twelve (12)
inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high with a companion sign twelve (12)
inches wide and six (6) inches high stating "TOW AWAY ZONE." Signs shall be
painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less
than two (2) inch lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary
post and the bottom of the sign shall be six (6) feet, six (6) inches above
finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart along
both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or
walls or as approved by the code official.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9875.jpg]
 
   Section 503.4 - Change to read as follows:
   503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access
roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles.
The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and 503.2.2
and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be
maintained at all times. Spike strips or other devices that are intended to
damage tires/vehicles to prevent access or egress from a property are
prohibited regardless of manual or automatic features to retract such devices,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. Fire apparatus access
roads shall be constructed with surface above the 100 year flood plain, unless
otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   Section 503.6 - Change to read as follows:
   503.6 Security gates. Except as prohibited by other ordinances, the
installation of security gates that restrict fire department access to a
property or access to the fire apparatus access road require approval by the
fire code official. Where security gates are installed, an approved means of
emergency operation is required. The security gates and the emergency operation
shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where
provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for
automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with
the requirements of ASTM F 2200.
      503.6.1 Manual Gates. Manually operated gates shall have an approved lock
installed to allow fire department access. A hold-open device shall be
installed, such that the gate will remain in the open position until manually
released to close.
      503.6.2 Electric Gates. Electrically operated gates shall be operated
with an approved key switch. The key switch shall be installed on the column or
post near the electrical control box (preferably on the right-hand side). When
the key switch is operated, the gate shall remain in the open position until
manually reset. A mechanical manual release or a "fail safe" gate operating
mechanism shall be provided for electrically operated gates in case of power
failure.
      Electric gate operators shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates
intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed
to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200.
      An Access Control Permit from the fire department is required for
electrically operated gates. For multi-family occupancies where gates are
provided that obstruct fire apparatus access roads, at least one gate shall be
electric and comply with all requirements of Section 503.6.
      503.6.3 Dimensions. All gates crossing fire apparatus access roads shall
have a minimum twenty (20) feet clear width when opened.
      503.6.4 Existing gates. All manual gates restricting fire department
access that are locked shall comply with Section 503.6.1. All electric gates
restricting fire department access shall comply with Section 503.6.2. Section
503.6.3 may be applied retroactively when required by the fire code official
where it is determined that fire department access is restricted by such gate
(s). When an electric gate operator must be replaced, such replacement shall
comply with all requirements of Section 503.6.
SECTION 505
PREMISES IDENTIFICATION
   Section 505.1 - Change to read as follows:
   505.1 Premises identification. An approved address shall be provided for all
new and existing buildings in accordance with the fire department's addressing
policies. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
SECTION 506
KEY BOXES
   Section 506.1 -Change to read as follows:
   506.1 Key boxes. In any building which contains an elevator, any building or
complex which contains a fire alarm system, or when access to or within a
structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings, or where
immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire- fighting purposes, a key
box shall be installed. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire code
official and shall contain keys to gain necessary access to any areas required
by the code official. Keys to elevators, fire alarm control panels, and safety
data sheets shall be included in the key box. When installed for the primary
purpose of providing access to the fire alarm system serving an apartment
complex, the key box shall be placed at the exterior entrance of the property
manager's office and shall be suitably marked as such.
{'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Section 506.3 - Add to read as follows:
   506.3 Location. Key box shall be located at the front of the building six
(6) to eight (8) feet above grade level and within five (5) feet of the right
side of the main entrance as viewed from the outside, unless alternate or
additional locations are approved or required by the fire code official, such
as fire pump room or sprinkler riser room access doors, etc.
SECTION 507
FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES
   Section 507.4-Change to read as follows:
   507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for
hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be provided by the Water
Department via hydraulic water model of the water supply system as approved by
the fire code official, or where allowed, conducted in accordance with NFPA 291
"Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within
one year of fire protection plans submittal. The exact location of the water
model node or of the static/residual hydrant and flow hydrant shall be
indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be
accompanied by a hard copy of the water model or water flow supply test report
from the Fort Worth Water Department, or as approved by the fire code official.
The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on
this fluctuation information as approved by the fire code official. Reference
Section 903 as to additional safety factor required. {'{'}Delete rest of
paragraph.{'}'}
   Section 507.5.1 - Change to read as follows:
   507.5.1 Required installations. All fire hydrants shall be accessible to the
fire department apparatus by roadways meeting the requirements of Section 503.
All fire hydrants shall meet the specifications of the Fort Worth Water
Department for DryBarrel Fire Hydrants, or as approved by the fire code
official. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following criteria:
   1.   For all R-3 and Group U Occupancies, fire hydrants shall be installed
such that there is not more than one thousand (1,000) feet (five hundred foot
radius) of space between hydrants along a direct horizontal line. No point on a
building shall exceed a six hundred (600) feet hose lay distance using the
route of access that fire department personnel would travel between the hydrant
and the building.
   2.   For other than R-3 and Group U occupancies, all land uses, including
multi-family complexes, shall have fire hydrants installed such that there is
no more than six hundred (600) feet (three hundred feet radius) of space
between hydrants along a direct horizontal line. No point on any structure
shall exceed five hundred (500) feet hose lay distance, using the route of
access that fire department personnel would travel between the hydrant and the
structure.
   3.   A fire hydrant shall be installed no more than one hundred-fifty (150)
feet from fire department connections.
   4.   All fire hydrants shall be installed at least two (2) feet, but not
more than nine (9) feet, from the curb face of a paved street or edge of a
designated approved fire access roadway.
   5.   All fire hydrants shall be installed such that the center of the main
outlet on the front of the hydrant is not less than eighteen (18) inches, nor
more than forty-eight (48) inches, above grade level.
   6.   Only National Standard three-way hydrants that open in the clockwise
direction are approved.
   7.   All fire hydrant threads must be National Standard hose threads or as
approved by the fire code official.
   8.   Where fire hydrants are installed on a metered water supply or are not
owned by the City of Fort Worth, said hydrants shall be maintained by the legal
owner in satisfactory operating condition and kept free of obstructions at all
times.
   9.   All private fire hydrants shall be painted red and shall be properly
maintained by the property owner. All public fire hydrants shall be provided
with two coats of aluminum paint, as required by the Fort Worth Water
Department specifications for Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants.
   Section 507.5.1.1 - Delete this section.
   Section 507.5.4 - Change to read as follows:
   507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be
maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and
other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept within three (3) feet of
fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system
control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants
from being immediately discernible or accessible. The fire department shall not
be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection
equipment or fire hydrants.
SECTION 508
FIRE COMMAND CENTER
   Section 508.1 - Change to read as follows:
   508.1 General. Where required by other sections of this code and in all
buildings classified as high-rise buildings by the International Building Code,
a fire command center for fire department operations shall be provided and
shall comply with Sections 508.1.1 through 508.1.7.
   Section 508.1.3 - Change to read as follows:
   508.1.3 Size. The fire command center shall be not less than 0.015 percent
of the total building area of the facility served or 200 square feet (19 m2) in
area, whichever is greater, with a minimum dimension of 0.7 times the square
root of the room area or 10 feet (3048 mm), whichever is greater.
SECTION 509
FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION AND ACCESS
   Section 509.1.2 - Add to read as follows:
   509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply,
lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of two
(2) inches when located inside a building and four (4) inches when located
outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a
color that contrasts with the background.
Chapter 6
BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
SECTION 603
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, WIRING AND HAZARDS
   Section 603.2.3 - Add to read as follows:
   603.2.3 Battery-charged/solar electrified fences. Permitting of battery-
charged/solar electrified fences is no longer allowed by State law where such
electrified fence complies with the applicable State law. As a result, the Fire
Department must be notified in writing of any such electrified fence
installation by the electric fence installing contractor, as such presents a
shock hazard to first responders at the property in question. An approved key
switch is required to shut down the electrified fence at the main entrance to
the property for use by first responders in order to not restrict or further
delay fire department response to the property, unless an approved key switch
is provided to open the access gate (Access Control Permit required) that will
automatically disconnect the electrified fence as well.
SECTION 605
FUEL-FIRED APPLIANCES
   Section 605.4 Fuel oil storage systems - Add sentence to read as follows:
   Flammable and combustible liquids tanks and their appurtenances shall comply
with Chapter 57, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   Sections 605.4 through 605.4.2.2 - Change to read as follows:
   605.4 Fuel oil (diesel and Class II or III combustible liquid storage
systems). Fuel oil (diesel and Class II or III combustible liquid) storage
systems connected to fuel burning equipment shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with this code. Tanks and fuel-oil piping systems shall be
installed in accordance with Chapter 13 of the International Mechanical Code
and Chapter 57.
      605.4.1 Fuel oil storage in outside, above-ground tanks. Where connected
to a fuel-oil piping system, the storage of fuel oil above ground shall comply
with NFPA 31 and Chapter 57.
         605.4.1.1 Approval. Outdoor fuel oil storage tanks shall be in
accordance with UL 142 or UL 2085, and also listed as double-wall/secondary
containment tanks, and the secondary containment shall be monitored visually or
automatically.
      605.4.2 Fuel oil storage inside buildings. Fuel oil storage inside
buildings shall comply with Sections 605.4.2.2 through 605.4.2.8 and Chapter
57.
         605.4.2.1 Approval. Indoor fuel oil storage tanks shall be in
accordance with UL 80, UL 142 or UL 2085.
         605.4.2.2 Quantity limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks
containing Class II or III combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building.
The aggregate capacity of all tanks shall not exceed the following:
         1.   660 gallons (2498 L) in non-sprinklered buildings, where stored
in a tank complying with UL 80, UL 142 or UL 2085, and also listed as a double-
wall/secondary containment tank for Class II liquids.
         2.   1,320 gallons (4996 L) in buildings equipped with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where stored in a tank
complying with UL 142 or UL 2085. The tank shall be listed as a secondary
containment tank, and the secondary containment shall be monitored visually or
automatically.
         3.   3,000 gallons (11 356 L) in buildings equipped with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where stored in
protected above-ground tanks complying with UL 2085 and Section 5704.2.9.7. The
tank shall be listed as a secondary containment tank, as required by UL 2085,
and the secondary containment shall be monitored visually or automatically.
   Section 605.5.2.1.1 Prohibited locations - Change Note 3. to read as
follows:
   3.   On roofs or exterior balconies.
      Exceptions:
         1.   On roofs of noncombustible construction.
         2.   For exterior balconies where buildings, balconies and decks are
protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
         3.   LP-gas cooking or heating devices having an LP-gas container with
a water capacity not greater than 2-1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-
gas capacity].
Chapter 8
INTERIOR FINISH, DECORATIVE
MATERIALS AND FURNISHINGS
SECTION 806
NATURAL DECORATIVE VEGETATION IN NEW AND EXISTING BUILDINGS
Section 806.1.1 - Change to read as follows:
   806.1.1 Restricted occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be prohibited within
ambulatory care facilities and Group A, B, E, I-1, 1-2, 1-3, 1-4, M, R-l, R-2,
and R- 4 Occupancies.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic sprinkler
system in- stalled in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall not
be prohibited in Groups A, B, E, M, R-1, and R-2.
      2.   Trees shall be allowed within dwelling units in Group R-
2 Occupancies.
   Section 806. J.4 - Add to read as follows:
   806.1.4 Fire-retardant treatments for natural cut trees. Trees shall be
properly treated with an approved fire-retardant that has been tested by an
approved agency and shall comply with both Test Method 1 and Test Method 2 of
ASTM E3082.
   Exception: Fire-retardant treatment shall not be required within dwelling
units in Group R-2 Occupancies.
   Section 806.1.5 - Add to read as follows:
   806.1.5 Tags. Trees shall bear a tag stating date of placement in public
building, type of fire-retardant treatment used, name of the person who applied
the fireretardant, name of the person affixing the tag, and of designated
person making daily tests for dryness.
SECTION 807
DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND ARTIFICIAL DECORATIVE VEGETATION IN NEW AND EXISTING
BUILDINGS
   Section 807.5.2.2 and 3 applicable to Group E occupancies - Change to read
as follows:
   807.5.2.2 Artwork in corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be
limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area.
Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall
(minimum 18 inches from ceiling in all cases). Curtains, draperies, wall
hangings, and other decorative material, other than artwork, suspended from the
walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA
701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
   Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent
of the wall area.
   807.5.2.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be
limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall
area to which they are attached. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall (minimum 18 inches from ceiling in all cases).
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material, other than
artwork, suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation
performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be
noncombustible.
   Section 807.5.5.2 and 3 applicable to Group 1-4 occupancies - Change to read
as follows:
   807.5.5.2 Artwork in corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be
limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area.
Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall
(minimum 18 inches from ceiling in all cases). Curtains, draperies, wall
hangings and other decorative material, other than artwork, suspended from the
walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA
701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
   Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent
of the wall area.
   807.5.5.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be
limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall
area to which they are attached. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall (minimum 18 inches from ceiling in all cases).
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material, other than
artwork, suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation
performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be
noncombustible.
Chapter 9
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
SECTION 901
GENERAL
   Section 901.1 - Add sentence to read as follows:
   Fire protection equipment required by this code shall be listed or approved
for the intended use by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, unless
otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   Section 901.2 Add sentence to read as follows:
   Submittal of plans, specifications, and appropriate calculations for fire
protection systems and appurtenances shall be made to the fire department by a
fire protection systems contractor who is appropriately licensed per the Texas
Administrative Code requirements.
   Section 901.4.2.1 - Add to read as follows:
   901.4.2.1 Nonrequired fire alarm devices. Nonrequired fire alarm devices or
devices for a nonrequired fire alarm system shall be clearly identified on the
submitted fire alarm construction documents associated with the fire alarm
permit, as required by NFPA 72.
   Section 901.5.1 - Change to read as follows:
   901.5.1 Occupancy. It shall be unlawful to occupy any portion of a building
or structure until the required fire protection and life safety systems have
been tested and approved, unless otherwise approved by the building and fire
code officials contingent on fire watch or other mitigating factors/
requirements.
   Section 901.6 - Change to read as follows:
   901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance. The building owner and/or
occupant shall be responsible for assuring that all fire sprinkler systems,
fire hydrant systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, portable fire
extinguishers, smoke and heat vents, smoke control and exhaust systems, and
other fire protection or extinguishing systems or appliances, whether required
or voluntarily installed, are maintained in an operative condition at all
times, and are replaced or repaired where defective. Such systems shall be
extended, altered or augmented as necessary to maintain and continue protection
whenever any building so equipped is altered, remodeled or added to. All
additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall be in accordance with this
chapter. Non-required fire protection systems and equipment shall be inspected,
tested and maintained or removed, upon approval of the fire code official, as
per Section 901.8.
   The fire code official may require the testing of any fire protection or
extinguishing system, at the owner's expense, when evidence is found to
indicate possible impairment of the system. All tests and inspections required
herein shall be conducted by persons approved by the fire code official. {'
{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
   Section 901.6.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test
standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional
requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years:
   1.   The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the
standpipe shall be backflushed or inspected by an approved camera with video
recording when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for
all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be
conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of
standpipe systems.
   2.   For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic
water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, connect hose from
a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code
official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof
outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that
there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe
to prevent potential water damage. There is no required pressure criteria at
the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no
closed water supply control valves on the system that prevent proper operation
of the system.
   3.   Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be flow tested
or exercised in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves
shall be exercised.
   4.   If the FDC is not already provided with approved locking caps, the
contractor shall install such caps for all FDC inlets, as required by the fire
code official.
   5.   Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag, as per
the Texas Administrative Code -'Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
Tag' at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be
check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the
tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum.
   6.   The procedures required by the Texas Administrative Code with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags for any deficiencies noted during the testing,
including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction
(Fire Marshal) shall be followed.
   7.   Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner
and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State law mentioned above and
NFPA 25.
   8.   Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the
building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day
prior to expected night time freezing conditions.
   9.   Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire
hose from any standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the
utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must
remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is
given to remove hose by the fire code official.
   Section 901.1 - Change to read as follows:
   901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out
of service or in the event of an excessive number of accidental activations,
the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately
and, where required by the code official, the building shall be either
evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left
unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned
to service.
   Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with at least one approved
means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to
perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires, or
as required by the fire code official.
   Section 901.8.2 - Change to read as follows:
   901.8.2 Removal of occupant-use hose lines. The fire code official is
authorized to permit the removal of new or existing occupant-use hose lines and
hose valves where all of the following conditions exist:
   1.   The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire
department.
   2.   Where occupant-use hose lines are allowed to be removed, the hose
valves are required to remain and be made compatible for use by the fire
department, as needed.
SECTION 903
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   Section 903.1.1 Change to read as follows:
   903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing
systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to required
automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or
as approved by the fire code official.
   Section 903.1.2 - Add to read as follows:
   903.1.2 Residential systems. Reductions to Building Code provisions,
commonly referred to as "building code tradeoffs," shall not apply to systems
installed in accordance with NFPA 13R or 13D unless authorized as specified in
Section 903.1.2 of the Building Code. When "tradeoffs" are used in the building
design that are not authorized for NFPA 13R or 13D systems, the sprinkler
installation shall be in accordance with NFPA 13.
   Residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R shall
include attic sprinkler protection in buildings of three or more stories.
   Section 903.2 - Change to read as follows and delete the Exception:
   903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings
and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Section 903.2.1
through 903.2.12. In order to prohibit elevator shunt trip, automatic
sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine
spaces, and elevator hoistways (except for hydraulic elevator pits where such
does not initiate the shunt trip requirement in the State Elevator Code), or as
approved by the fire code official. Storage shall not be allowed within the
elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the
elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED."
Such signage shall comply with Section 509.
   Exception: {'{'}Delete Exception in its entirety{'}'}.
   Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2 - Add exception after first paragraph to read as
follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3 -Add exception after first paragraph to read as
follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   Section 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs - Delete the Exception.
   Section 903.2.7 Group M - Add Exception after first paragraph to read as
follows:
   Exception: Where the building is existing, single story, and multi-tenant
with independent egress per tenant space, only the single tenant fire area
(separated by approved fire barriers) shall require sprinkler protection.
   Section 903.2.8 and 903.2.8.1 - Change to read as follows:
   903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire
area, other than one- and two-family dwellings, and townhomes in compliance
with the Residential Code.
      903.2.8.1 Group R-l and R-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout buildings with a Group R-l or R-2 fire area.
      Exception: Where no portion of the R-l or R-2 fire area is located higher
than the second story, nor in a basement, and such use complies with any of the
following conditions:
         a.   For other than Group R-2 apartments, the occupant load is less
than ten (10).
         b.   The building when used as Group R-2 apartments contains less than
five (5) dwelling units.
   Section 903.2.4.2 - Change to read as follows:
   903.2.4.2 Group F-1 distilled spirits. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout a Group F-1 fire area used for the manufacture of
distilled spirits involving more than 120 gallons of distilled spirits (>16%
alcohol) in the fire area at any one time.
   Section 903.2.8.4 Care facilities - Delete.
   Section 903.2.9.3 - Change to read as follows:
   903.2.9.3 Group S-1 distilled spirits or wine. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout a Group S-1 fire area used for the bulk storage of
distilled spirits or wine involving more than 120 gallons of distilled spirits
or wine (>16% alcohol) in the fire area at any one time.
   Section 903.2.9.4 Group S-1 upholstered furniture and mattresses - Delete
the Exception.
   Section 903.2.9.5 - Add to read as follows:
   903.2.9.5 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. The minimum
sprinkler system design shall be based on an Ordinary Hazard Group II
classification, in accordance with NFPA 13 requirements. Physical construction
in compliance with open-grid ceilings as per NFPA 13, such as an open metal
grid ceiling or chicken wire that does not obstruct the overhead sprinkler
protection, shall be installed to prevent storage from exceeding the lower of
either 12 feet above finished floor or 18 inches beneath standard sprinkler
head deflectors. At least one sprinkler head shall be provided in each storage
unit/room (additional sprinklers may be necessary for compliance with NFPA 13
spacing requirements), regardless of wall height or construction type
separating such units.
   Exception: One story self-service storage facilities that have no interior
corridors and are provided with a one-hour fire barrier wall installed between
every storage compartment up to a maximum aggregate building area of 12,000 sq.
ft. The above required overhead physical obstructions are still required at 2
ft. below the ceiling or roof deck for a non-sprinklered building.
   Section 903.2.10 - Change to read as follows:
   903.2.10 Group S-2 parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout buildings classified as parking garages where any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage, in accordance
with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code, exceeds 12,000 square
feet (1115 m2).
      2.   Where the enclosed parking garage, in accordance with Section 406.6
of the International Building Code, is located beneath other groups.
            Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R- 3
occupancies.
      3.   Where the open parking garage is open, in accordance with Section
406.5 of the International Building Code, and:
         a.   Fire area exceeds 48,000 square feet (4460 m2) and building
exceeds four parking levels, or
         b.   Where fire apparatus access is not provided along at least two
sides of the structure in question (1/2 of the perimeter of the building)
having required openings, or
         c.   Where other occupancies are provided above the open parking
garage.
   Section 903.2.10.2 - Change to read as follows:
   903.2.10.2 Mechanical-access parking garages. An approved automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for the storage of
motor vehicles in a mechanical-access parking garage. The portion of the
building that contains the mechanical-access parking garage shall be protected
with a specially engineered automatic sprinkler system. At least one exit stair
shall be provided to the roof of the structure to allow installation of
standpipe for firefighting, as per Section 905.
   Section 903.2.11.3 - Change to read as follows and delete Exception:
   903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories or
occupiable roofs, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1511 of the
International Building Code, located 55 feet (16 764 mm) or more above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor.
   Exception: {'{'}Delete Exception{'}'}
   Section 903.2.11.7 - Add to read as follows:
   903.2.11.7 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and
spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire sprinkler or
alternate fire extinguishing system.
   Section 903.3.1.1.1 - Change to read as follows:
   903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official,
automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas
where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire
detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible
or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any
room merely because it is damp, of fireresistance-rated construction or
contains electrical equipment.
   1.   A room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes
a serious life or fire hazard, including but not limited to molten metal
exposures.
   2.   {'{'}Delete.{'}'}
   3.   Generator and transformer rooms under the direct control of a public
utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/
ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than 2 hours.
   4.   Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces. (Shunt
trip prohibited.)
   5.   Elevator hoistways (other than hydraulic pits) and elevator machine
rooms enclosed by fire barriers as required by the International Building Code.
Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room
indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." (Shunt trip prohibited.)
   6.   Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces
associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with
Section 3008 of the International Building Code. (Shunt trip prohibited.)
   Section 903.3.1.2 - Change to read as follows:
   903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R
occupancies up to and including four stories in height above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access shall be permitted to be installed throughout
in accordance with NFPA 13R. However, when "building code tradeoffs" that are
not authorized for NFPA 13R systems are used in the building design, the
sprinkler installation shall be in accordance with NFPA 13. (See Section
903.1.2)
   Residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R shall
include attic sprinkler protection in buildings of three or more stories, (See
903.3.1.2.3)
   The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
the Building Code shall be measured from grade plane.
   Section 903.3.1.2.2 - Change to read as follows:
   903.3.1.2.2 Corridors and balconies. Sprinkler protection shall be provided
in all corridors/breezeways and for all balconies, including any associated
storage rooms, closets, etc. accessed from such corridor/breezeway. {'{'}Delete
the rest of this section.{'}'}
   Section 903.3.1.2.3 - Change to read as follows:
   Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages and Attics. Sprinkler protection is
required in attached garages, and in the following attic spaces:
   1.   Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall
be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
   2.   Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in a non-sprinklered attic, not
fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be
installed above the equipment.
   3.   Attic spaces of buildings that are three or more stories in height
above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
         Exception: Where the attic would be exempt from sprinkler protection
by NFPA 13.
   4.   Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to
have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following:
      4.1.   Provide automatic sprinkler system protection.
      4.2.   Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is
arranged to activate the building fire alarm system.
      4.3.   Construct the attic using noncombustible materials.
      4.4.   Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood complying
with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code.
      4.5.   Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation where there is a
flat roof of no more than 48 inches height of interstitial space between
ceiling and roof.
   {'{'}Delete rest of this section.{'}'}
   Section 903.3.1.4, 903.3.1.4.1, 903.3.1.4.2, and903.3.1.4.3 - Add to read as
follows:
   903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire
sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
      903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze
automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
      Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect
non-ventilated attic spaces where the attic space is a part of the building's
thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck,
rather than at the ceiling level.
      903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be
allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large
diameter water- filled pipe.
      903.3.1.4.3 Dry pipe sprinkler systems. All dry pipe sprinkler systems
shall be required to meet the 60 second water delivery time, per Section
8.2.3.2 of NFPA 13 (2019 edition), to the system test connection regardless of
the system size, unless more stringent criteria is applicable in NFPA 13, and
all dry pipe sprinkler systems shall be trip tested to flow/discharge water to
verify compliance with this requirement, unless otherwise approved by the fire
code official.
   Section 903.3.1.5 - Add to read as follows:
   903.3.1.5 Multiple or detached buildings. Multiple or detached buildings
shall not be allowed to be supplied by a single fire sprinkler riser, unless
specifically approved by the fire code official.
   Section 903.3.1.6 - Add to read as follows:
   903.3.1.6 Exterior projections/canopies. For NFPA 13 or 13R sprinkler
systems, all exterior projections/canopies exceeding 4 ft. in width/depth from
the building, whether attached or not, shall be sprinklered.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Canopies meeting NFPA 13 requirements for noncombustible or limited
combustible construction or fire-retardant treated wood for pedestrian use
only.
      2.   Canopies that are detached/separated from the sprinklered building
as required by the Building Code to be considered a separate building and
meeting the allowable area requirements of the Building Code as a non-
sprinklered building.
   Section 903.3.5 Water supplies - Add second paragraph to read as follows:
   Every fire protection system shall be designed with a 5 psi safety factor in
the hydraulic calculations in addition to water fluctuation adjustments
required by Section 507.4.
   Section 903.3.7.1 - Add to read as follows:
   903.3.7.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) Caps. New FDC
installations shall be equipped with locking FDC caps as approved by the fire
code official. Existing FDC installations will require approved locking FDC
caps to be installed when directed by the fire code official.
   Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms - Add second paragraph
to read as follows:
   Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for
each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection
of water flow for more than forty-five (45) seconds. All control valves in the
sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be electrically supervised.
   Section 903.4 - Add Exception number 9 to read as follows:
   9.   Control valves associated with a backflow prevention device that is
installed outside of a building. Such valves must be chained and locked in the
open position even if located in a locked vault or enclosure.
   Section 903.4.2 - Change to read as follows:
   903.4.2 Alarms. An approved sprinkler waterflow alarm device, located on the
exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each
automatic sprinkler system Such sprinkler waterflow alarm devices shall be
activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the
smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is
installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the
building fire alarm system.
   The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a
weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela
strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department
connections. Adjacent to the alarm shall be a sign which states:
   "WHEN ALARM SOUNDS, CALL FORT WORTH FIRE DEPARTMENT, 91-1,
   {'{'}insert address{'}'} "
and which contains the address of the property as indicated on the Certificate
of Occupancy. The sign shall consist of red letters of 1-inch minimum height on
a white reflective background.
   Section 903.4.3 - Change to read as follows:
   903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves
shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in
buildings requiring a standpipe system, as per Section 905. Floor control
assemblies shall be located in protected stairwells, or as otherwise approved
by the fire code official.
SECTION 905
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
   Section 905.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   905.1.1 Locking Fire Department Connection (FDC) caps. New standpipe systems
shall be equipped with approved locking caps on all FDC's. Existing standpipe
systems shall have approved locking fire department connection caps installed
when required by the code official.
   Section 905.3.3 - Change to read as follows:
   905.3.3 Covered and open mall buildings. A covered mall or open mall
building shall be equipped throughout with a Class 1 automatic wet standpipe
system where the mall exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area per
story. Standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's
interior area is more than two hundred (200) feet of travel, vertically and
horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. Mall
buildings not required to be equipped with a standpipe system by this section
shall be equipped with Class 1 hose connections connected to the automatic
sprinkler system sized to deliver water ... {'{'}remainder of section unchanged
{'}'}.
   Section 905.4 - Change Item 1. and 3. to read as follows:
   1.   In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided
for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located
at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the
fire code official.
   2.   {'{'}No change.{'}'}
   3.   In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to
other areas of a building.
      Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable
from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a... {'{'}No change to rest
of section.{'}'}
   Section 905.8.1 - Add to read as follows:
   905.8.1 Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of
ten (10) psig and a maximum of forty (40) psig air pressure with a monitored
high/low air pressure alarm.
   Section 905.12 - Add to read as follows:
   905.12 Manual standpipe design. All manual standpipes shall be designed
based on a water supply of 160 psi static and 145 psi residual flowing 1,000
gpm at the Fire Department Connection, or as otherwise approved by the fire
code official.
   Section 906.1 - Change to read as follows:
   906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed and
tagged by a State Fire Marshal-licensed fire extinguishing contractor, unless
otherwise approved by the fire code official, in the following locations. {'
{'}No change to remainder of section.{'}'}
SECTION 906
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
   Section 906.1(1) - Delete Exception item number 3.
SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
   Section 907.1.4 - Add to read as follows:
   907.1.4 Documentation cabinet. A documentation cabinet in compliance with
all requirements of NFPA 72 shall be provided for any new or upgraded fire
alarm system, or any fire alarm system where the main fire alarm control panel
requires replacement, for proper storage of system documentation.
   Section 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures - Change last
sentence to read as follows:
   Where other sections of this code allow elimination of manual fire alarm
boxes/manual pull stations due to sprinklers, at least one manual pull station
shall be installed at the exit from the sprinkler riser room where applicable,
as well as at the fire alarm control panel (FACP), unless the FACP is also
located in the sprinkler riser room. If not sprinklered, the required single
manual pull station shall be located at the FACP or in a commonly occupied
location, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   Section 907.2.1 - Change to read as follows:
   907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant
notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in
Group A occupancies having an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more or
more than one hundred (100) persons above or below the lowest level of exit
discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance
with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as
a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group
E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire
alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. Unless otherwise approved
by the fire code official, activation of fire alarm notification appliances
shall:
   1.   Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1
footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and
   2.   Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler waterflow.
   2.   Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303
of the Building Code, when used for open air seating and having a public
address system; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses
including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and other enclosed areas.
   Section 907.2.2.2 - Add to read as follows:
   907.2.2.2 Corridor smoke detection alternative. When a fire alarm system is
used as a reduction to fire-resistance rated corridors, as provided for in
Section 1020, the occupant load exceptions of 907.2.2 shall not be used to
exempt the required installation.
   Section 907.2.3 Group E - Add the following sentence after the first
paragraph:
   The Fire Alarm Control Unit or Remote Annunciator with silence and reset
capability shall be located in the main reception office area.
   Section 907.2.3 Group E - Add the following sentence to Exception 2. to read
as follows:
   Emergency voice/alarm communication systems are not required in additions to
Group E occupancies with existing horn-type audible devices where the addition
itself does not exceed an occupant load of 100 and where the addition is
separated from the existing building by appropriately rated fire separation,
per the Building Code.
   Section 907.2.3.1 and 2 - Add to read as follows:
   907.2.3.1 Group E daycares with an occupant load of more than twelve (12)
children. A manual fire alarm system and an automatic fire detection system
shall be installed in Group E daycares with an occupant load of more than
twelve (12) children. Smoke detectors shall be installed in corridors, sleeping
rooms and common areas. Heat detectors shall be installed in kitchens.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Smoke detectors are not required in restrooms.
      2.   Smoke detectors and heat detectors shall not be required in Group E
daycares where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, except that interconnected single or multiple station smoke
alarms are required in sleeping rooms, as per NFPA 72.
   907.2.3.2 Group E daycares with an occupant load of not more than twelve
(12) children. Interconnected single or multiple station smoke alarms shall be
installed in corridors, sleeping rooms and common areas of Group E daycares
with an occupant load of not more than twelve (12) children.
   Exception: Smoke alarms are not required in kitchens and rest rooms.
   Section 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system for Group R-2 occupancies -
Change subparagraph 3. to read as follows:
   3.   The building contains five (5) or more dwelling units or sleeping
units.
   Section 907.2.10 - Change to read as follows:
   907.2.10 Group S public- and self-storage occupancies. A manual fire alarm
system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group S public- and self-storage
occupancies for interior corridors and interior common areas. Notification
appliances are not required within individual storage units.
   Exception: {'{'}No change.{'}'}
   Section 907.2.10.1 - Add to read as follows:
   907.2.10.1 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. A manual fire alarm system
that activates audio/visual occupant notification throughout the building, as
per Section 907.5.2, shall be required for Group S-2 enclosed parking garages.
   Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1, and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
   Section 907.2.13 High-rise buildings - Change Exception 3. to read as
follows:
   3.   Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303
of the International Building Code when used for open air seating; however,
this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to
sky boxes, restaurants, and other enclosed areas.
   Section 907.3.2 - Change to read as follows:
   907.3.2 Special locking systems. Where special locking systems are installed
on means of egress doors in accordance with Section 1010.2.13 or 1010.2.14, an
automatic smoke detection system or monitored automatic sprinkler system shall
be installed as required by that section to automatically release such locks.
   Section 907.4.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   907.4.1.1 Number of fire alarm panels per building. Each building shall be
provided with no more than one main fire alarm control panel that monitors any
other required panels, such as an extinguishing releasing panel, elevator
recall system, sprinkler monitoring system, etc., rather than allowing multiple
dedicated panels, per NFPA 72, unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official.
   Section 907.4.2.7 - Add to read as follows:
   907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double
action type.
   Section 907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances - Add Exception to read as
follows:
   Exception: In Group E and I occupancies, private mode signaling shall be
allowed for rooms that are specifically designated for the supervision of
light- or sound-sensitive students/occupants, such as those on the autism
spectrum, for the protection of those students/occupants from such signals.
Occupant notification systems are not required to be activated in those rooms
where private mode signaling installed in accordance with NFPA 72 is approved
by the fire code official and staff evacuation responsibilities are included in
the fire safety and evacuation plan required by Section 404.
   Section 907.5.2.3.1 - Change Exceptions to read as follows:
   Exception:
      1.   Group F or S occupancies shall only require audible alarm coverage,
unless hearing impaired employee(s) or the public are present.
      2.   Where employee work areas have audible alarm coverage, the
notification appliance circuits ... {'{'}remainder of exception unchanged.{'}'}
   Section 907.6.1.1 and 2 - Add to read as follows:
   907.6.1.1 Wiring circuits. Signaling Line Circuit (SLC) style shall be Class
A, per NFPA 72.
      Exceptions:
         1.   One initiating device on the circuit.
   907.6.1.2 Pathway survivability. Circuits installed vertically in conduit in
a sprinklered one hour rated enclosure and circuits installed horizontally in
conduit in a sprinklered building are acceptable alternates as meeting Pathway
Survivability Level 2, per NFPA 72.
   Section 907.11 - Add to read as follows:
   907.11 Rented or leased residential occupancies. This section shall apply to
all one- and two- family, multi-family, and manufactured home dwellings where
one or more rooms are rented for use as a permanent residence.
      907.11.1 Smoke and/or carbon monoxide alarms. All dwelling units which
are rented or leased shall be provided with smoke alarms in accordance with
this code (Section 907 or 1103.8 as applicable), as well as carbon monoxide
alarms where required by Section 915 or 1103.9 as applicable. The smoke
detector purchase, installation and initial testing shall be the responsibility
of the landlord prior to occupancy by any tenant.
         907.11.1.1 Notice of malfunction. The landlord shall have a duty to
replace a smoke and/or carbon monoxide alarm if the tenant has given notice to
the landlord of a malfunction. The landlord shall comply with the tenant's
request within 24 hours. The landlord has the option of asking the tenant, in
writing, to replace the malfunctioning alarm at no cost to the tenant.
         907.11.1.2 Cause of malfunction. A landlord shall not have a duty to
replace a smoke alarm if the damage is caused by the tenant.
         907.11.1.3 Battery replacement. It is the tenant's duty to provide a
replacement battery for a smoke and/or carbon monoxide alarm which was in good
working order at the time of commencement of possession of the dwelling unit by
the tenant.
SECTION 909
SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEMS
   Section 909.18.8 - Change to read as follows:
   909.18.8 Special inspections for smoke control. All smoke control systems in
Section 909, which also include stairway and ramp pressurization and elevator
hoistway pressurization systems (909.20 and 909.21), shall be tested by a
special inspector in accordance with Section 1705.19 of the International
Building Code in accordance with this section and as directed by the fire code
official.
SECTION 910
SMOKE AND HEAT REMOVAL
   Section 910.2.3 - Add to read as follows:
   910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy
as follows:
   1.   In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more
than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
   2.   In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3 and 4
liquid and solid oxidizers. Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic
peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-
reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification.
   Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only
noncombustible materials.
   Section 910.4.3.1 - Change to read as follows:
   910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet
(1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be
automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet
per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust.
SECTION 912
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
   Section 912.2 - Add paragraph to read as follows:
   The fire department connection (FDC) shall be located within fifty (50) ft.
of a dedicated street or fire apparatus access road and shall be within 150 ft.
hose lay distance of the nearest fire hydrant. For standpipe systems, fire
department connections shall be within one hundred fifty (150) ft. of the fire
hydrant. Each building shall be equipped with its own FDC.
SECTION 913
FIRE PUMPS
   Section 913.1 - Add a second paragraph and Exception to read as follows:
   The fire pump room shall be located on the ground level at an exterior wall
and provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than
3 feet in width and 6 feet 8 inches in height, regardless of any interior doors
that are provided. An approved key box with access keys shall be provided at
this door, as required by Section 506.1.
   Exception: Existing installations undergoing remodel or change of occupancy
when approved by the fire code official.
SECTION 914
FIRE PROTECTION BASED ON SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
   Section 914.3.1 Automatic sprinkler systems - Delete the exception.
   Section 914.3.1.2 - Change to read as follows:
   914.3.1.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In all buildings that are
more than 120 feet (36.6 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be
supplied by connections to not fewer than two water mains located in different
streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to
the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the
connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure
required for the pumps to operate.
   Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided that
the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water
supply will continue without interruption through not fewer than one of the
connections.
   Section 914.7.3 - Add to read as follows:
   914.7.3 Emergency voice/alarm communication system. An emergency voice/alarm
communication system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
   Section 914.8.3 Fire suppression for aircraft hangars - Delete Exception and
replace as follows:
   Exception: Group II hangars used for storage of aircraft and only routine
maintenance shall have a fire suppression system, but the system shall be
exempt from foam requirements. Hazardous operations equipment (torch cutting,
welding, spray equipment, etc.) is prohibited in Group II hangars without a
foam fire suppression system.
   Section 914.8.3.1 - Delete and replace as follows:
   914.8.3.1 Hazardous operations. Any Group II, III or IV aircraft hangar
according to Table 914.8.3 that contains hazardous operations equipment or
performs hazardous operations including, but not limited to, the following
shall be provided with a foam fire suppression system in accordance with NFPA
409 as applicable:
   1.   Doping.
   2.   Hot work including, but not limited to, welding, torch cutting and
torch soldering.
   3.   Fuel transfer as prohibited in Section 1104.1.1 of the Fire Code.
   4.   Fuel tank repair or maintenance not including defueled tanks in
accordance with NFPA 409, inerted tanks, or tanks that have never been fueled.
   5.   Spray finishing operations.
   Exception: Group I, II, and III hangars as defined in NFPA 409 for storing
or servicing aircraft that strictly contain only unfueled aircraft at all times
with appropriate de-fueling operations outside of the hangar shall be exempt
from foam suppression requirements only.
   914.8.3.1.1 Prohibited equipment. Torch cutting, welding or spray equipment
is prohibited in new and existing Group III hangars in any of the following
situations:
   1.   Group III hangars having fueled aircraft, but not provided with a foam
fire suppression system, or
   2.   Non-sprinklered Group III hangars.
SECTION 915
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION
   Section 915.2.3 - Change to read as follows:
   915.2.3 Group E occupancies. Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in
classrooms in Group E occupancies. Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location that is staffed by school
personnel during school hours.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall not be required to be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location that is staffed by school
personnel in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 30 or less.
      2.   Carbon monoxide alarm signals shall not be required to be
automatically transmitted to an on-site location for portable classroom
structures.
   Section 915.6 - Change to read as follows:
   915.6 Maintenance. Carbon monoxide alarms and carbon monoxide detection
systems shall be maintained in accordance with NFPA 720. Carbon monoxide alarms
and carbon monoxide detectors that become inoperable or begin producing end-of-
life signals shall be replaced by the owner of the occupancy.
CHAPTER 10
MEANS OF
EGRESS
SECTION 1004
OCCUPANT LOAD
   Section 1004.5; delete the exception.
TABLE 1004.5
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT
   Table 1004.5; amend and add the following categories:
 
Function of Space
   Note: "Functions" listed are not to be considered as an occupancy Group    Occupant Load Factor
classification. Example: "Assembly" provisions will apply to Group A assemblies
as well as Group B assemblies, or any other use that functions as an assembly.
Assembly without fixed seats                                                        7 net
   Concentrated (chairs only-not fixed) Dance floors                             7 net
   Standing space                                                                5 net
   Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)                                            15 net
Business areas                                                                      150 net
Group B used for Assembly uses with an occupant load less than 50                   Same as Assembly
Other Group B occupancies                                                           As assigned based upon the actual
                                                                                 use
Day Care                                                                            35 net
Adult Day Care                                                                      30 net
Educational                                                                       
   Classroom area - Group E occupancies, with standard student desks, through    20 net
the 12th grade                                                                      Same as Assembly
   Classroom area - other than listed above                                      50 net
   Shops, labs with tables and other vocational room areas
Gymnasiums/Sport Area
   When dedicated for sporting event only                                      
   When usable for other events, e.g. graduation ceremonies, assembly meetingsTotal number of sport participants,
parties, etc. (includes school gyms)                                             coaches, and other accessory personnel
   Note: All high school gyms will be considered as used for events. Other    15 net
schools will be individually evaluated.
Waiting areas                                                                     
   When associated with professional services                                 15 net
   When associated with pick up/drop off locations                            Same as primary function
 
SECTION 1010
DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES
   Section 1010.1 - Add sentence and exception to paragraph to read as follows:
   Electric devices controlling means of ingress or egress shall be permitted
through the Fire Department and subject to the approval of the fire code
official, as per Section 105.7.20.
   Exception: Stand-alone battery operated or mechanical code-controlled
devices that provide unrestricted mechanical egress.
   Section 1010.1.6; amend exception 1 to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
   1.   In occupancy Group R-2 or R.-3, threshold heights on the exterior side
of sliding and side-hinged exterior doors shall be ... {'{'}remainder unchanged
{'}'}...
   Section 1010.2.4; add an item 3.4 and 3.5 to read as follows:
   3.4   When doors or sets of doors at one egress location occur in a series,
the key- operated locking devices shall only be installed on one door or set of
doors. Key- operated locking devices shall not be installed on both the outer
and inner door(s).
   3.5   In lieu of a key-operated locking device (double keyed dead bolt) a
thumb turn dead bolt may be used provided it is a 1/4 turn dead bolt. All other
provisions, including readily distinguishable as locked, are still applicable.
   Section 1010.2.4; add an item 4.1 to read as follows:
   4.1   Where egress doors are used in pairs and positive latching is
required, approved automatic flush bolts shall be permitted to be used,
provided that both leaves achieve positive latching regardless of the closing
sequence and the door leaf having the automatic flush bolts has no doorknobs or
surface mounted hardware.
   Section 1010.2.5; change exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
   3.   Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons
in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted
bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no
doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware.
      When the doors are indistinguishable as to which door to use for exiting,
such as matching glass doors with matching push bars, both doors shall be
operational and a sign shall be posted adjacent to the doors stating: THESE
DOORS TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN BUILDING IS OCCUPIED.
   4.   Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy,
manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive
leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress with requirements
and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no
doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware.
      When the doors are indistinguishable as to which door to use for exiting,
such as matching glass doors with matching push bars, both doors shall be
operational and a sign shall be posted adjacent to the doors stating: THESE
DOORS TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN BUILDING IS OCCUPIED.
   Section 1010.2.7, 1010.2.7.1, 2, and 3 - Change and add to read as follows:
   1010.2.7 Stairway doors. Stairway doors shall comply with the following
sections.
   1010.2.7.1 Stairway doors serving other than high rise buildings. Interior
stairway means of egress doors shall be openable from both sides without the
use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Stairway discharge doors shall be openable from the egress side and
shall only be locked from the opposite side.
      2.   This section shall not apply to doors arranged in accordance with
Section 403.5.3 of the Building Code.
      3.   Stairway exit doors are permitted to be locked from the side
opposite the egress side, provided they are openable from the egress side and
capable of being unlocked from the ingress side with a master key. Four master
keys shall be located in the required key box and shall be labeled "Stairwell
Master Key".
   1010.2.7.2 Stairway doors serving high-rise buildings. Stairway exit doors
shall be installed and operated as specified in Section 403.5.3 of the building
code.
   1010.2.7.3 Stairway door electric locking devices. Only electrified latching
panic hardware or electrified latching mortise handsets are allowed to be
installed on exit stairwell doors, unless otherwise approved in writing by the
fire code official.
   1010.2.12 - Change to read as follows:
   1010.2.12 Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. The electric
locks on sensor released doors are permitted where installed and operated in
accordance with all of the following criteria unless otherwise approved by the
fire code official:
   1.   Loss of power to the lock or locking system shall automatically unlock
the doors.
   2.   The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device
located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor
and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be
provided to the manual unlocking device by a red or green actuator at least a 1
5/8 inch diameter and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that
reads "PUSH TO EXIT." When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result
in direct interruption of power to the lock -independent of other electronics -
and the doors shall remain unlocked for not less than 15 seconds.
      Exception: Electronic touch release panic bars.
   3.   The doors shall additionally be arranged to unlock from an infrared
sensor (motion detector) upon approach of the door(s).
   4.   Activation of the building fire alarm system, where provided, shall
automatically unlock the doors, and the doors shall remain unlocked until the
fire alarm system has been reset.
   5.   Activation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection
system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the doors. The doors shall
remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset.
   6.   The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL
294.
   Exception: Electric locks that provide free mechanical egress are only
required to comply with Item 5. above.
   Section 1010.2.12.1 and 2 - Add to read as follows:
   1010.2.12.1 Emergency release of electrically locked egress doors. When
required by the fire code official, an approved positive latching emergency
release device that directly interrupts lock power must be located 40 to 48
inches above the floor within 2 feet of the door. An approved sign must be
installed that reads "Emergency Door Release". Any alternate means of release
must be approved in writing by the fire code official.
   1010.2.12.2 Access to exits. Access to exits shall not be restricted unless
approved in writing by the fire code official or otherwise allowed by Section
1010.
   Section 1010.2.13 and 1010.2.13.1 - Change to read as follows:
   1010.2.13 Delayed egress. Delayed egress locks shall not be installed unless
approved by variance via the Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals
or as required by State or Federal Agency. Where approved as such, delayed
egress locking systems shall be permitted to be installed on doors serving any
occupancy, except Group A, E and H, in buildings that are equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or a
fire alarm system installed as required by the occupancy classification
specified in Section 907 with additional automatic smoke detection installed in
corridors, areas open to the corridors and common areas in accordance with
Section 907. {'{'}Delete numerical list 1 through 3.{'}'}
      1010.2.13.1 Delayed egress locking system. Where approved for use by the
Construction and Fire Prevention Board of Appeals or where required by State or
Federal Agency, the delayed egress locking system shall be installed... {'{'}No
change to rest of section.{'}'}
   Section 1010.2.13.1 - Delete Exception to Item 4.
   Section 1010.2.14 - Change Items 3. and4. to read as follows:
   3.   The door locking system shall be installed to have the capability of
being unlocked at the fire command center, a nursing station or other approved
location and shall have an approved means of unlocking at the controlled door.
   4.   A building occupant shall not be required to pass through more than one
door equipped with a controlled egress locking system before entering an exit,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
   Section 1010.2.14 - Change Exception 2. to read as follows:
   2.   Items 2 through 4 shall not apply to doors to areas where a listed
egress control system is utilized to reduce the risk of child abduction from
nursery and obstetric areas of a Group 1-2 hospital.
SECTION 1012
RAMPS
   Section 1012.1; add a sentence to exception number 3. to read as follows:
   This exception applies to parking spaces installed along the vehicle ramp.
Accessible parking shall not be installed on the ramp. The portion of the
vehicle ramp from the parking space to the next landing can only be used as an
exit access for those spaces along the ramp between landings unless in
compliance with Section 406.2.5.
SECTION 1013
EXIT SIGNS
   Section 1013.5; changed to read as follows:
   1013.5 Internally illuminated exit signs. Electrically powered and self-
luminous exit signs shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 924 and
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, Sections
1013.5.1, 1013.5.3 and Chapter 27. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all
times. If photoluminescent exit signs are approved by Board variance, a
charging light shall be installed nearby in accordance with UL 924 that cannot
be manually turned off except with the overcurrent protection device.
SECTION 1015
GUARDS
   Section 1015.8; add exception number 5. to read as follows:
   5.   In the original portion of a historical contributing structure, when
creating or installing new windows, or when adjusting the window dimensions of
an existing window, the window sill may be as approved by the Historical
Cultural and Landmark Commission during their approval process when determined
to be appropriate to maintain the historical significance.
SECTION 1017
EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE
   Table 1017.2; amend footnote "c" and add a footnote "f to read as follows:
 
F-2, S-2, U 300 f 400 c, f
 
   c.   Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. For Group B occupancies, this sprinkler
increase may be applied on each floor that is fully sprinklered throughout,
without requiring the entire building to be sprinklered.
   f.   Single use open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.4.1,
may have the following travel distances:
      -   Non-sprinklered open parking garages may have 450 ft. travel
distance.
      -   Sprinklered open-parking garages may have 600 ft. travel distance.
SECTION 1020
CORRIDORS
   Section 1020.1; add an exception number 6. to read as follows:
   6.   In existing Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need
not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant when in compliance
with the following:
      a.   the occupant load of the tenant space does not exceed 100; or,
      b.   the building is equipped with an approved fire alarm system in
accordance with Section 907.2.2 and smoke detectors are installed within the
corridor.
   Table 1020.1; add a footnote "e" to read as follows:
 
A, B, E, F, M, S, U Greater than 30 1 0e
 
   e.   Corridors of Group B Occupancies need not be of fire-resistive
construction when the entire story in which the space is located is equipped
with an automatic sprinkler system throughout.
   Section 1020.7; add exception number 3 and change to read as follows:
   1020.7 Corridor continuity. Corridors shall be continuous from the point of
entry to an exit and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms.
   Exceptions: {'{'}No change to Exceptions 1. and 2.{'}'}
      3.   When the corridor within an individual tenant space is not required
to be fire- resistance-rated, it is permitted to pass through open office/
business spaces provided the exit path is clearly marked through the office/
business area to the point of exit.
SECTION 1027
EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS
   Section 1027.4; change to read as follows:
   1027.4 Side yards. The open areas adjoining exterior exit ramps or stairways
shall be in direct contact with either yards, courts or public ways; the
remaining sides are permitted to be enclosed by the exterior walls of the
building.
      Exception: Any stairway at the end of an open-ended corridor that is
pulled into the building shall be considered an exterior stair if in compliance
with both of the following provisions:
      1.   The bottom riser is no more than 1 foot inside the exterior wall,
and
      2.   No riser is located more than 20 feet inside the exterior walls.
   Section 1027.6; change to read as follows:
   1027.6 Exterior ramps and stairway protection. Exterior exit stairways and
ramps shall be separated from the interior of the building as required in
Section 1023.2 Openings shall be limited to those necessary for egress from
normally occupied spaces. Where a vertical plane projecting from the edge of an
exterior exit stairway or ramp and landings is exposed by other parts of the
building at an angle of less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad), the exterior wall
shall be rated in accordance with Section 1023.7.
   Exceptions: {'{'}No change to Exceptions 1. and 2.{'}'}
   3.   Separation from the interior open-ended corridors of the building is
not required for exterior exit stairway or ramps, provided that Items 3.1
through 3.6 are met:
      3.1   The building, including corridors and ramps and stairs, shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
      3.2   The open-ended corridors comply with Section 1020.
      3.3   The open-ended corridors are connected on each end to an exterior
exit stairway or ramp complying with Section 1027.
      3.4   The exterior walls and openings adjacent to the exterior exit
stairway or ramp comply with Section 1023.7
      3.5   At any location in an open-ended corridor where a change of
direction exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad) occurs, a clear opening of not less
than 35 square feet (3.3 m2) or an exterior stairway or ramp shall be provided.
Where clear openings are provided, they shall be located so as to minimize the
accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.
      3.6   When in compliance with this exception, the travel distance of
Section 1006 may be measured from the most remote point to the first tread of
the stair.
SECTION 1030
ASSEMBLY
   Section 1030.1; change to read as follows:
   1030.1 General. A room or spaces used for assembly purposes shall comply
with this section.
   Section 1030.1.1.1; change to read as follows:
   1030.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers. Enclosed spaces under
grandstands or bleachers shall be separated by fire barriers... {'{'}remainder
unchanged{'}'} ...
SECTION 1032
MAINTENANCE OF THE MEANS OF EGRESS
   Section 1032.2 - Change to read as follows:
   1032.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall
be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full
instant use in the case of fire or other emergency at all times. An exit or
exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means
of egress.
   Section 1032.2.1 - Add to read as follows:
   1032.2.1 Lift-out bars. In other than I and R occupancies and high-rise
buildings, and only when approved by the fire code official, lift-out bars may
be utilized under the following provisions:
   1.   Bar shall be removable with a single effort not to exceed 15 pounds.
   2.   Installation of such devices shall not reduce the required minimum
egress width of the subject door when fully open. Projections into the means of
egress shall not exceed that allowed by Sections 1003.3, 1005 and 1008 and
shall not result in an obstruction or impediment to egress.
   3.   Bar shall be marked with "Lift to Remove" in 2-inch letters with
contrasting background.
   4.   Each door shall be marked with "This Door to be Unlocked when building
is occupied" in 2-inch letters with contrasting background.
   5.   Bars shall be stored in an area not accessible to the public when
occupied.
   6.   Bars shall not be capable of being locked in place.
   Section 1032.7 - Change to read as follows:
   1032.7 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall
be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction
or, when applicable, the provisions of Fire Code Chapter 11, or the Minimum
Building Standards Code and the following:
   1.   Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from
the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.
   2.   Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are allowed to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear openings
size is maintained complies with the code that was in effect at the time of
construction and the unit is equipped with smoke alarms installed in accordance
with Section 907 of the International Fire Code. Such devices shall be
releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force
greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and
rescue opening. Bars, grills, grates and similar devices require a building
permit as specified in the Building Code and Residential Code.
CHAPTER 11
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
SECTION 1101
GENERAL
   Section 1101.1 - Change to read as follows:
   1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
buildings lawfully constructed prior to the adoption of this code. The
provisions are applicable at any time a building is found to be non-compliant,
whether work is being performed or not. The provisions of this section shall
not be construed as granting approval of noncompliance with the code under
which the building was constructed.
   Section 1101.4 - Change to read as follows:
   1101.4 Owner notification. When a building is found to be in noncompliance
with this chapter, the fire code official shall duly notify the owner or
authorized representative of the building. Upon receipt of such notice, the
owner shall, subject to the time limits established by the fire code official
dependent upon the extent of the required work and severity of the violation
pertinent to life safety, take necessary actions to comply with the provisions
of this chapter.
SECTION 1103
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   Section 1103.1.2 - Add to read as follows;
   1103.1.2 Existing buildings damaged by fire, natural disaster, or other
cause. Where existing legal, nonconforming buildings (existing buildings that
do not comply with new construction requirements of this code) are damaged by
fire, natural disaster, or other cause resulting in greater than 50% damage in
area of the structure or resulting in a requirement to demolish greater than
50% of the building area, such building shall be made to comply with this code
as new construction.
   Section 1103.3.2 Elevator emergency operation - Delete all exceptions.
   Section 1103.3.3 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.3.3 Posting of Elevators. In high-rise buildings, a permanent sign
shall be installed in each elevator cab adjacent to the floor status indicator
and at each elevator call station on each floor reading "IN FIRE EMERGENCY, DO
NOT USE ELEVATOR USE EXIT STAIRS", or similar verbiage approved by the fire
code official.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Sign may be omitted at the main entrance floor-level call station.
      2.   Occupant evacuation elevators in accordance with Building Code
Section 3008.
   Section 1103.4 through 1103.4.3 - Delete and replace as follows:
   1103.4 Vertical openings. Interior vertical shafts, including but not
limited to stairways, elevator hoistways, service and utility shafts, that
connect two or more stories of a building, shall be enclosed or protected as
specified in this section.
   1103.4.1 Group I occupancies. In Group I occupancies, interior vertical
openings connecting two or more stories shall be protected with 1-hour fire-
resistance-rated construction.
   Exceptions:
      1.   In high-rise buildings of Type I, II-A, III-A or IV construction
with the installation of an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1, vertical shaft enclosures may be of nonrated construction
for required exit stairway enclosures. Vertical shaft enclosures of openings in
floors provided for elevators, escalators and supplemental stairways shall not
be required, provided such openings are protected by an approved curtain board
and water curtain sprinkler system, as per NFPA 13 requirements.
      2.   In non-high-rise buildings with the installation of an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1 1, vertical openings need
not be protected.
   In high-rise buildings, all elevators on all floors shall open into elevator
lobbies that are separated from the remainder of the building as is required
for corridor construction in the Building Code, unless the building is
protected throughout by a sprinkler system.
   1103.4.2 Three to five stories. In other than Group I occupancies, interior
vertical openings connecting three to five stories shall be protected by either
1-hour fire resistance-rated construction or an automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed throughout the building in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1
or 903.3.1.2.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Vertical opening protection is not required for Group R-
3 occupancies.
      2.   Vertical opening protection is not required for open parking garages
and ramps.
      3.   Vertical opening protection for escalators shall be in accordance
with Section 1103.4.5 through 1103.4.7.
   1103.4.3 More than five stories. In other than Group I occupancies, interior
vertical openings connecting more than five stories shall be protected by 1 -
hour fire-resistance rated construction.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Vertical opening protection is not required for Group R-
3 occupancies.
      2.   Vertical opening protection is not required for open parking garages
and ramps.
      3.   Vertical opening protection for escalators shall be in accordance
with Section 1103.4.5 through 1103.4.7.
      4.   In high-rise buildings of Type I, II-A, III-A or IV construction
with the installation of an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1, vertical shaft enclosures may be of nonrated construction
for required exit stairway enclosures. Vertical shaft enclosures of openings in
floors provided for elevators, escalators and supplemental stairways shall not
be required, provided such openings are protected by an approved curtain board
and water curtain sprinkler system, as per NFPA 13 requirements.
   In high-rise buildings, all elevators on all floors shall open into elevator
lobbies that are separated from the remainder of the building as is required
for corridor construction in the Building Code, unless the building is
protected throughout by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system.
   Section 1103.4.11 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.4.11 Shaft enclosure opening protection. Openings other than those
provided for elevator doors in new vertical shaft enclosures constructed of
one-hour fire- resistive construction shall be equipped with approved fire
assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than one hour.
   Openings other than those provided for elevator doors in existing vertical
shaft enclosures shall be equipped with approved 20-minute-rated fire
assemblies, 1 3/4- inch (44 mm) solid wood doors or the equivalent thereto.
Doors shall be either selfclosing or automatic closing, and automatic latching.
   Exception: In high-rise buildings of Type I, II-A, III-A or IV construction
with the installation of an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1 1 , protection of openings in vertical shaft enclosures may be
nonrated but shall not be less than a 1 3/4-inch (44 mm) solid wood door or the
equivalent thereto. Doors shall be either self-closing or automatic closing,
and automatic latching.
   Section 1103.5.1 Group A-2 - Delete this section in its entirety.
   Section 1103.5.4 High-rise buildings - Delete this section in its entirety
   1103.5.4 Fire extinguishing systems for certain hazards. Approved fire
protection systems are required for the following hazards in existing
buildings.
      1103.5.4.1 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and
spraying rooms in existing buildings of any occupancy shall be protected by an
approved automatic fire extinguishing system, as per Section 903 or 904, as
applicable.
      1103.5.4.2 Basements. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided in basements as required by Section 903.2.11.1.
   Section 1103.6, 1103.6.1 and 1103.6.2 - Delete and replace as follows:
   1103.6 Standpipes. Any building over four stories in height shall be
provided with an approved Class I or Class III standpipe system installed in
accordance with Section 905, unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official. The standpipes shall have an approved fire department connection with
hose connections located at every intermediate landing above or below the
lowest level of fire department access. Existing standpipes having hose
connections at the floor landing may continue to remain and be maintained as
such. The fire code official is authorized to approve the installation of
manual standpipe systems to achieve compliance with this section where the
responding fire department is capable of providing the required hose flow at
the highest standpipe outlet.
   Section 1103.7 Fire alarm systems - Change Exceptions to read as follows:
   Exceptions:
      1.   For other than existing Group R occupancies and dwellings not
classified as Group R occupancies under Section 1103.8, occupancies with an
existing previously approved fire alarm system.
      2.   In high-rise buildings of Type I, II-A, III-A or IV construction,
the manual fire alarm system and occupant notification is not required when an
approved automatic sprinkler system is installed throughout the building in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
   Section 1103.7.1 Group E - Delete all exceptions.
   Section 1103.7.7 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.7.7 Group R-4. Single and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed in existing Group R-4 occupancies in accordance with Section 1103.8.
   Section 1103.7.8 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.7.8 Group A-2. Existing Group A-2 occupancies having an occupant load
of three hundred (300) or more shall install a fire alarm system in accordance
with Section 907.2.1.
   Section 1103. 7.9 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.7.9 High-rise fire alarm system. Existing high-rise buildings shall be
provided with an approved monitored manual fire alarm system and an approved
occupant voice notification system throughout, unless the building is provided
with approved complete automatic fire sprinkler protection.
   Section 1103.8.1 Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms -Where required -
Delete exceptions 1. and 2. only.
   Section 1103.8.4 - Add to read as follows:
   1103.8.4 Rented or leased residential occupancies. Any new or existing
rented or leased residential occupancy shall comply with Section 907.11 in its
entirety.
SECTION 1104
MEANS OF EGRESS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   Section 1104.1 - Add exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Means of egress conforming to the requirements of the adopted
building code under which they were constructed shall be considered as
complying means of egress if, in the opinion of the fire code official, they do
not constitute a distinct hazard to life.
   Section 1104.5 - Change to read as follows:
   1104.5 Illumination emergency power. When the building is occupied, exit
stairways and corridors shall be illuminated with lights having an intensity of
not less than 1 footcandle (10.8 lux) at the floor level. The power supply for
means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises'
electrical ...{'{'}Remainder of section unchanged.{'}'}
   Section 1104.16 - Change to read as follows:
   1104.16 Fire escape stairways. Existing fire escape stairways shall comply
with Section
   1104.16.1 through 1104.16.7. New fire escape stairways are prohibited.
   Section 1104.25 Egress path markings - Delete and replace as follows:
   1104.25 Stairway doors. Exit doors into exit stairway enclosures shall
comply with all of the following.
   1.   Maintained unlocked from the stairway side (opposite of egress side) on
at least every incremental fifth floor level and bear a sign stating "ACCESS
ONTO FLOOR THIS LEVEL" having minimum 2-inch high letters on contrasting
background.
      Exception: The incremental fifth floor may be locked from the stairway
side, subject to all of the following conditions:
      1.   All stairway doors that are to be locked from the stairway side
shall have the capability of being unlocked simultaneously without unlatching
upon a signal from the Fire Command Center, or an approved location, and
      2.   A telephone or other two-way communications system connected to an
approved emergency service that operates continuously or an approved emergency
pull box or emergency break glass device shall be provided at not less than
every fifth floor in each required stairway on the stairway side.
   2.   All other stairway doors into the related exit stairway enclosure may
be mechanically or electrically locked (see number 5. below) as approved from
the stairway side.
   3.   The stairway side lock shall have the capability to be unlocked with a
key. The un- locking shall be mechanical and shall not be dependent on
electricity.
   4.   Approved key box required by Section 506 shall contain a minimum of
four master keys to unlock the doors from the stairway side. These keys shall
be clearly labeled with a tag that reads "Exit Stairway Master Keys".
   5.   Only mechanical egress latching electric crash bars or mechanical
egress latching electrified handset access control hardware shall be allowed to
control exit stairway doors, unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official.
   Section 1104.26 - Add to read as follows:
   1104.26 High-rise stair shaft ventilation. Stair shaft enclosures that
extend to the roof shall be provided with an approved manually openable hatch
to the exterior having an area not less than 16 square feet (1.486 m2) with a
minimum dimension of 2 feet (610 mm), unless provided with complete automatic
fire sprinkler protection throughout.
   Exception: Stair shaft enclosures complying with the requirements for
smokeproof enclosures per the Building Code and this code.
SECTION 1106
REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR OPERATIONS
   Section 1106.1, 1106.1.1, and 1106.1.2 - Delete and replace as follows:
   1106.1 Tire storage yards. Reference Section 3405 regarding the outdoor
storage of tires.
SECTION 1107
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
   Section 1107 - Add to read as follows:
   1107 Certificate of Occupancy. Those premises not posting a Certificate of
Occupancy shall be required to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy when required
by the building or fire code official. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be
withheld based on non-compliance when a building meets the ordinance under
which it was constructed provided the non-compliance items are not considered
hazardous. This provision shall not waive the requirement to comply with any
retroactive provision of any applicable ordinance.
   Exceptions:
      1.   One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses regulated by the
Residential Code and their associated accessory buildings or structures.
      2.   Community Homes, as defined in the Zoning Code.
Chapter 20
AVIATION FACILITIES
SECTION 2004
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE
   Section2004.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   2004.1.1 Transferring fuel in hangars. Flammable and combustible liquids
shall not be dispensed into or removed from the fuel system of an aircraft
within an aircraft hangar.
   Exception: When approved by the fire code official, fueling and de-fueling
of aircraft inside a repair hangar for the specific purpose of evaluating the
integrity of the aircraft fuel system may be conducted when sufficient
safeguards are provided. These may include enclosed secondary containment of
the fueling system, vapor monitoring with automatic shutoffs for the system,
leak detection, drainage, spill control, and automatic fire protection adequate
to protect the hazard. Fueling and de-fueling operations utilizing refueling
units are prohibited inside hangars.
   Section 2004.3 - Change to read as follows:
   2004.3 Cleaning parts. Aircraft engines and parts of aircraft shall not be
cleaned with Class I or II liquids in an aircraft hangar or within fifty (50)
feet of another aircraft, building, or hangar, unless cleaning is in accordance
with Section 5705.3.6. {'{'}Delete rest of paragraph.{'}'}
Chapter 24
FLAMMABLE FINISHES
SECTION 2401
GENERAL
   Section 2401.2 Nonapplicability - Delete this section in its entirety.
SECTION 2404
SPRAY FINISHING
   Section 2404.4 - Change to read as follows:
   2404.4 Fire protection. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall
be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with
Chapter 9. Protection shall also extend to exhaust plenums, exhaust ducts and
both sides of dry filters when such filters are used.
Chapter 28
LUMBER YARDS AND AGRO-INDUSTRIAL, SOLID BIOMASS AND
WOODWORKING FACILITIES
SECTION 2803
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 2803.2.2 - Add to read as follows:
   2803.2.2 Woodworking (or cabinet) shop. Where more than three (3) fixed or
table mounted pieces of dust producing equipment exist, each fixed or table
mounted piece shall be connected to a dust collection system, in accordance
with this section and the Mechanical Code, and interconnected such that the
dust collection is automatically activated whenever the equipment is on.
CHAPTER 31
TENTS AND OTHER MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
SECTION 3103
TEMPORARY TENTS AND MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
   Section 3103.2 Approval required - Change to read as follows:
   3103.2 Approval required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in
excess of 400 square feet (37 m2) shall not be erected, operated or maintained
for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire
code official. Tents open on any or all sides (canopies) shall also comply with
all permitting and tent requirements of this section as a tent.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
      2.   {'{'}Delete this exception in its entirety.{'}'}
   Section 3103.1.1 - Add to read as follows:
   3103.1.1 Occupancy. Temporary tents and membrane structures shall be
restricted to approved Group A, B, M, S, and U occupancies, unless otherwise
approved by the fire code official. Group E, F, 1, H, and any day care
occupancies are strictly prohibited.
   Section 3103.3.1 Special amusement area - Delete this section in its
entirety.
   Section 3103.5 - Change to read as follows:
   3103.5 Use period. Temporary tents, air-supported, air-inflated or tensioned
membrane structures shall not be erected for a period of more than 180 days
within a 12-month period on a single premise, or as allowed by the Zoning
Ordinance, whichever is less.
SECTION 3106
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS
   Section 3106.5.1 - Change to read as follows:
   3106.5.1 Separation from tents or structures. Cooking appliances or devices
that produce sparks or grease-laden vapors or flying embers (firebrands) shall
not be used within 20 feet (6096 mm) of a tent or temporary structure. Any
cooking involving greaseladen vapors or open flames to be located in a tent
shall be located in 'cooking tents' specifically, which must be separated from
any other tent, canopy or membrane structure by a minimum of 20 feet. Cooking
tents shall also comply with the following, unless otherwise approved by the
fire code official:
   1.   If provided with sidewalls or drops, cooking tents shall have an
adequate exhaust, shall not be accessible by the public, and shall be limited
to 200 square feet each.
   2.   Cooking tents if 75% open on sides, shall have adequate ventilation,
shall not be accessible by the public, except for walk-up store front type
service, and shall be limited to 400 square feet each.
   3.   All cooking tents shall be provided with Class K portable fire
extinguishers for all such cooking operations in accordance with Section
904.11.5.
   4.   Appropriate Health permits shall be obtained and posted,
   Exceptions: {'{'}Delete all exceptions.{'}'}
Chapter 32
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE
SECTION 3206
GENERAL FIRE PROTECTION AND LIFE SAFETY FEATURES
   Table 3206.2 General Fire Protection and Life Safety Requirements - Delete
both 'Nonpublic accessible (option 2)' rows from the table.
   Table 3206.2 - Add footnote j to row titled 'High Hazard' and Greater than
300,000' to read as follows:
   j.   High hazard high-piled storage areas shall not exceed 500,000 square
feet. A 2-hour fire wall constructed in accordance with Section 706 of the
International Building Code shall be used to divide high-piled storage
exceeding 500,000 square feet in area.
   Sect ion 3206.4.2 - Add to read as follows:
   3206.4.2 Air handling interlock. Where comfort air handling is provided by
High Volume Low Speed (HVLS) fans or exhaust fans, such fans shall be provided
with a relay/interlock to shut-off upon fire sprinkler waterflow activation.
Chapter 33
FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
SECTION 3303
OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FIRE PROTECTION
   Section 3303.1 - Change to read as follows:
   3303.1 Program development and maintenance. The owner or owner's authorized
agent shall be responsible for the development, implementation and maintenance
of an approved, written site safety plan establishing a fire prevention program
at the project site applicable throughout all phases of the construction,
repair, alteration or demolition work. The plan shall be developed prior to
vertical construction above slab for all buildings exceeding 20.000 sq. ft. in
aggregate area and shall be maintained on-site for review by any employee,
inspector, or code official. Any changes to the plan shall address the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable portions of this code, the
duties of staff and staff training requirements.
   Section 3305.5.1 - Change to read as follows:
   3305.5.1 Fire watch during construction. A fire watch shall be provided
during nonworking hours for new combustible construction that exceeds two
stories in height above the lowest adjacent grade at any point along the
building perimeter or having an aggregate area exceeding 20,000 square feet in
total, or any construction that exceeds 40 feet in height and an area exceeding
50,000 sq. ft. per story, or as required by the fire code official. When
required fire protection systems are complete and functional as approved by the
fire code official, the fire watch is no longer required.
SECTION 3313
WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION
   Section 3313.2 through 3313.4 Combustible building materials, Vertical
construction of Types III, IV and V construction, and Vertical construction,
Type I and II construction reduction of water supply requirements - Deleted in
their entirety.
CHAPTER 34
TIRE REBUILDING AND TIRE STORAGE
SECTION 3405
OUTDOOR STORAGE
   Section 3405.1 - Change to read as follows:
   Outdoor tire and tire byproduct storage. Outdoor tire and tire byproduct
storage is prohibited.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Outdoor tire storage may be permitted when in conjunction with a tire
rebuilding, tire recapping, or tire handling operation and less than fifty (50)
tires are stored within the boundary of any contiguous properties owned by the
same person or persons.
   2.   Outdoor tire storage may be permitted when in conjunction with a tire-
rebuilding, tire recapping, or tire handling operation and fifty (50) or more
tires are stored within the boundary of any contiguous properties owned by the
same person or persons if such tires are suitable for recapping or rebuilding
and if:
      2.1.   The ground surface covering in the areas used for and adjacent to
storage areas or sixty (60) feet in any direction are hard surfaced and kept
free of grass, weeds, debris, etc.; and
      2.2.   The perimeter of the storage area is enclosed by a fence not less
than 6 feet in height to restrict access by unauthorized persons; and
      2.3.   Tires are not stored within fifty (50) feet of any structure or
property line; and
      2.4.   Storage configurations are piles not to exceed six hundred twenty-
five (625) square feet in area with a maximum dimension of fifty (50) feet, a
maximum height of ten (10) feet, and a minimum separation between piles of
twenty (20) feet; or in racks no more than fifty (50) feet in length and ten
(10) feet in width with a minimum aisle separation between racks of ten (10)
feet, and
   3.   New or recapped tires displayed for purposes of sale.
   Section 3405.2 through 3405.7 - Delete.
SECTION 3407
FENCING
   Section 3407.1 through 3407.4 - Delete.
SECTION 3409
INDOOR STORAGE
ARRANGEMENT
   Section3409.2 - Add to read as follows:
   3409.2 Fire protection. Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required
in accordance with Section 903 and Chapter 32 (High-piled storage) regarding
fire sprinkler requirements for the storage of rubber tires.
Chapter 50
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS -GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 5003
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 5003.6.1 - Add to read as follows:
   5003.6.1 Sign size requirements. Signs required in Section 2703.5 and
2703.5.1 shall have text characters that are a minimum of four (4) inches in
height when inside a building and six (6) inches in height when outside a
building, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official.
Chapter 56
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
SECTION 5601
GENERAL
   Section 5601.1.3 - Delete Exceptions 1, 2, and 4 and change to read as
follows:
   5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and
use of fireworks are prohibited.
   Exception: The use of fireworks for permitted professional fireworks
displays as allowed in Section 5608.
   Section 5601.2.2 - Change to read as follows:
   5601.2.2 Sale and retail display. Persons shall not construct a retail
display nor offer for sale explosives, explosive materials, or fireworks.
   Section 5601.2.3 - Delete.
   Section 5601.2.4 - Change to read as follows:
   5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility. Before a permit is issued, as required by
Section 5601.2, the applicant shall submit proof of Commercial General
Liability (CGL) insurance coverage with the jurisdiction, in an amount of no
less than $5,000,000 for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons
or property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act
authorized by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. The required
coverage limit of liability may be greater than the minimum when conditions at
the location warrant the increase due to higher levels of risk exposures. The
CGL policy shall have no exclusions for pollution liability.
   {'{'}Delete rest of section.{'}'}
   Section 5601.2.4.1 - Change to read as follows:
   5601.2.4.1 Blasting. Before approval to do blasting is issued, the applicant
for approval shall file a bond or submit a certificate of insurance in such
form, amount and coverage to be adequate in each case to indemnify the
jurisdiction against any and all damages arising from permitted blasting.
   Section 5601.2.4.2 - Change to read as follows:
   5601.2.4.2 Fireworks display. The permit holder shall furnish a bond or
certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the fire code official
for the payment of all potential damages to a person or persons or to property
by reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permit
holder, the agent, employees or subcontractors.
   Section 5601.9 - Add to read as follows:
   5601.9 Aiding minors to violate article. No parent or guardian of a minor
shall furnish money or a thing of value to a minor for the purchase of
fireworks or encourage, act in conjunction with, or in any manner instigate or
aid a minor in the commission of possessing, selling, offering for sale, giving
away, using, transporting, or manufacturing fireworks within the city. The
commission of the offense by the minor on the property under the control or
owned by the parent or guardian shall be prima facie proof that the relation or
guardian was instigating or aiding the minor.
   Section 5601.10 - Add to read as follows:
   5601.10 Signaling devices. This article shall not apply to the possession or
use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels
and others requiring them: or to the possession, sale, or use of normal stocks
of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic
supplies; or to the possession or use of flares or rockets for military or
police purposes; or any auto flares, or paper caps containing not in excess of
an average of twenty-five one hundredths (25/100ths) of a grain of explosive
content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices for use
of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   Section 5601.11 - Add to read as follows:
   5601.11 Territorial applicability. The provisions of this article shall be
applicable within the corporate limits of the city, or as allowed by State law.
SECTION 5608
FIREWORKS DISPLAY
   Section 5608.2 Permit application - Delete and replace as follows:
   5608.2 Fireworks application and permit. It shall be unlawful for any person
to possess, use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, give away, transport, or
discharge fireworks of any description; provided, however, that the fire code
official shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by State-
licensed pyrotechnics operator. Every such use or display shall be handled by a
competent operator approved by the fire code official, and shall be of such
character and so located, discharged, or fired as in the opinion of the fire
code official after proper investigation so as not to be hazardous to property
or endanger any person. No permit granted shall be transferable.
   The fire code official shall not approve any application for permit for
supervised public display of fireworks unless he or she finds that:
   1.   The applicant has filed in the City Secretary's Office a certificate
showing the applicant has secured, and agrees to keep in force during the term
of the permit, a policy providing for bodily injury and property damage
insurance in the amounts as follows:
      Commercial General Liability,
      Per Occurrence   $5,000,000
      Commercial General Liability,    
      Aggregate   $5,000,000
   Such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled or amended
without at least thirty (30) days' notice to the City Secretary; and
   2.   That the applicant has covenanted and agreed in writing to indemnify,
hold harmless, and defend at its own expense, the City of Fort Worth, it's
officers, agents and employees from and against any and all claims or suits for
property damage and/or personal injury, including death, or whatsoever kind of
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or in connection with, the
execution, performance or attempted performance of fireworks at a public
display whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of
officers, agents or employees of the City of Fort Worth; and the applicant
hereby assumes all liability and responsibility for any and all claims or suits
for property damage and/or personal injury, including death, or whatsoever kind
of character, whether real or asserted, arising out of, or in connection with,
the execution, performance, or attempted performance of fireworks at a public
display, whether or not caused in whole or in part by alleged negligence of
officers, agents or employees of the City of Fort Worth. Applicant likewise
covenants and agrees, and does hereby indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Fort Worth from and against any and all injuries, damage, or destruction of
City property arising out of or in connection with, directly or indirectly, all
acts or omissions of applicant, his officers, agents, employees, contractors,
subcontractors or invitee, or caused by alleged negligence in whole or in part
by officers, agents or employees of the City; and
   3.   The application for the permit was made in writing at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of display in accordance with this code: and
   4.   The applicant has included in the application for permit the names of
the organization sponsoring the display together with the names of persons
actually in charge of the firing of the display; and
   5.   The applicant has included in the application for permit the date and
time of day at which the display is to be held; and
   6.   The applicant has included in the application for permit the exact
location planned for the display; and
   7.   The applicant has included in the application for the permit a
description setting forth the age, experience, and physical characteristics of
the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks; and
   8.   The applicant has included in application for permit the number and
kinds of fireworks to be discharged; and
   9.   The applicant has included in the application for permit the manner and
place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display; and
   10.   The applicant has included in the application for the permit a diagram
of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which
the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of the buildings, highways,
and other lines of communication, the lines behind which the audience will be
restrained, and the location of all nearby trees, communication or telephone
lines, or other overhead obstructions; and
   11.   The applicant has included in the application for permit all licenses
and permits issued and required by the Texas State Fire Marshal's Office.
   Section 5608.2.1 Outdoor fireworks displays - Delete and replace as follows:
   5608.2.1 Displays. In addition to the requirements of Section 403, permit
applications for outdoor fireworks displays using Division 1.3G fireworks shall
include the following:
   1.   The fire code official shall approve the application and issue the
permit for the public display of fireworks if he finds that: the applicant has
complied with the applicable provisions for this article; the discharge,
failure to fire, faulty firing, or fall-out of any fireworks or other objects
will not endanger any person, buildings, structures, forests, or brush; and the
fireworks are to be fired more than 200 feet from the nearest building, public
highway, railroad, or other means of travel; and 50 feet from the nearest above
ground telephone or communication line, tree, or other overhead obstruction. In
no case shall the fire code official issue a permit for a display to be held
within six hundred (600) feet of a school, theater, church, hospital, or
similar institution.
   2.   All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be so set up that the
projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical direction:
provided, however, that where such fireworks are to be fired beside a lake or
other large body of water, they may be directed in such a manner that the
falling residue from the projectile will fall into said body of water.
   3.   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall
be immediately disposed of or removed in a manner safe for the particular type
of fireworks. The debris from the discharged fireworks shall be properly
disposed of by the operator before he leaves the premises. The operator, upon
the conclusion of the display, shall make a complete and thorough search for
any unfired fireworks or pieces thereof which have failed to fire or function
and shall dispose of them in a safe manner. The search shall be instituted at
the earliest possible time following that conclusion of the display, but in no
event later than the first period of daylight which follows.
   4.   No fireworks display shall be held during any windstorms in which the
wind reaches a velocity of more twenty (20) miles per hour.
   5.   All fireworks articles and items at places of display shall be stored
in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge, and theft,
and in a manner approved by the fire code official.
   6.   The approval of any application and issuance of any permits by the fire
code official shall in no way be construed as an assumption of responsibility
or liability by the City for any damages or injuries to persons or property
arising out of or incident to the discharge of fireworks at a public display.
Chapter 57
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
SECTION 5703
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 5703.6 - Add a sentence to read as follows:
   An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for
underground tank and piping systems.
SECTION 5704
STORAGE
   Section 5704.2.7.5.5.1 - Change to read as follows:
   5704.2.7.5.5.1 Class 1 liquids. For Class 1 liquids other than crude oil and
asphalt, the fill pipe shall be designed and installed in a manner that will
minimize the possibility of generating static electricity by terminating with-
in 6 inches (152 mm) of the bottom of the tank.
   Section 5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention - Add sentence and change Exception
to read as follows:
   Additionally, a minimum 5 gallon permanent spill container shall be provided
at the fill connection.
   Exception: Outside above-ground tanks with a capacity of 1,320 gallons (5000
L) or less shall only require a 90% audible fill alarm to notify the filler of
the tank or a 95% automatic shut-off device. Additionally, a minimum 5 gallon
permanent spill container shall be provided at the fill connection.
   Section 5704.2.11.3 Overfill protection and prevention systems - Add
sentence to read as follows:
   An exterior weather-proof audio/visual notification device shall be provided
to notify the filler of the tank of a high level (90% full) alarm for all
underground tanks in addition to the required 95% shut-off device.
   Section 5704.2.11.5 - Add to read as follows:
   5704.2.11.5 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes, or observation
wells, shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground
flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a
point twelve (12) inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground
level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. The number,
location, and size of such observation wells shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
   Section5704.2.11.6 - Add to read as follows:
   5704.2.11.6 Submersible Turbine Pump (STP) sumps and dispenser sumps.
Approved sumps shall be installed around the STP's and beneath dispensers
having underground piping. The sumps around the sub-pumps (STP's) and beneath
dispensers shall be liquid and vapor tight and shall be electronically
monitored.
   Section 5704.2.11.7 - Add to read as follows:
   5704.2.11.7 Secondary containment. An approved method of secondary
containment shall be provided for underground tank systems, including tanks,
piping and related components containing fuel.
   Section 5704.2.13.1.3 Out of service for one year - Add sentence to read as
follows:
   Tanks shall only be allowed to be abandoned in place where it can be shown
that removal is not possible, due to topography, adjacent buildings or
foundations, or other hazards are present, subject to the approval of the fire
code official.
   Section 5704.2.14.1 - Delete and replace as follows:
   5704.2.14.1 Removal. Removal of above-ground and underground tanks shall be
in accordance with all of the following, unless otherwise approved by the fire
code official:
   1.   Flammable and Combustible Liquids Construction Permit required for
removal of tank. The fire code official shall be notified prior to starting
work at a removal site to inform the inspector as to the schedule of the work
to coordinate appropriate inspection times. Tanks shall not be removed from an
excavation without the fire code official present.
   2.   Submit copy of TCEQ Construction Notification Form for removal of each
tank.
   3.   The excavation shall be properly secured and barricaded to ensure the
public safety. Lighted barricades required if the excavation is left open
overnight. There shall be no smoking on a flammable/combustible liquids tank
removal site at any time.
   4.   Flammable and combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank and
connecting piping. Tank shall be cleaned with approved surfactant agent to
assist with removal of all flammable/combustible liquid residue in tank. Vacuum
trucks shall be bonded and grounded to prevent possible static accumulation.
   5.   Piping at tank openings which is not to be used further shall be
disconnected.
   6.   Piping shall be removed from the ground.
      Exception: Piping is allowed to be abandoned in place only where the fire
code official determines that removal is not practical. Abandoned piping shall
be capped and safeguarded as required by the fire code official.
   7.   Tanks shall be purged of vapor prior to removal from the excavation.
Vapors shall be purged out of vent located minimum 12 ft. above grade. (Verify
tank atmosphere to be less than 10% LEL prior to removal from excavation with
combustible gas meter - contractor shall provide calibrated meter for this
purpose.)
   8.   After the tank has been purged of vapor and prior to removal, the tank
openings shall be capped or plugged, leaving a 0.125-inch to 0.25-inch-
diameter (3.2 mm to 6.4 mm) opening at the top of the tank for pressure
equalization. Care shall be taken to avoid damaging the tank. However, in the
event that the tank becomes damaged, holes in the tank shall be patched with
tape, etc., in a non-hazardous manner (no cutting/welding of any kind and no
introduction of a flammable/combustible adhesive) in order to meet the above
venting requirement If the tank is so severely damaged that patching is not
possible, additional cleaning of the tank with surfactant is required until
such time as a 0% LEL can be achieved and maintained.
   9.   The tank atmosphere and the excavation shall be regularly tested (at
least hourly) after vapor purge to ensure LEL does not exceed 10% until the
tank is removed from both the excavation and the site.
   10.   Tanks shall not be dropped, dragged, or rolled during the process of
removal from the excavation and loading of the transport on site, due to
potentially hazardous conditions. Tanks shall be lifted from manufacturer-
provided lifting lugs on the tank. If this is not possible, straps shall be
provided for lifting, rather than wrapping the tank with a chain.
   11.   Tanks shall not be destroyed in the excavation or on site, due to
potentially hazardous conditions, unless otherwise approved by the fire code
official.
   12.   Before any tank is removed from a premise, the tank shall be labeled
and the manifest of transportation shall be filed with the fire department. The
labeling shall include the prior contents of the tank, the address that the
tank was removed from, the date that the tank was removed, and that the tank is
not suitable for storage of food or liquids intended for human or animal
consumption. Letters shall be at least two (2) inches high and contrasting in
color with the background.
   13.   Prior to removal from the site, tanks shall be inerted with dry ice
adequate for the tank capacity.
   14.   Tanks shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local
regulations. API 1604 shall be utilized as a guide for tank removals unless the
above requirements are more stringent.
SECTION 5706
SPECIAL OPERATIONS
   Section 5706.3 Well drilling and operating - Add sentence as follows:
   Refer to the City of Fort Worth Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance for
other pertinent permitting and requirements.
   Section 5706.3.1.2 - Change to read as follows:
   5706.3.1.2 Streets and railways. Wells shall not be drilled and associated
tanks shall not be located within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway,
future street or right-of-way, properly line, or nearest rail of an operating
railway.
   Section 5706.3.1.3, 5706.3.1.3.1, and 5706.3.1.3.2 - Delete and replace as
follows:
   5706.3.1.3 Setbacks. There shall be no avenue for an appeal or variance from
any of the following minimum setback requirements in this Section, other than
those provided for in the Fort Worth Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance.
   5706.3.1.3.1 Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this Section only, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section
only, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the
words "or portions thereof."
   HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure for which a certificate of occupancy is
required. A habitable structure shall not include detached accessory buildings,
garages and sheds.
   HOSPITAL BUILDING. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used
for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or custodial care on a 24-hour
basis, including convalescent facilities, social rehabilitation centers, mental
hospitals, detoxification facilities, and alcohol and drug centers.
   LIFT COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order to lift gas from the well.
   LINE COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a pipeline.
   MULTIPLE WELL SITE PERMIT. A permit that is required when there is an
application for the placement of more than one well on a pad site, as per the
Fort Worth Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance.
   OUTER BOUNDARY SURFACE PROPERTY LINE. The outer boundary of any property for
which a preliminary plat or concept plan has been filed with the City of Fort
Worth
   PROTECTED USE. A residence, religious institution, hospital building, school
or public park.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. All buildings with occupancies greater than 50 persons and
more than 750 square feet used or designed to and intended to be used for
motion picture theaters, symphony and concert halls, television and radio
studios admitting an audience, theaters, banquet halls, night clubs,
restaurants, taverns and bars, amusement arcades, art galleries, bowling
alleys, community halls, courtrooms, dance halls, exhibition halls funeral
parlors, gymnasiums without spectator seating, indoor swimming pools and tennis
courts without spectator seating, lecture halls, libraries, museums, waiting
areas in transportation terminals, pool and billiard parlors, arenas with
spectator seating, skating rinks with spectator seating, swimming pools with
spectator seator, tennis courts with spectator seating and amusement park
outdoor activities.
   PUBLIC PARK. Any structures, bleachers, grandstands and stadiums used for
viewing land area dedicated to by the City for traditional park-like
recreational purposes.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for
religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with
such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
   RESIDENCE. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, city-
inspected mobile homes or other building designed for dwelling purposes,
including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the
application for a Gas Well Permit is filed with the Gas Inspector. Residence
shall include assisted living facilities, nursing homes (both intermediate care
facilities and skilled nursing facilities), residential board and care
facilities, group homes, 24-hour shelters, half-way houses, hotels, motels and
jails.
   SCHOOL. Any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities
providing education or off-site related school sports venues up through and
including the twelfth-grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a
facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Fort Worth that
provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more
than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
   5706.3.1.3.2 New Natural Gas Wells. New natural gas wells and associated
tanks and equipment shall have setbacks provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Fort Worth Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance.
   5706.3.1.3.3 Existing Natural Gas Wells. Where natural gas wells are
existing, the following setback requirements shall apply.
   1.   A Protected Use or Public Building shall not be constructed within
three hundred (300) feet of the center of a gas well, at the surface of the
ground, or within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of a gas well pad site
having a Multiple Well Site Permit.
      Exception: Residential structures on platted lots prior to 4/3/2009 shall
not be constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the center of a gas well,
at the surface of the ground, or within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of a
gas well pad site having a Multiple Well Site Permit.
   2.   A Habitable Structure shall not be constructed within two hundred (200)
feet of the center of a gas well, at the surface of the ground, or within one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet of a gas well pad site having a Multiple Well
Site Permit.
   3.   An accessory building, not necessary to the operation of the well,
shall not be constructed within one hundred (100) feet of the center of a gas
well, at the surface of the ground, or within twenty-five (25) feet of a gas
well pad site having a Multiple Well Site Permit.
   4.   A Protected Use, Public Building, or Habitable Structure shall not be
constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the closest tank battery or
permanently installed equipment associated with a gas well.
      Exception: This required distance in Number 4 above shall be reduced to
one hundred (100) feet on lots platted prior to 4/3/2009.
   5.   No structure of any kind shall be constructed over or within five (5)
feet of an abandoned gas well, which is required to have a 5-foot no build
easement surrounding it by the Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance.
   The setback distances above shall be calculated from the well bore, or edge
of pad site for Multiple Well Site Permit, in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any
object indicated in this Section.
   5706.3.1.3.4 Compressor Stations - Natural Gas Facilities. Natural gas
compressor stations shall be provided with the following setbacks.
      5706.3.1.3.4.1 New Lift or Line Compressors. New natural gas Lift or Line
Compressors shall have setbacks provided in accordance with the requirements of
the Fort Worth Gas Drilling and Production Ordinance.
      5706.3.1.3.4.2 Existing Lift Compressor. Any Protected Use, Public
Building, or Habitable Structure shall be setback a minimum of two hundred
(200) feet from any existing Lift Compressor.
      5706.3.1.3.4.3 Existing Line Compressor. Any Protected Use shall be
setback a minimum of six hundred (600) feet from any existing Line Compressor
site. Any Public Building or Habitable Structure shall be setback a minimum of
three hundred (300) feet from any existing Line Compressor site. Any Protected
Use, Public Building or Habitable Structure shall be setback a minimum of two
hundred (200) feet from any equipment and buildings not part of the operation
of the compressor.
         Exception: When the line compressor site is located in Light, Medium,
or Heavy Industrial zoning districts ("I", "J", or "K"), the setback to a
Protected Use shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any existing
fully enclosed Line Compressor sites.
      5706.3.1.3.4.3.1 Setback Measurement. The measurement of the setback
distance shall be made from the boundary of the Line Compressor Site as
permitted by the City of Fort Worth Gas Well Ordinance, in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior
point of the proposed Protected Use or boundary line of a Public Park or
property line of a School.
   Sections 5706.5.4.5.1 - Add to read as follows:
   5706.5.4.5.1 Fees. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in Section
105, the fees for mobile fueling permits are as set forth in Appendix K.
SECTION 5707
ON-DEMAND MOBILE FUELING OPERATIONS
   Sections 5707.1.1 Approval required - Add paragraph as follows:
   Dispensing of Class I, II and III motor vehicle fuel from tank vehicles into
the fuel tanks of motor vehicles located at commercial, industrial,
governmental or manufacturing establishments is allowed where permitted,
provided such dispensing operations are conducted in accordance with the
following and Appendix K. Mobile fueling of Class I liquids shall be strictly
prohibited in residential areas of all types, shall comply with all
requirements of the Fire Department's Mobile Fueling policy, shall require
permitting as indicated above, and shall require Fire Marshal approval in all
cases.
   Sections 5707.1.2 - Add to read as follows:
   5701.1.2 Fees. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in Section 105,
the fees for mobile fueling permits are as set forth in Appendix K.
   Section 5707.4 Mobile fueling areas - Add paragraph to read as follows:
   Mobile fueling sites shall be restricted to commercial, industrial,
governmental, or manufacturing, where the parking area having such operations
is primarily intended for employee vehicles. Mobile fueling shall be conducted
for fleet fueling or employee vehicles only, not the general public. Commercial
sites shall be restricted to office-type or similar occupancies that are not
primarily intended for use by the public. Mobile fueling of Class I liquids
shall be strictly prohibited in residential areas of all types, shall comply
with all requirements of the Fire Department's Mobile Fueling policy, shall
require permitting as indicated above, and shall require Fire Marshal approval
in all cases.
Chapter 61
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
SECTION 6107
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS AND DEVICES
   Section 6107.4 - Change to read as follows:
   6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular
damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas
containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with Section
312.
SECTION 6109
STORAGE OF PORTABLE LP-GAS CONTAINERS AWAITING USE OR RESALE
   Section 6109.13 - Change to read as follows:
   6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a
suitable enclosure or otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact
protection shall be provided as required by Section 6107.4.
   Appendix A Board of Appeals - Delete.
   Appendix B - Change to read as follows:
APPENDIX B
FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR
BUILDINGS
   Section B105 through B105.2 - Delete and replace as follows:
   B105 Fire-flow requirements.
      B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings and townhomes. The minimum required
fire-flow shall be 1,000 gpm for 0-3,600 sq. ft., and 1,500 gpm for greater
than 3,600 sq. ft. for a minimum duration of 1 hour.
      B105.2 Other than one- and two-family dwellings and townhomes. The
minimum required fire-flow shall be 1,500 gpm for a minimum duration of 2
hours, unless otherwise required by the fire code official.
   Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution - Delete.
   Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads - Delete.
   Appendix E - As written.
APPENDIX E
HAZARD CATEGORIES
   Appendix F Hazard Ranking - Delete.
   Appendix G - As written.
APPENDIX G
CRYOGENIC FLUIDS-WEIGHT AND VOLUME EQUIVALENTS
   Appendix H HMMP and HMIS - Change to read as follows:
Appendix H
COMMERCIAL INSPECTIONS, OPERATIONAL PERMITS AND FALSE ALARMS
SECTION
H101GENERAL
   H101.1 The fire inspections for all commercial establishments (defined as
all buildings, facilities, and structures, including but not limited to
residential structures, except one- and two-family residential dwellings) - all
buildings/facilities required to have a Certificate of Occupancy shall be in
accordance with this Appendix and Section 105, Permits, and Section 106,
Inspections, of the Fire Code. The fire inspection of mobile home recreational
vehicle parking facilities will be in accordance with Appendix J of this code.
SECTION H102
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION
   H102.1 General. A Certificate of Inspection will be issued by the fire
department in accordance with Section 102 of this Appendix. A Certificate of
inspection will be issued only after all inspection procedures have been
followed in accordance with Section 103 of this Appendix, Inspection
Procedures, and all fees have been paid in accordance with Section 104 of this
Appendix, Fees for Inspections and Operational Permits.
      H102.1.1 Required Certificate of Inspection for buildings less than four
stories in height. The occupant of every commercial establishment shall be
required to have a valid certificate of inspection.
         Exception: An owner or manager of a building less than four stories in
height may request that the building he.'she manages or owns receive a valid
Certificate of Inspection for the entire building, structure, or facility,
including all tenant spaces. The building owner must provide after hours
contact information that is current and acceptable for all tenants in the
building. The owner or his designee must have access to all tenant spaces in
case of an emergency. Where there is a significant difference in occupancy
classifications among the tenant spaces, the chief reserves the authority to
require separate Certificates of Inspection for those spaces.
      H102.1.2 Required Certificate of Inspection for buildings of four stories
or more in height. The owner, building manager, or property manager
representative of any building with four or more occupied floors existing above
street level shall be required to have a valid Certificate of Inspection for
the entire building, structure, or facility.
   H102.2 Expiration. A Certificate of Inspection shall be valid until a
subsequent inspection takes place or until revoked: provided, however, that
possession of a Certificate of Inspection shall not exempt a commercial
establishment from reinspection or citation for violations occurring during the
period of time between inspections.
   H102.3 Transfer of Certificate of Inspection. A Certificate of Inspection
shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of the major
portion of the building or operation shall require a new Certificate of
Inspection.
   H102.4 Conditions of Certificates of Inspection. The issuance or granting of
a Certificate of Inspection shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit
for, or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No
certificate presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of
this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes
is lawful.
   H102.5 Retention of Certificate of Inspection. Certificates of Inspection
shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein and shall at all
times be posted in a conspicuous location and be subject to inspection by an
officer of the fire or police department or other authorized persons.
   H102.6 Revocation of Certificate of Inspection. Any Certificate of
Inspection issued under this code may be suspended or revoked when it is
determined by the chief that one or more of the following has occurred:
   1.   The Certificate of Inspection was used by someone other than to whom it
was issued.
   2.   The Certificate of Inspection was used for a location other than that
for which it was issued.
   3.   Any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the certificate have
been violated.
   4.   The possessor of the certificate fails, refuses, or neglects to comply
with any order or notice served upon him under the provisions of this code
within the time period provided therein.
   5.   There has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a
material fact in the plans, specifications, or documentation on which the
certificate was based.
   6.   There has been a change in the use or occupancy classification of the
building for which a Certificate of Inspection has been issued.
SECTION H104
FEES FOR INSPECTIONS AND OPERATIONAL PERMITS
   H104.1 General. Fees for fire inspections and operational permits will be in
accordance with Section 104 of this Appendix. Fees for the inspection of mobile
home and recreational vehicle parking facilities will be in accordance with
Appendix J of this code.
   H104.2 Fees for fire inspections. A fire inspection fee will be charged not
more than once per calendar year for a fire inspection of all occupancies
requiring a Certificate of Inspection as set forth in Section 102 of this
Appendix. These fees shall be paid before a Certificate of Inspection is
issued. The fees for fire inspection will be the sum of the base fee as set
forth in Table H104.1 and the multiple-story fee as set forth in H104.2.1.
   Table H104.1 Base Fees for Fire Inspections
Number of Square Feet of Floor Area in Building or Business Base Fee
Number of Square Feet of Floor Area in Base Fee
Building or Business
Less than 5,000                        $55.00
5,001 -10,000                          $60.00
10,001-25,000                          $70.00
25,001 -50,000                         $95.00
50,001-75.000                          $145.00
75,001-100,000                         $195.00
Greater than 100.000                   $195.00 plus $30.00 for each additional
                                       50,000 sq. ft. or portion
 
      H104.2.1 Multiple-story fee. An additional fee of $10.00 per floor will
be added to the base fee for inspection of buildings with four or more occupied
floors above the street level.
      H104.2.2 Shopping malls. Shopping malls shall be assessed an inspection
fee based on total floor area of the public areas within the structure plus the
per story charge. The individual tenant spaces will be assessed fees based on
the square footage of the individual space.
   H104.3 Fees for operational permits. The fee for all operational permits
will be as set forth in Table H104.2. Fees for Mobile Fueling Permits will be
in accordance with Appendix K.
Table H104.2
Fees for Operational Permits
IFC Section Operational Permit Fee Amount
IFC Section Operational Permit                                  Fee Amount
105.5.1     Additive Manufacturing                              $165.00
105.5.2     Aerosol Products                                    $110.00
105.5.3     Amusement Buildings                                 $165.00
105.5.4     Aviation Facilities                                 $165.00
105.5.6     Cellulose nitrate film                              $80.00
105.5.7     Combustible Dust-Producing                          $80.00
105.5.8     Combustible Fibers                                  $80.00
105.5.9     Compressed Gases                                    $165.00
105.5.11    Cryogenic Fluids                                    $165.00
105.5.12    Cutting and Welding                                 $110.00
105.5.14    Energy Storage Systems                              $80.00
105.5.16    Explosives                                          $165.00
105.5.18    Flammable and Combustible Liquids                   $110.00
105.5.19    Floor Finishing                                     $110.00
105.5.20    Fruit and Crop Ripening                             $110.00
105.5.21    Fumigation and Thermal Insecticide Fogging          $110.00
105.5.21    Hazardous Materials                                 $390.00
105.5.22    HPM Facilities                                      $390.00
105.5.24    High-Piled Storage                                  $165.00
105.5.25    Hot Work Operations                                 $80.00
105.5.26    Industrial Ovens                                    $110.00
105.5.27    Lumber Yards and Woodworking Plants                 $305.00
105.5.28    Liquid or Gas-Fueled Vehicles/Equipment in Assembly $165.00
105.5.29    LP-Gas                                              $165.00
105.5.30    Magnesium                                           $165.00
IFC Section Operational Permit Fee Amount
IFC Section Operational Permit                Fee Amount
105.5.31    Miscellaneous Combustible Storage $80.00
105.5.34    Trench Burning                    $195.00
105.5.35    Open Flames and Torches           $110.00
105.5.36    Open Flames and Candles           $80.00
105.5.37    Organic Coatings                  $80.00
                                              $80.00-Occupant Load <300.
105.5.39    Places of Assembly                $165.00-Occupant Load 301-1000
                                              $390-Occupant Load > 1000
            Pyrotechnic Special Effects       $195.00
105.5.42    Material (or, if requested within Additional $195.00
            15 days of the event )
105.5.43    Pyroxylin Plastics                $165.00
105.5.45    Repair Garages and Motor Fuel-    $110.00
            Dispensing Facilities
105.5.46    Rooftop Heliports                 $110.00
105.5.47    Spraying and Dipping              $80.00
105.5.48    Storage of Scrap Tires and Tire   $60.00
            Byproducts
105.5.49    Temporary Membrane Structures,    $280.00
            Tents, and Canopies
105.5.50    Tire Rebuilding Plants            $165.00
105.5.51    Waste Handling                    $165.00
105.5.52    Wood Products                     $110.00
                                              $140.00 (If Inspector is required
105.5.53    Special Operational Permit        onsite beyond 1 hour, hourly rate
                                              of $120.00 shall be charged)
105.5.54    Mobile Fueling                    See Appendix K
 
SECTION H105
FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS
   H105.1 General. Fees will be assessed to commercial establishments for
excessive false alarms in accordance with Section 105 of this Appendix.
   H105.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Appendix the following
definitions shall apply in addition to those in Section 202, General
Definitions, and Section 902, Definitions, of the Fire Code.
      H105.2.1 False alarm. For the purpose of this section, a false alarm is
defined as an alarm which causes the emergency response by the fire department
and which is initiated by one of the following:
      1.   A fire alarm system malfunction.
      2.   Improper maintenance of a fire alarm or an automatic fire
suppression system.
      3.   Improper use or misuse of a fire alarm system or an automatic fire
suppression system.
      4.   Damage to a fire alarm system or automatic fire suppression system
due to carelessness while performing other procedures in the building.
      5.   The initiation of a fire alarm system during construction, painting,
or other procedure in which care should have been taken to protect initiating
devices from sending a false signal.
   H105.3 Procedure. The procedure used to assess false alarm complaints and
application of the fees contained herein will be in accordance with Section
H105.3.
      H105.3.1 Review of Incident Reports. False alarm incidents will be
reviewed by the Fire Prevention Bureau on a regular basis to determine if those
incidents meet the criteria stated in Section Hl 05.2.1 of this Appendix.
      H105.3.2 Notification. Upon the review of a false alarm incident report,
a member of the Fire Prevention Bureau will verify the validity of the
complaint. The owner or manager of the premises in question will then be issued
a written notice to take measures to correct any problem that may be causing
the false alarms. The notice will state that future false alarms at the
referenced address, which occur within twelve months of the original complaint,
will cause the owner or manager of the establishment to be invoiced in
accordance with Section 105.4 of this Appendix, Fees.
      H105.3.3 Invoice for false alarms. An invoice will be mailed to any
establishment for all reported false alarms which occur after the written
notification in accordance with Section 105.3.2 of this Appendix is issued, and
which occur before a period of twelve months has passed since the written
notification. The invoice will be in accordance with Section 105.4 of this
Appendix, Fees.
   H105.4 Fees. A fee in accordance with Table H105.1 will be assessed for each
false alarm reported to the Fire Prevention Bureau after written notification
is issued in accordance with Section 105.3.2 of this Appendix.
Table H105.1
 
Number of False Alarms in a 12 Month Period Fee Amount
1-2                                         No Fee/Warning
3                                           $140.00
4                                           $280.00
5                                           $560.00
6                                           $1,010.00
7 or more                                   $1,685.00
 
SECTION H106
OVERPAYMENT OF FEES
   H106.1 Overpayment of fees. All business owners requesting reimbursement of
overpayments on inspection fees must notify the fire department no later than
one year from the actual date of inspection. Requests must be written and
mailed to Fire Administration - Revenue Group, 200 Texas Street, Fort Worth,
Texas 76102. Telephone requests will not be accepted. The request must contain
appropriate documentation of overpayment, such as copies of both sides of the
canceled check. Requests must include the business name, address (including
suite number if applicable) and a contact person's name and telephone number.
   Appendix I Fire Protection Systems Noncompliant Conditions - Delete and
replace as follows:
Appendix I
INSTALLATION OF FIRE SERVICE FEATURES, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, AND OTHER
CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
SECTION
1101
GENERAL
   1101.1 The installation of fire service features and fire protections
systems shall be in accordance with this Appendix and Section 105, Permits;
Section 106, Inspections; Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads; and Section
508, Fire Protection Water Supplies, of the Fire Code.
SECTION
1102 FEES
   1102 General. Upon application for a construction permit in accordance with
Section 105 for fire protection systems, the applicant shall be required to pay
all fees associated with the installation or tenant finish work as specified in
Table 1102.1.
      1102.1.1 Pre-engineered extinguishing systems. Construction permit fees
for these systems shall be one half of the fees designated in Table 1102.1 for
"Other Suppression Systems." This does not affect the permit fee schedule
indicated in Table 1102.1 for pre-engineered kitchen hood extinguishing
systems.
   1102.2 Penalty. Fees specified in Table 1102.1 will be doubled if a
contractor starts installation or tenant finish work without a valid permit.
   1102.3 Additional plan review. When the original plans have been reviewed
and found to be acceptable, an additional plan review fee of $225.00 shall be
charged to the fire protection system contractor for each additional plan
review conducted.
   1102.4 Resubmittal plan review. When the original plans have been reviewed
and found to be unacceptable, a fee equivalent to one-half of the permit fee
will be charged for the second plan review and each subsequent review until the
plans are found to be acceptable.
   1102.5 Inspection failure. Re-inspections that are required due to lack of
readiness on the part of the applicant/contractor or due to Fire Code
violations shall be charged a 4 hour minimum fee.
TABLE
1102.1
FEES BASED ON TYPE OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
TYPE PERMIT FEES OTHER FEES
TYPE                      PERMIT FEES                OTHER FEES
New Sprinkler              
Installations:            $335.00
1 to 20 sprinklers        $560.00
21 to 100 sprinklers      $560.00 plus $110.00 for
Over 100 sprinklers       each additional 100
                         sprinklers or fraction
With fire pump            thereof in excess of 100   $120.00 per hour fee for
With foam                 $560.00 additional         any additional inspections
Each additional floor     $560.00 additional         after two inspections.
With private water        $90.00
storage                   $560.00 additional
Add/Relocate Sprinkler    No Fee/No Inspection
Installations:            Same as New Sprinkler fee
1 to 10 sprinklers        schedule above.
11 and more sprinklers
                                                     $120.00 per hour fee for
Underground Installation  $225.00                    any additional inspections
                                                     after two inspections.
Pre-Engineered Kitchen    $225.00 per kitchen hood   $120.00 per hour fee for
Hood Extinguishing        having the preengineered   any additional inspections
Systems (per Hood)        extinguishing system       after one inspection.
                           
New Fire Alarm            $335.00
Installation:             $560.00
1 to 4 initiating devices $560.00 plus $110.00 for   $120.00 per hour fee for
5 to 25 total devices     each additional 100        any additional inspections
Over 25 total devices     devices or fraction        after one inspection.
Each additional panel     thereof in excess of 25
Each additional floor     $90.00
                          $90.00
Other New Suppression
Systems:                                            $120.00 per hour fee for
(Gaseous, CO2, Dry        $560.00                    any additional inspections
Chemical, etc.)           $560.00 plus $75.00 per    after one inspection.
1 to 5 nozzles            nozzle over 5 nozzles.
Over 5 nozzles
Standpipe Systems:                                  $120.00 per hour fee for
1 to 3 risers             $785.00                    any additional inspections
4 or more risers          $1,125.00                  after two inspections.
With fire pump            $560.00 additional
Smoke Control or Exhaust                             $120.00 per hour fee for
Systems Installations     $560.00                    any additional inspections
                                                     after one inspection.
Compressed Gas Tanks                                 $120.00 per hour fee for
Installation              $165.00 per tank           any additional inspections
                                                     after two inspections.
Cryogenic Fluid Tank                                 $120.00 per hour fee for
Installations             $160.00 per tank           any additional inspections
                                                     after one inspection.
Flammable and Combustible $390.00 per tank or per    $120.00 per hour fee for
Liquids Installations and site for piping/           any additional inspections
Removals                  dispensing/other           after two inspections.
Hazardous Materials                                  $120.00 per hour fee for
Facility Installation/    $390.00                    any additional inspections
Construction                                         after one inspection.
Industrial Oven                                      $120.00 per hour fee for
Installations             $165.00 per oven           any additional inspections
                                                     after one inspection.
LP Gas Tanks/Facilities                              $120.00 per hour fee for
Installation              $165.00 per tank           any additional inspections
                                                     after one inspection.
Temporary Membrane                                   $120.00 per hour fee for
Structure, Tents, and     $165.00 per tent type      any additional inspections
Canopies Installations    structure                  after one inspection.
(per event)
                           
Access Control Systems    $225.00                    $120.00 per hour fee for
1 to 4 devices            $305.00                    any additional inspections
5 to 25 devices           $305.00 Plus $110.00 for   after one inspection.
More than 25 devices      each 100 devices over 25
                          or fraction thereof.
Emergency Responder Radio                            $120.00 per hour fee for
Coverage Equipment        $305.00 per building       any additional inspections
(Installation)                                       after one inspection.
Energy Systems            $165.00 per battery system $120.00 per hour fee for
(Installation)            installation               any additional inspections
                                                     after one inspection.
Firefighter Air                                      120.00 per hour fee for
Replenishment Systems     $305.00 per building       any additional inspections
(FARS) (Installation)                                after one inspection.
 
 
   Appendix J Building Information Sign - Delete and replace as follows:
Appendix J
MANUFACTURED HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION J101
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   J101.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this Appendix, certain words and
phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth
herein, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is
intended. When terms are not defined in this section, they shall have the
meanings set forth in Article 2 of the Fire Code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, HUD-CODE. A structure constructed on or after June 15,
1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that
term is defined by 24 CFR § 3282.8(g).
   LOT. A plot of ground within a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park
as indicated on the construction plan, which is designed to accommodate one (1)
manufactured home or recreational vehicle respectively.
   MANUFACTURED HOME or MANUFACTURED HOUSING. Includes the terms
HUD-code manufactured home and mobile home, and collectively means and refers
to both.
   MANUFACTURED HOME ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structural addition to a
manufactured home or mobile home park lot which includes awnings, cabanas,
carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets and buildings, and
similar appurtenant structures.
   MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE. That article of the "Buildings" chapter of
the City Code so designated.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transport-able in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is
eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length,
or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A unified development of lots arranged on a tract of
land under common ownership, which has been planned and improved for the
placement of two (2) or more manufactured homes for non-transient occupancy.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A manufactured home stand constructed per the
requirements of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b)
four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (c) self- propelled or permanently towable by an automobile or
light duty truck; (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use; and (e) required by Texas law to have a valid vehicle registration when
traveling upon public streets. It shall not include a manufactured home.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A unified development on a tract of land under
common ownership designed primarily for transient service, on which
recreational vehicles of the general public are parked or situated.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Fort
Worth.
SECTION J201
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK STANDARDS
   J201.1 Applicability. All manufactured home parks and manufactured homes
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with this appendix, the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, the Minimum Building Standards Code, and all
other applicable provisions of the City Code. Any reference to "mobile home"
elsewhere in the City Code shall mean "manufactured home" as defined by this
appendix.
SECTION J202
TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES
   J202.1 Each manufactured home park tenant shall maintain the tenant's
manufactured home and lot in compliance with the following:
      J202.1.1 The manufactured home shall be properly placed on its stand and
anchored to a permanent foundation. All utilities shall be properly installed
in accordance with the instructions of the park's owner or operator, and in
accordance with the City Code. The building official has the right to refuse to
issue all permits to hook a manufactured home up to utilities until the tenant
or owner or operator of the park shows proof that the manufactured home has
been anchored in accordance with state regulations.
      J202.1.2 A noncombustible skirting shall be installed around the
manufactured home. Such skirting may include any vents, screens, and/or
openings necessary for utility and mechanical system hookups.
      J202.1.3 The skirting, and any porches, stairways, awnings and other
additions shall be constructed, installed, and maintained in good repair. All
requirements of the Building Code pertaining to single family dwellings for
like structures or additions shall be applicable.
      J202.1.4 The space beneath a manufactured home shall not be used for
storage.
   J202.2 A person commits an offense if the person is a mobile home park
tenant and knowingly fails to maintain the person's manufactured home and lot
in compliance with this section.
   J202.3 A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a mobile
home park and knowingly allows or suffers a violation of this section by a
tenant.
SECTION J203
FIRE SAFETY EDUCATION
   J203.1 Each manufactured home park owner or operator shall ensure that its
park staff is instructed in the use of park fire protection equipment and in
the staffs specific duties in the event of a fire.
   J203.2 The fire chief may make printed safety instructions available to all
manufactured home park owners or operators for distribution to their tenants.
SECTION J301
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK STANDARDS
   J301.1 Applicability. All recreational vehicle parks shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with this appendix, the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, the Minimum Building Standards Code, and all other applicable
provisions of the City Code.
SECTION J302
FIRE SAFETY INSTRUCTION
   J302.1 Each recreational vehicle park, owner or operator, shall ensure that
its park staff is instructed in the use of park fire protection equipment and
in their specific duties in the event of a fire.
   J302.2 The fire chief may make printed safety instructions available to all
recreational vehicle park owners or operators for distribution to their guests.
SECTION J401 INSPECTION FEES
   J401.1 An annual fee is hereby charged to the owner of each manufactured
home park and recreational vehicle park located within the city, to provide for
inspections by the fire code official to determine compliance with the
requirements of the Fire Code and of the requirements of this appendix relative
to fire safety.
      J401.1.1 Calculation of inspection fee. The annual inspection fee for
inspections required by this section are calculated as the total of the
following:
      a.   Base fee of $225.00.
      b.   Additional fee of $5.50 per individual lot within the park.
   J401.2 All other requirements of Appendix H shall apply with regards to
issuance of Certificates of Inspections.
SECTION J500
HISTORY
   J500.1 Mobile Home Park regulations were first adopted in May 18, 1970 (with
retroactive provisions), Ordinance 6293 Recreational Vehicle Park regulations
were first adopted by Ordinance 6372, effective October 12, 1970. Under
Ordinance 12264, City Code Chapter 21, Mobile Home Parks was deleted and the
provisions moved to the Fire Code Appendix. Such Appendix was continued thru
Ordinances 14652, 14688 and 16027.
   Appendix K Construction Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care Facilities
- Delete and replace as follows:
Appendix K
MOBILE FUELING PERMIT FEES
   K101.1 Mobile fueling permit fees. Mobile fueling permit fees will be
assessed as set forth in Table K101.1. Permits shall renew annually.
      K101.1.1 Mobile fueling site permit. The mobile fueling site permit fee
shall be required for each site, as defined by this code.
      K101.1.2 Mobile refueling vehicle permit. The mobile refueling vehicle
fee shall be applicable based on the VIN number provided by the applicant for
the subject vehicle and a copy of the applicable mobile refueling vehicle
permit shall be maintained in or on the vehicle at all times.
Table K101.1
Mobile Fueling Permit Fees
 
                          For Each Site For Each Refueling Vehicle.
Initial Permit Fee        $1,125        $280
Permit Annual Renewal Fee $560          $225
 
   Appendix L - Change to read as follows:
Appendix L
REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE FIGHTER AIR
REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS
   Section L101.1 - Change to read as follows:
   Section L101.1 Scope. Fire fighter air replenishment systems (FARS) shall be
provided in accordance with this appendix in new buildings when any of the
following conditions occur:
   1.   Any new building 5 or more stories in height.
   2.   Any new building with 2 or more floors below grade.
   3.   Any new building 500,000 square feet or more in size.
Each stairwell shall have a supply riser. SCBA fill panels shall be located on
odd numbered floors commencing at the first level in the primary stairwell and
on even numbered floors commencing at level 2 in the remaining stairwells. Fill
panels in buildings over 500,000 square feet shall be located adjacent to
standpipe connections, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official, and
provided with a blue strobe light or approved equivalent activated by general
fire alarm signal for ease of location identification by first responders.
(Reason: Breathing air is critical for firefighting operations. Historically,
fire departments have supplied air bottles by manually transporting air bottles
up stairways or across long distances in a building, which is an
extraordinarily intensive process and takes firefighters away from their
primary' mission of rescue and firefighting. The FARS technology in Appendix L
exists to address this issue using in-building air supply systems. Many
jurisdictions in North Texas and across the country have already adopted this
Appendix and are enforcing and installing these systems to improve the life
safety of firefighters and enhance their firefighting capabilities in an
emergency incident, which is one of the reasons for recommending this Appendix
for adoption - to ensure regional consistency, as well as to improve mutual
emergency aid among jurisdictions in North Texas.)
   Section L104.13.1 Location - Delete this section in its entirety.
   Section L104.14 - Add paragraph to read as follows:
   The external mobile air connection shall be located with approved separation
from the Fire Department Connection (FDC) to allow functionality of both
devices by first responders; shall be visible from and within 50 ft. of a fire
apparatus access road along an unobstructed path; and shall be located in an
approved, signed, and secured cabinet.
   Appendix M High-rise Buildings Retroactive Automatic Sprinkler Requirement -
Delete and replace as follows:
Appendix M
Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) And Hazardous Materials Inventory
Statement (HMIS) Instructions
   {'{'}Relocate Appendix H as written from published 2015 IFC in its entirety
to Appendix M in these amendments.{'}'}
   Appendix N Indoor Trade Shows and Exhibitions - Delete in its entirety.
(Ord. 9281, § 2, passed 1-3-1985; Ord. 9643, § 3, passed 6-3-1986; Ord. 10105,
§ 2, passed 4-26-1988; Ord. 10328, § 2, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 10452, § 1,
passed 12-5-1989; Ord. 10632, §§ 1, 2, passed 7-12-1990; Ord. 10762, § 1,
passed 1-10-1991; Ord. 11389, § 2, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 11899, §§ 1, 2,
passed 4-4-1995; Ord. 12264, § 1, passed 11-21-1995; Ord. 13591, § 1, passed 9-
18-1998; Ord. 13636, § 2, passed 11-3-1998; Ord. 14652, § 2, passed 6-25-2001;
Ord. 15001, § 1, passed 3-5-2002; Ord. 15704, §§ 1-3, passed 9-30-2003; Ord.
16027, § 2, passed 7-6-2004; Ord. 16252, § 1, passed 1-4-2005; Ord. 17390, § 1,
passed 2-6-2007; Ord. 18443-1-2009, § 2, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 18817-09-2009,
§§ 1-5, passed 9-15-2009; Ord. 19607-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-2-2011; Ord. 21137-
03-2014, § 1, passed 3-4-2014; Ord. 22058-01-2016, § 1, passed 1-26- 2016; Ord.
22524-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 25388-03-2022, § 2,
passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-24-2022; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-2024,
eff. 10-1-2024)
§ 13-3 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and of the
City of Fort Worth (1986), as amended, except where the provisions of this
ordinance are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances and
such code, in which event conflicting provisions of such ordinances and of such
code are hereby repealed. Former Chapter 13 of the Code, as amended, is
expressly superseded by the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 9281, § 4, passed 1-3-1985; Ord. 10105, § 3, passed 4-26-1988; Ord.
10328, § 3, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 11389, § 3, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13636, §
3, passed 11-3-1998; Ord. 14652, § 3, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 16027, § 3, passed
7-6-2004)
§ 13-4 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED; PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in the city or cause the same to be done contrary to or
in violation of any of the provisions of this code. Any person, firm or
corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this code with
respect to life safety, shall be fined not more than $2,000 for each offense in
accordance with §
1-6(c), and with respect to all other provisions of this code shall be fined
not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 9281, § 6, passed 1-3-1985; Ord. 10105, § 4, passed 4-26-1988; Ord.
10328, § 4, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 11389, § 4, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 13636, §
4, passed 11-3-1998; Ord. 14652, § 4, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 16027, § 4, passed
7-6-2004; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§§ 13-5—13-20 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: FIRE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 13-21—13-23 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 13-21
through 13-23, which pertained to Established, Office of Chief, and Executive
Assistance Chief. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 13-24 FIRE APPOINTEES.
   (a)   The fire chief shall have the authority to select and appoint up to
three persons to the classification immediately below that of fire chief.
   (b)   The fire chief shall have the authority to select and appoint up to
four persons to the classification of deputy chief, which will be immediately
below that of assistant chief and immediately above that of battalion chief.
   (c)   Each person appointed under this section shall serve at the pleasure
of the fire chief. Eligibility for appointment of and the protections afforded
to appointees hereunder shall be as set forth in Tex. Local Government Code §§
143.014(g) and 143.014(h).
(Ord. 9316, § 1(1), passed 2-12-1985; Ord. 19708-06-2011, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-7-
2011; Ord. 20991-10-2013, § 2, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 13-24.1 FIRE EMS APPOINTEES.
   (a)   The fire chief shall have the authority to select and appoint up to
two persons to the classification of Deputy EMS Officer.
   (b)   Each person appointed under this section shall serve at the pleasure
of the fire chief. Eligibility for appointment of and the protections afforded
to appointees hereunder shall be as set forth in the Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
(Ord. 27829-06-2025, § 1, passed 6-24-2025, eff. 6-28-2025)
§ 13-25 MEMBERS TO BE SELECTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH CIVIL SERVICE REGULATIONS;
EXCEPTION OF CHIEF; APPOINTMENT OF ADDITIONAL FIREFIGHTERS AND OFFICERS IN
TIMES OF EMERGENCY.
   The members of the fire department, other than the fire chief and the
appointees provided for in §
13-24 and §
13-24.1, shall be selected in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 143, as amended and in accordance with such rules and regulations as
the civil service commission may prescribe; provided that, in case of an
emergency, the city manager or the fire chief may appoint additional
firefighters and officers for temporary service, who will not be considered as
regular employees of the department. Each member of the fire department shall
be issued a warrant of appointment as a commission, according to the rules and
regulations of the city and state law and shall, before entering into service,
subscribe to an oath of office.
(1964 Code, § 15A-3) (Ord. 8649, § 1, passed 9-28-1982; Ord. 27829-06-2025, §
2, 6-24-2025, eff. 6-28-2025)
§ 13-26 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; ENFORCEMENT OF THE FIRE CODE.
   The fire chief shall appoint an assistant chief to serve as deputy chief in
charge of the bureau of fire prevention, and such other members of the bureau
from the ranks of the fire department. Such assistant chief and other officers
shall serve without additional compensation. The members of the bureau of fire
prevention shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of the fire code, and
to issue such permits as are required by the fire code, and to issue citations
for violations of the fire code and to conduct other investigatory functions as
specified in the fire code.
(1964 Code, § 15A-4) (Ord. 8649, § 1, passed 9-28-1982; Ord. 20991-10-2013, §
3, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 13-27 ASSIGNMENT PAY FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF SPECIALIZED DUTIES WITHIN THE
FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   The chief of the fire department or the chief’s designee may from time
to time designate civil service firefighters to perform one of the specialized
duty assignments set forth in this section, which requires the attainment of
specialized training and/or the performance of duties in addition to
traditional firefighting operations.
   (b)   Subject to the city council’s annual review, approval and funding in
each fiscal year budget ordinance, while assigned to and performing one of the
specialized duties listed herein, a firefighter may receive, in addition to his
or her regular base salary, additional compensation in the form of assignment
pay in the amount corresponding to the specialized assignment listed. BASE
SALARY shall be the amount shown in the city’s salary schedule for the current
fiscal year, exclusive of all other additional payments or allowances.
   (c)   It is further expressly stated that all of the “assignment pay”
positions are to be made with existing personnel staffing levels and that this
section shall not operate to create any new civil service classifications
(ranks) or other authorized positions within the fire department. This section
shall not operate to create any vacancies at any existing classified position
within the fire department. This section shall not operate to increase or
diminish the overall number of authorized civil service positions in the fire
department. A “duty assignment” may include employees who are designated to
perform specialized functions intermittently in a reserve capacity to
substitute when regularly assigned employees are absent or unavailable.
   (d)   The following conditions are applicable to all forms of assignment pay
authorized by this section.
      (1)   To be eligible for assignment pay, an employee must be expressly
assigned by the fire chief or designee to one of the assignment pay positions
listed herein as a regular on-going duty assignment or reserve assignment, and
must also be expressly authorized by the fire chief or designee to receive the
assignment pay in conjunction with the assignment.
      (2)   In addition to the criteria listed for each assignment pay position
herein, in order to become eligible and thereafter remain eligible for
assignment pay, each employee shall also be required to participate in the
operations of their specialized duties or operation either as a regular on-
going duty assignment or in a designated reserve capacity; shall acquire and
demonstrate the appropriate level of expertise and proficiency in their
specialized duties or operation; possess and maintain current certifications in
the areas of expertise required for the duty assignment; and perform other
related duties as assigned by the fire chief.
      (3)   Employees assigned to the specialized assignments listed herein
shall be eligible to receive assignment pay only while satisfactorily
performing the assigned duties. Assignment pay shall not accrue nor be payable
to an individual once that person is no longer assigned to or otherwise no
longer performing the specialized duties; or is absent due to illness or other
authorized leave for a period of 90 days or more; or fails to maintain current
certifications as required; or while suspended from duties as the result of a
disciplinary action.
      (4)   Except for employees who are explicitly assigned in a reserve
capacity, assignment pay is not authorized for employees who only temporarily
fill in for another employee who was expressly assigned but who is temporarily
absent for a period of 90 days or less due to illness, vacation or some other
authorized absence.
      (5)   If qualified and expressly authorized by the fire chief or
designee, all firefighters are eligible to receive up to three assignment pay
categories.
      (6)   Employees receiving instructor pay in a particular category may not
receive responder pay in the same discipline.
      (7)   In instances in which assignments require obtaining certifications
or licenses, such licenses or certifications must be obtained within 180 days
of the effective date for the start of the assignment pay in order to continue
receiving the assignment pay.
      (8)   In the event one of the certifying agencies listed below changes
the requirements for receiving a certification that makes a fire fighter
ineligible for an assignment pay based on the criteria below, the fire fighter
shall have 180 days from the change in requirements to obtain the new
certification in order to continue receiving the assignment pay.
   (e)   The following listings are the only specialized duty assignments in
the fire department authorized to receive assignment pay. The listing includes
the amount of assignment pay authorized for each assignment, and the
specialized training, education or other criteria required in order to be
eligible for the specialized assignments:
      (1)   Chief fire investigator.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic arson investigator
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection;
            3.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic peace officer license
from the Texas commission on law enforcement officer standards and education;
            4.   Hold or obtain hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection;
            5.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices; and
            6.   Be assigned as the chief fire investigator.
      (2)   Chief training officer.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Hold or obtain an advanced instructor certification from the
Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor III);
            3.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices;
            4.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            5.   Be assigned as the chief training officer.
      (3)   Community risk reduction chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices;
            3.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            4.   Be assigned as the community risk reduction chief.
      (4)   Bureau of fire prevention (BFP) section chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic fire inspector
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Inspector I,
Inspector II and Plans Examiner I);
            3.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices;
            4.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            5.   Be assigned as the bureau of fire prevention (BFP) section
chief.
      (5)   Special operations chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices;
            3.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            4.   Be assigned as the special operations chief.
      (6)   Emergency medical services (EMS) chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. Three hundred fifty dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervisory practices;
            3.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            4.   Be assigned as the emergency medical services (EMS) chief.
      (7)   Program coordinator.
         a.   Assignment pay. Two hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervision of the assigned departmental program; and
            2.   Be assigned as the program coordinator for one of the
following departmental programs:
               i.   Aircraft rescue firefighting (ARFF);
               ii.   Assistant aircraft rescue firefighting (Alliance);
               iii.   Assistant aircraft rescue firefighting (Meacham);
               iv.   Hazardous materials;
               v.   Recruit training;
               vi.   Technical rescue;
               vii.   Swift water/underwater rescue;
               viii.   Emergency medical services;
               ix.   Public information;
               x.   Master scheduler; and
               xi.   Hiring coordinator.
      (8)   Section manager.
         a.   Assignment pay. Two hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in management and
supervision of the assigned departmental section; and
            2.   Be assigned as the manager for one of the following
departmental sections:
               i.   Public education;
               ii.   Self contained breathing apparatus (SCBA);
               iii.   Supply;
               iv.   Vehicle services;
               v.   Fire communications; and
               vi.   Fire investigations.
      (9)   Fire inspector.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic fire inspector
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Inspector I,
Inspector II and Plans Examiner I); and
            2.   Be assigned as a fire inspector.
      (10)   Fire investigator.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic arson investigator
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection;
            2.   Hold, as a minimum, a basic peace officer license from the
Texas commission on law enforcement officer standards and education; and
            3.   Be assigned as a fire investigator.
      (11)   Hazardous device (bomb) technician.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold certification as a hazardous device technician with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation; and
            2.   Be assigned as a hazardous device (bomb) technician.
      (12)   Hazardous materials technician - fire prevention.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            2.   Be assigned to the bureau of fire prevention as a hazardous
materials specialist as defined in the Fort Worth Fire Department Standard
Operating Procedures.
      (13)   Paramedic.
         a.   Assignment pay: One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold certification as a paramedic with the Texas department of
state health services; and
            2.   Be assigned as active or reserve paramedic as defined in the
Fort Worth fire department standard operating procedures.
      (14)   Public educator.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor
II); and
            2.   Be assigned as a public educator.
      (15)   Hazardous materials - instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold a hazardous materials technician certification from the
Texas commission on fire protection;
            2.   Hold, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor II); and
            3.   Be assigned as a hazardous materials instructor.
      (16)   Aircraft rescue firefighting (ARFF) - instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold, as a minimum, a basic aircraft rescue firefighter
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection;
            2.   Hold, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor II); and
            3.   Be assigned as an ARFF instructor.
      (17)   Specialty instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor II); and
            2.   Be assigned as a specialty instructor.
      (18)   Swift water/underwater - instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor II);
            2.   Hold an instructor certification from Emergency Response
Diving International (ERDI) or similar certifying agency as defined by the fire
chief; and
            3.   Be assigned as a swift water rescue instructor.
      (19)   Technical rescue - instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Complete the training and job performance requirements for
technical rescue technician as specified by the special operations chief;
            2.   Hold, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor II); and
            3.   Be assigned as a technical rescue instructor.
      (20)   Training academy instructor.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, an intermediate instructor
certification from the Texas commission on fire protection (NFPA Instructor
II); and
            2.   Be assigned as a training academy instructor.
      (21)   Aircraft rescue firefighting (ARFF) - responder.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain, as a minimum, a basic aircraft rescue
firefighter certification from the Texas commission on fire protection unless
assigned to Fire Station 44, in which case, must hold, as a minimum, a basic
aircraft rescue firefighter certification from the Texas Commission on Fire
Protection; and
            2.   Be assigned as an ARFF responder.
      (22)   Hazardous materials - responder.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            2.   Be assigned as a primary or secondary hazardous materials
responder as defined in the Fort Worth Fire Department Standard Operating
Procedures.
      (23)   Hazardous materials responder - battalion chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of battalion chief;
            2.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas commission on fire protection; and
            3.   Be assigned as a staff or operation battalion chief.
      (24)   Swift water/underwater - responder.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold, as a minimum, scuba diver certification from Emergency
Response Diving International (ERDI) or equivalent certifying agency as defined
by the fire chief; and
            2.   Be assigned as an active or reserve swift water/underwater
responder.
      (25)   Technical rescue - responder.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain the Fort Worth Fire Department training and job
performance requirements for Technical Rescue Technician; and
            2.   Be assigned as a technical rescue responder.
      (26)   Working agreement secretary/records manager.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Have recognized qualifications and expertise in managing
assigned program; and
            2.   Be assigned working agreement secretary/records manager by the
President of the Fort Worth Professional Firefighters Association, IAFF Local
440.
      (27)   Public information officer.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold or obtain the Fort Worth fire department requirements for
public information officer; and
            2.   Be assigned as a public information officer.
      (28)   Bilingual Personnel.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month for verbal skills.
Use of writing skills is additional twenty-five dollars per month, for a total
of up to one hundred twenty-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Job duties must require the use of employee's bilingual
skills; and
            2.   Successfully take and pass a language proficiency test
administered by the Human Resources Department.
      (29)   Hazardous materials responder – deputy chief.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold the rank of deputy chief;
            2.   Hold or obtain a hazardous materials technician certification
from the Texas Commission on Fire Protection; and
            3.   Be assigned as a staff or operation deputy chief.
      (30)   Professional standards investigator.
         a.   Assignment pay. One hundred seventy-five dollars per month.
         b.   Eligibility requirements.
            1.   Hold, as a minimum, the rank of lieutenant;
            2.   Hold or obtain a certification in investigations, internal
affairs or related field from the Public Agency Training Council or equivalent
certifying agency; and
            3.   Be assigned as a professional standards investigator.
(Ord. 12795, § 1, passed 12-12-1996; Ord. 14841, § 1, passed 10-30-2001; Ord.
15353, § 1, passed 12-3- 2002; Ord. 16988, § 1, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 19175-
06-2010, § 1, passed 6-8-2010; Ord. 21702-03- 2015, § 1, passed 3-17-2015; Ord.
23117-02-2018, § 1, passed 2-20-2018)
§§ 13-28—13-35 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1(B) of Ord. 11592, adopted June 6, 1994, repealed Div. 2 in its
entirety. Formerly, Div. 2 consisted of §§ 13-36 through 13-40, which pertained
to the office of emergency management and derived from § 2 of Ord. 9692,
adopted August 12, 1986. See
Ch. 11.5 for current provisions regarding emergency management.
§§ 13-36—13-40 RESERVED.
CHAPTER 14: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274 repealed former Chapter 14 in its entirety.
Formerly, said chapter pertained to garbage and derived from the following
legislation:
Ord. Section Date
Ord.  Section Date
9742  1       10-14-1986
9938  1       8-25-1987
10388 1,2     9-20-1989
10676 1, 2    9-25-1990
10934 1—3   10-15-1991
10992 1       1-7-1992
11165 1—4   9-8-1992
11348 1       6-29-1993
11682 1       9-20-1994
11922 1, 3    4-18-1995
 
CHAPTER 15: GAS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
      
III.   GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION FEES
Charter reference:
   Provisions re authority of city to acquire and maintain systems for
distribution of natural gas, see
Ch. II, § 7
Cross-reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Ch. 7
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
Statutory reference:
   Authority of home rule cities relative to gas, see Tex. Local Government
Code Ch. 552
   Control and regulation of gas plants by cities generally, see Tex. Local
Government Code Ch. 552
Section
Article I: In General
   
15-1   Compliance with rate schedule required
   
15-2   Rate schedule
   
15-3   British thermal units required per cubic foot
   
15-4   Basis of measurement for sale
   
15-5   Requirements as to pressure
   
15-6—15-29   Reserved
Article II: Gas Drilling and Production
Division I: Purpose
   
15-30   Purpose
Division II: Definitions
   
15-31   Definitions
Division III: Gas Inspector
   
15-32   Gas inspector
Division IV: Agent
   
15-33   Operator’s agent
Division V: Gas Well Permits
   
15-34   Gas well permit required
   
15-35   Gas well permit application and filing fees
   
15-36   Gas well permitting procedure
   
15-37   Issuance of gas well permits
   
15-38   Amended gas well permit application
   
15-39   Suspension or revocation of gas well permit; issuance of a citation,
effect
   
15-40   Periodic reports
Division VI: Insurance, Bond and Indemnity
   
15-41   Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance
Division VII: Onsite and Technical Regulations
   
15-42   Technical regulations
   
15-43   Fences and landscaping
   
15-44   Cleanup and maintenance
   
15-45   Plugged and abandoned wells
Division VIII: Pipelines
   
15-46   Oil and gas pipelines technical and permitting regulations
   
15-47   Salt water pipelines
Division IX: Technical Advisor
   
15-48   Technical advisor
Division X: Appeals
   
15-48.1   Appeals
Division XI: Penalty
   
15-48.2   Penalty
Article III: Gas Well Drilling and Production Fees
   
15-49—15-50   Reserved
   
15-51   Gas well fees
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 15-1 COMPLIANCE WITH RATE SCHEDULE REQUIRED.
   All persons engaged in the business of furnishing, distributing or
delivering natural gas to domestic and commercial consumers in the city shall
charge for such service in accordance with the schedule referred to in §
15-2.
(1964 Code, § 17-1)
§ 15-2 RATE SCHEDULE.
   After a full and adequate hearing at which all interested parties are given
a full opportunity to be heard, and the right to present evidence, the city
council shall establish a rate schedule to provide sufficient net revenues,
after the payment of all expenses, taxes, depreciation and other charges, to
provide a fair and reasonable return to the owners and operators on their
property devoted to consumers in the city, subject to the right of appeal of
the gas utility company to the state railroad commission.
(1964 Code, § 17-2)
§ 15-3 BRITISH THERMAL UNITS REQUIRED PER CUBIC FOOT.
   No natural gas shall be delivered and sold to any consumer which shall
contain less than 1,000 British thermal units per cubic foot of the natural
gas, as determined at a temperature of 60°F and a pressure equivalent to 30
inches of mercury at 32°F and water vapor saturated. The British thermal unit
content of the natural gas shall be determined and calculated from the gas
discharged from the service main.
(1964 Code, § 17-5)
§ 15-4 BASIS OF MEASUREMENT FOR SALE.
   Natural gas shall be measured for sale to the consumer on the basis of the
temperature, pressure and humidity existing in the meter at the time the gas is
measured, unless, by agreement between buyer and seller, a pressure higher than
eight ounces gauge is maintained at the outlet of the meter. In the latter
case, the volume measured shall be corrected to a pressure base of eight ounces
above 14.43 pounds per square inch.
(1964 Code, § 17-6)
§ 15-5 REQUIREMENTS AS TO PRESSURE.
   Natural gas shall be delivered at the outlet of the consumer’s metering
device at a pressure of not less than four ounces above atmospheric pressure
and not more than eight ounces above atmospheric pressure, unless some higher
pressure has been agreed upon between the person distributing the gas and the
individual customer. Nothing herein shall in any manner abrogate any
contractual agreement relating to pressure applicable to industrial consumers.
The penalties provided for the violation of this section shall not apply to
violations of the provisions of this section unless the person distributing the
gas shall fail to promptly correct conditions constituting those violations
whenever such violations or any of them are discovered.
(1964 Code, § 17-7)
§§ 15-6—15-29 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16986, § 1, adopted June 13, 2006, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of Ord. 16986, Art. II pertained to
similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, adopted February
3, 2009, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also
the Code Comparative Table.
DIVISION I: PURPOSE
§ 15-30 PURPOSE.
   The exploration, development and production of gas in the city are
activities which necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property
owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property
and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this
article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and
regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring,
drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of gas and other
substances produced in association with gas within the city to protect the
health and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to
property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and
encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION II: DEFINITIONS
§ 15-31 DEFINITIONS.
   All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and
production of gas wells not specifically defined in this article shall have the
meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas
industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. As defined by the railroad commission of Texas and includes the
plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this
article.
   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The all encompassing noise level associated with a
given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a
given location.
   BLOWOUT PREVENTER. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or
combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including
valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be
closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the
top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy. The term BUILDING shall be construed as if followed by the
words “or portions thereof.”
   CATHODIC PROTECTION. An electrochemical corrosion control technique
accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the
structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective
potential in the immunity region. The required CATHODIC PROTECTION current is
supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system.
   CESSATION OF DRILLING ACTIVITIES. The time when the blowout protectors
(BOPs) are removed or otherwise rendered inoperable and/or there are no further
activities to trip drill pipe, casing or insert other tools into or out of the
hole.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   CITY CODE. The code of the City of Fort Worth.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The city attorney of the City of Fort Worth.
   CITY REGULATED PIPELINES. Those pipelines within the city that under federal
and state rules and regulations are not exempt from city regulations and
articles regarding mapping, inventorying, locating or relocating of pipelines,
including, but not limited to, pipelines over, under, along or across a public
street or alley, pipelines from the well to the first point of custody transfer
or in private residential areas within the boundaries of the city.
   CLOSED LOOP MUD SYSTEM. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve
pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to collect all drilling
waste.
   COMMISSION. The railroad commission of Texas and all state rules.
   COMMENCEMENT OF DRILLING ACTIVITIES. The reflection of either “spud well” or
“nipple up” the blow out protectors (BOP) by the drilling contractors on the
IADC-API daily drilling report form maintained by the operator’s tool pusher on
the pad site.
   COMPLETION OF DRILLING, RE-DRILLING and RE-WORKING. The date the work is
completed for the drilling, re-drilling or re-working and the crew is released
by completing their work or contract or by their employer.
   DAYTIME. The period from 6:00 am to 7:00 pm.
   DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is
equal to ten times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the measured
sound pressure squared to a reference pressure which is 20 micropascals.
   DEMOBILIZATION. Those activities when the drilling has ceased and the rig
equipment and related pad site equipment is being dismantled for the purpose of
moving off the drill pad site.
   DERRICK. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is
required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the
production of gas.
   DRILLING. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for,
developing or producing gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of
injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
   DRILLING EQUIPMENT. The derrick, together with all parts of and
appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or
equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
   DRILLING OPERATIONS. Drilling with drill pipe and bit, running casing,
circulating mud and fluids, tripping tools and setting production casing/
tubing.
   EXPLORATION. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys,
related to the search for gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIRM. The flood insurance rate map.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The fire department of the City of Fort Worth.
   FLOWBACK. The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the purpose
of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior to sending gas
down a sales line.
   FRACTURE or FRACTURING. The process of fracture stimulation of a rock
formation.
   FRESHWATER FRACTURE PIT/POND. A pit used for the collection and storage of
fresh water for the purpose of fracture stimulation of gas wells.
   FRESH WATER. Water obtained from any source (natural or reuse) that contains
3,000 ppm chlorides or less or as defined by the railroad commission of Texas.
   GAS. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a
natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at
standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or
vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
   GAS DRILLING REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee consisting of applicable city
departments assembled for the purpose of reviewing wells drilled within 600
feet of a protected use without waivers, all pipeline permit applications for
gas pipelines through a private residential area, and permit applications
involving noncommercial truck routes. A parks advisory board member will be
included on the GAS DRILLING REVIEW COMMITTEE when any of the aforementioned
reviews affects dedicated public parkland.
   GAS WELL. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or
actual production of natural gas.
   HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure for which a certificate of occupancy is
required. A HABITABLE STRUCTURE shall not include detached accessory buildings,
garages and sheds.
   HOSPITAL BUILDING. Any building used or designed to and intended to be used
for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or custodial care on a twenty-four-
hour basis, including convalescent facilities, social rehabilitation centers,
mental hospitals, detoxification facilities, and alcohol and drug centers.
   INSPECTOR. The gas inspector(s) or other inspectors as needed and as
designated by the city.
   LIFT COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order to lift gas from the well.
   LINE COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a pipeline.
   LINE COMPRESSOR OPERATOR. Any person issued a permit for a line compressor
site, and/or who owns, operates, maintains or is responsible for operating a
line compressor.
   LINE COMPRESSOR SITE. A land area, as defined and submitted to the city by
the line compressor operator, for the purpose of transporting gas through a
pipeline by one or more line compressors and all associated operational
activities and equipment.
   MOBILIZATION. Those activities when the drilling rig and related equipment
and personnel arrive at the well site and are conducting activities to rig up
or position the rig equipment at the well and prepare for drilling. This
includes all activities and services prior to the drill bit being lowered below
the rotary table and entering the conductor pipe in an attempt to make hole
(“spud in”) for the first time at the pad site.
   MULTIPLE WELL SITE PERMIT. That permit issued for the sole purpose of
allowing future wells to be drilled on an existing pad site and within 600 of
protected uses without obtaining waivers and/or variances.
   NIGHTTIME. The period between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   OPERATOR. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission Form
W-1 or Form P-4 for a gas well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in
control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well,
including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the OPERATOR, as herein
defined, is not the lessee under a gas lease of any premises affected by the
provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an
operator. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises
affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises
shall be deemed an OPERATOR.
   OUTER BOUNDARY SURFACE PROPERTY LINE. The outer boundary of any property for
which a preliminary plat or concept plan has been filed with the City of Fort
Worth.
   PERSON. Both the singular and the plural and a natural person, a
corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee,
administrator, executor and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
   PIPELINE. All parts of those physical facilities through which gas,
hazardous liquids, fresh water, salt water or chemicals move in transportation,
including but limited to, pipe, valves and other appurtenance attached to pipe,
whether or not laid in public or private easement or public or private right-
of-way within the city, including but not limited to gathering lines,
production lines and transmission lines. This definition does not include
pipelines associated with franchise utilities.
   PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION. The initiation of any excavation or other disturbance
of property for the purpose of installation, construction, maintenance, repair,
replacement, modification or removal of a pipeline.
   PIPELINE OR WELL EMERGENCY. A pipeline or well incident that is required to
be reported to the railroad commission, the Texas commission on environmental
quality, or any federal, state or local regulatory agency.
   PIPELINE PERMIT. A permit for the movement of gas, oil, water or other
products.
   PIPELINE OPERATOR. Any person owning, operating or responsible for operating
a pipeline.
   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area within the territorial limits of the city
that is zoned and used as single- or multifamily residential; or vacant
residentially-zoned lot that is adjacent to properties that are zoned and used
as single- or multifamily residential.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of the surface property.
   PROTECTED USE. A residence, religious institution, hospital building, school
or public park.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. All buildings with occupancies of 50 or more persons and
more than 750 square feet used or designed to and intended to be used for
motion picture theaters, symphony and concert halls, television and radio
studios admitting an audience, theaters, banquet halls, night clubs,
restaurants, taverns and bars, amusement arcades, art galleries, bowling
alleys, community halls, courtrooms, dance halls, exhibition halls, funeral
parlors, gymnasiums without spectator seating, indoor swimming pools and tennis
courts without spectator seating, lecture halls, libraries, museums, waiting
areas in transportation terminals, pool and billiard parlors, arenas with
spectator seating, skating rinks with spectator seating, swimming pools with
spectator seating, tennis courts with spectator seating and amusement park
structures, bleachers, grandstands and stadiums used for viewing outdoor
activities.
   PUBLIC PARK. Any land area dedicated to the city for traditional park-like
recreational purposes.
   RE-DRILL. Re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack
operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore.
   REDUCED EMISSION COMPLETION (GREEN COMPLETION). Techniques or methods that
minimize the release of natural gas and vapors to the environment when a well
is being flowed during the completion or re-completion phase of a Barnett Shale
well.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for
religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with
such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
   RESIDENCE. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, city-
inspected mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes,
including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the
application for a gas well permit is filed with the gas inspector. RESIDENCE
shall include assisted living facilities, nursing homes (both intermediate care
facilities and skilled nursing facilities), residential board and care
facilities, group homes, 24-hour shelters, half-way houses, hotels, motels and
jails.
   RE-WORKING. Re-completion or re-entry of existing well within the existing
bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than
150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other
property within the city and which is dedicated to the use and benefit of the
public.
   SCHOOL. Any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities
providing education or off-site related school sports venues up through and
including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a
facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Fort Worth that
provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more
than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
   SITE. The area used for drilling, development and production and all
operational activities associated with gas production.
   SITE PREPARATION. Any grading, tree removal, construction of access roads,
delivery of fill material, staging of equipment or any other activity that
would disturb the surface of the property.
   STATE OR FEDERAL REGULATED PIPELINES. Those pipelines within the city that
under state and federal rules and regulations are exempt from city regulations
and articles regarding mapping, inventorying, locating and relocating of
pipelines.
   STREET. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area
or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
   TANK. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the
drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing
fluids.
   TECHNICAL ADVISOR. Such person(s) familiar with and educated in the gas
industry or the law as it relates to gas matters that may be retained from time
to time by the city.
   URBAN VILLAGE. A highly urbanized place designated by the city council that
has a concentration of jobs, housing units, commercial uses, public spaces,
public transportation, pedestrian activity and a sense of place within a
relatively compact geographical area as identified and amended from time to
time in the comprehensive plan.
   WELL. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation or strata
for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur
water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or
production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
   WORKOVER OPERATION. Work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, restore production that
has ceased or increase production.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 18910-2009, §§
1, 2, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19402-10-2010, § 2, passed 10-12-2010; Ord.
20927-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-10-2013; eff. 9-20-2013)
DIVISION III: GAS INSPECTOR
§ 15-32 GAS INSPECTOR.
   (a)   The city manager shall designate a gas inspector who shall enforce the
provisions of this article. The gas inspector shall have a degree in petroleum
engineering with a background in drilling and production or demonstrate a
proven background in the drilling, production and operation of gas wells. The
gas inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives
required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular
provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive
shall constitute a violation of this article.
   (b)   The gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any
premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with
the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or directives of the state and to issue citations for violations of
this article. Failure of any person to permit access to the gas inspector shall
constitute a violation of this article. The gas inspector shall conduct
periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to
determine that the wells are operating in accordance within proper parameters
as set out in this article and all regulations of the commission.
   (c)   The gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any
records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the
like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to
establish and determine compliance with the applicable gas well and pipeline
permits or other permits as required by this article. Failure of any person to
provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this
article.
   (d)   The gas inspector shall have the authority to allow alternatives to
the technical standards of this article such as new technology, if the operator
has demonstrated to the gas inspector’s satisfaction that the alternatives
provide equal or greater protection of the environment or public.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION IV: AGENT
§ 15-33 OPERATOR’S AGENT.
   Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of
the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article
may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so
designating such agent shall within ten days notify the city secretary and gas
well division in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address
unless operations within the city are discontinued.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION V: GAS WELL PERMITS
§ 15-34 GAS WELL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person wanting to engage in and operate in gas production activities
shall apply for and obtain a gas well permit under this article and shall
indicate what type of gas well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for
any person acting either for himself or herself or acting as agent, employee,
independent contractor or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in
any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing or operation of any
such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas without
first obtaining a gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with this
article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, re-working, initial
site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries,
fracturing and pressurizing. A permit shall not be required for seismic surveys
unless the survey is conducted on city owned property or city rights-of-way
unless such requirement is waived by the city.
   (b)   Operator must apply for and obtain a gas well permit for the drilling,
re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of each well.
   (c)   A gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering
and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new gas well
permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is re-
entering and drilling an abandoned well.
   (d)   When a gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the
drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of a
well, such gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling,
operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working,
testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity
associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well, provided,
however, that a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well
may be reworked for purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well
to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such
well.
   (e)   Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well using a drilling
rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion or to
conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written
notice to the gas inspector and post a sign as described below no less than ten
days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities
will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including whether
explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the
activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-
hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. The person
conducting the activities will post a sign on the property giving the public
notice of the activities, including the name, address and 24-hour phone number
of the person conducting the activities. If the gas inspector determines that
an inspection by the gas inspector is necessary, the operator will pay the city
for the inspection.
   (f)   (1)   A gas well permit shall automatically terminate if drilling of
the well bore has not commenced within 365 days from the date of the issuance
of the gas well permit.
      (2)   A gas well permit may be extended one time by the gas inspector for
an additional 365 days upon request by the operator if:
         a.   Operator provides proof that there are no additional protected
uses within 600 feet from the time of the filing of the original permit
applications; and
         b.   The request is submitted prior to the expiration of the original
permit.
      (3)   No permit shall be extended beyond the expiration date of the
current railroad commission permit.
   (g)   The gas well permits required by this article are in addition to and
are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of
this code or by any other governmental agency.
   (h)   (1)   No additional gas well permit or filing fees shall be required
for:
         a.   Any wells that are existing, previously permitted or approved by
the city, within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of the
2001 Gas Drilling Article (Ord. 14880);
         b.   Any wells where drilling has commenced on the effective date of
the 2001 ordinance;
         c.   Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has
commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of the 2001
ordinance; or
         d.   Any well that was planned for the land before the ninetieth day
before the effective date of its annexation and one or more licenses,
certificates, permits, approvals or other forms of authorization by a
governmental entity were required by law for such well and the completed
application for the initial authorization was filed before the date the
annexation proceedings were instituted.
      (2)   A person shall have 45 days after annexation into the city to
designate a gas operation as a pre-existing operation by filing a site plan
drawn to scale that shows the proposed location of the well or pad site with
respect to survey lines and the proposed associated production facilities, if
any, or designate an existing pad site as a multiple well site with the gas
inspector.
      (3)   An operator or property owner shall have 45 days after the
effective date of this article to notify the city of well sites existing prior
to January 1, 2009, that have a protected use (permitted or built), as defined
in the 2006 Gas Drilling Article (Ord. 16986), or a residential lot that is
located between 300 feet and 200 feet from an existing well site. Sites that
meet the above notice and distance requirements will be grandfathered to the
setback requirements existing prior to January 1, 2009. For residential lots
only, if the above required notice is not received by the city within 45 days,
the minimum setback distance may be reduced by the city council to 200 feet.
   (i)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within
any public park without the prior consent of the city council. The city council
shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis
prior to issuing the permit.
   (j)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within
any floodplain or floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM without
obtaining a floodplain development permit from the transportation and public
works department.
   (k)   No gas well permit shall be issued without an approved erosion control
and grading plan as required by the city to prevent any off site migration of
silt and sediment.
   (l)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city
owned property without the prior consent of the city council. The city council
shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis
prior to issuing the permit.
   (m)   No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within a
designated urban village without the prior consent of the city council unless
the site has, prior to November 10, 2009:
      (1)   An existing approved gas well permit;
      (2)   An existing approved gas well pad site permit; or
      (3)   A gas drilling and development site plan on property owned/leased
or controlled by the gas operator and approved by the development services
director.
   (n)   Multiple gas well pad site permit. At the time the operator submits an
application for the issuance for a single well permit, the operator, at his or
her option, may also request the issuance of a multiple well site permit for
drilling future wells. Applications for gas wells drilled on a multiple well
site shall comply with the following:
      (1)   For all purposes, the measurement shall be from the boundary line
of the pad site.
      (2)   If the pad site is located within 600 feet of a protected use at
the time of the filing of a multiple well site permit application, the
applicant must obtain a variance granted by the city council or waivers from
all protected uses within a 600 foot radius before the multiple well site
permit may be issued.
      (3)   Notice that a multiple well site permit application has been filed
with the city must be included in any notice to property owners and in the
published newspaper notice as required by §
15-36 for the initial gas well permit.
      (4)   All multiple well site permits must be filed of record by the
operator, at his or her expense in the applicable county deed records and
indicated on all applicable plats filed in the deed records. Each filed
multiple well site permit shall contain the address, lot and block, subdivision
name and plat volume and page of each lot, tract or parcel located within 1,000
feet of the multiple well site permit.
      (5)   Prior to the issuance of a multiple well site permit by the city,
the operator must place at least one sign on the property located in a
conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points visible from
the nearest right-of-way, street, roadway, public thoroughfare or protected use
adjacent to such property. The gas inspector may require additional signage if
the pad site fronts on more than one right-of-way, street, roadway or public
thoroughfare. The sign shall indicate that a multiple well site permit to drill
multiple wells for gas on this site has been applied for, and shall further set
forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/
operator at the number indicated on the sign. A permanent sign approved by the
gas inspector indicating that a multiple well site permit has been issued shall
remain posted at the pad site location for the duration of the multiple well
site permit.
      (6)   Prior to the commencement of drilling of each additional gas well
on a permitted multiple well site permit pad site, the operator must submit an
application for the issuance of a gas well permit, for each such future well,
in accordance with this article.
      (7)   All subsequent gas wells drilled on a permitted gas well pad site
permit shall comply with all regulations, including the notice and landscape
provisions, and all other provisions of this article, except for the distance
setback requirements related to drilling a well from a protected use. No
variance or waiver for a distance setback from a protected use shall be
required for subsequent wells; however, no well shall be drilled closer than
300 feet from any protected use or public building.
      (8)   No multiple well site permit shall be issued for a gas well pad
site greater than five acres in surface area or the amount of surface area
acreage included in the surface use agreement, whichever is larger.
      (9)   All wells will be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the outer pad
site boundary.
      (10)   The multiple well site permit shall automatically terminate if
drilling of the initial well bore has not commenced within 365 days from the
date of the issuance of the gas well permit unless the initial gas well permit
is extended by the gas inspector.
      (11)   The issuance of a multiple well site permit is for the sole
purpose of allowing future wells to be drilled on an existing pad site and
within 600 feet of protected uses without obtaining waivers and/or variances as
set forth in §
15-36 of this article. All gas wells drilled upon a permitted gas well pad site
must otherwise comply with any drilling distance regulations from a protected
use or other structure as required by state law and applicable fire code
regulations and all other provisions of this article.
   (o)   By acceptance of any gas well permit issued pursuant to this article,
the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the
provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be
incorporated in any gas well permit issued pursuant to this article with the
same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such gas
well permit.
   (p)   Gas drilling review committee (GDRC).
      (1)   All applications where a city council waiver is required, all
applications that involve noncommercial truck routes, all applications for gas
pipelines or gas pipeline facilities located in a private residential area and
all applications for line compressor sites requiring rezoning to a “PD” planned
development district shall be reviewed by the gas drilling review committee
(GDRC) prior to that application being presented to the zoning commission, the
city council or administratively issued by the city staff, where applicable.
      (2)   The GDRC shall be composed of city staff representatives from the
transportation and public works, gas inspectors, water, planning and
development, law, community relations and park and recreation departments. A
representative from the city’s parks advisory board shall sit as a committee
member when the application involves drilling within 600 feet of a public park,
drilling on a public park or a pipeline through a public park. The committee
shall be chaired by the assistant director of planning and development - gas
well division.
      (3)   a.   Notice of GDRC meeting shall be mailed ten days after receipt
of the application to:
            1.   All neighborhood associations within:
               a.   One-half mile of drill site; or
               b.   One-half mile of line compressor site.
            2.   All property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed well or
a line compressor site;
            3.   All property owners fronting or along the noncommercial truck
route; and
            4.   All property owners along the proposed private residential
area pipeline route.
         b.   Notices shall follow the same format used for adoption of zoning
regulations and district boundary changes and shall include a description of
the application, the proposed truck route, distance setbacks, a location map
and the GDRC meeting date and time. Notices shall include the email and phone
contact information for the operator and the street address for the well
location.
         c.   All notices and applications shall be placed on the city’s
webpage in an electronic format.
      (4)   The GDRC meeting shall be conducted in the following manner.
         a.   The operator (or pipeline operator, where applicable) shall
present overview of the application.
         b.   Staff shall present the staff report including applicable article
regulations.
         c.   Following the presentations, a total of 15 minutes shall be
allotted for citizen comments from the notified persons listed in subsection
(o)(3) above.
      (5)   If the application involves a public park issue, the parks advisory
board representative shall report the recommendation of the GDRC to the park
advisory board at their next meeting.
      (6)   No continuance shall be allowed unless requested by the operator/
applicant. If a continuance is requested, the operator must submit new
revisions within two weeks of the initial GDRC hearing date. Notices to
neighborhood associations and property owners as outlined in subsection (o)(3)
above will be resent with revised information.
      (7)   The GDRC shall submit a written report with the mayor and council
communication permit request on all applications involving gas wells or
multiple well site permit without waivers and pipelines within the city’s
rights-of-way. The GDRC shall also submit a written report to the zoning
commission for a line compressor site requiring rezoning to a “PD” planned
development district. The report shall include the staff and citizen concerns
and any unresolved issues. The GDRC shall submit a recommendation to the gas
well division on all applications that involve noncommercial truck routes and
all applications for pipelines or pipeline facilities located in a private
residential area.
      (8)   The results and recommendations of the GDRC shall be sent to the
operator or pipeline operator and shall be posted on the city’s webpage within
two weeks following the GDRC meeting.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 18910-2009, §
3, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 20927-09-2013, §§ 2, 3, 4, passed 9-10-2013; eff. 9-
20-2013; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 15-35 GAS WELL PERMIT APPLICATION AND FILING FEES.
   (a)   Every application for a gas well permit issued pursuant to this
article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly
authorized to sign on his or her behalf, and filed with the gas inspector.
   (b)   Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set forth in
the city code of articles for gas drilling and production fees.
   (c)   The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The date of the application and type of gas well permit requested;
      (2)   An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for
the gas operation, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic
formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat should reference
subdivision, block and lot numbers;
      (3)   Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment,
chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas operation indicating
commercial and noncommercial routes;
      (4)   Proposed well name;
      (5)   Surface owner name(s) and address(es) of the pad site property;
      (6)   Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a
corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership,
the names and addresses of the general partners;
      (7)   Name and address of individual designated to receive notice;
      (8)   Name of representative with regulatory response and supervisory
authority over all gas operation site activities and a phone number that is
answered on a 24-hour basis;
      (9)   Location and description of all improvements and structures within
600 feet of the well;
      (10)   Owner and address of each parcel of property within 600 feet of
the proposed drill site;
      (11)   A surveyed site plan of the proposed operation site shall display
a registered professional land surveyor seal, a legend with scale for
measurements and a complete legal description. The site plan shall include
specific details to the projected location of the major components of the
drilling site, the location of all improvements and equipment, including the
location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not
limited to, tanks, city regulated pipelines, compressors, separators, lights,
storage sheds, fencing, driveway approaches and any access roads. Surveyed site
plan shall show the location of specific wells, pipelines, tanks and reservoir
(s) in relationship to existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines and
any other utility easements. The site plan shall also indicate floodway,
floodplain or city recognized drainage ways and the elevation and slope of the
pad site which indicates compliance with the then current fill article,
impacted vegetation, tree survey, creeks and other topographic features,
compliance with the landscaping requirements as set out in §
15-43 of this article, adjacent buildings and other structures and the measured
distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and
permanent fencing and landscaping;
      (12)   The name, address and a phone number that is answered on a 24-hour
basis of the person to be notified in case of an emergency;
      (13)   The exact and correct acreage and number of wells, if applicable,
included in the gas well permit application;
      (14)   Copies of all reports submitted to the commission as required by
the gas inspector;
      (15)   An original executed city-wide road maintenance agreement signed
and approved by the city must be filed with the city secretary that provides
that the operator shall repair, at his or her own expense, any damage to roads,
streets or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity
associated with the preparation, drilling, production and operation of gas
wells;
      (16)   Copies of erosion control and grading plans;
      (17)   A description of the water source to be used during drilling;
      (18)   A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by
the Environmental Protection Agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be
submitted to the City of Fort Worth, Department of Environmental Management,
Stormwater Division, three days prior to the commencement of any onsite
activity;
      (19)   A copy of the determination by the Texas commission on
environmental quality (TCEQ) of the depth of useable quality ground water;
      (20)   Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this
article;
      (21)   A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated
representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the
best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true
and correct;
      (22)   All applicable city departmental reviews and approvals;
      (23)   Fracture pond permit/approval;
      (24)   A surface reclamation plan;
      (25)   The proposed gathering pipeline route from the well to the
transmission pipeline, including all existing and proposed city rights-of-way
and public or private property crossed by the proposed gathering pipeline;
      (26)   Noise management plan as outlined in §
15-42(b);
      (27)   All required application and gas well permit fees; and
      (28)   A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together with
attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill site.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued until a copy of the approved railroad
commission permit to drill together with all submitted attachments and survey
plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites are submitted to
the gas inspector.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-36 GAS WELL PERMITTING PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Wells located within 600 feet of a protected use.
      (1)   A gas well permit shall not be issued for any well to be drilled
within 600 feet of a residence, religious institution, hospital building,
school or public park without:
         a.   Waiver granted by the city council; or
         b.   Written notarized waiver granted by all the protected use
property owners within a 600 foot radius around the proposed well pursuant to
this section. All waivers must identify the property address, block and lot
number, subdivision name (if applicable) and plat volume and page and be filed,
at the expense of the operator, in the applicable county records prior to the
application of a gas well permit.
      (2)   This setback distance may be reduced, but never less than 300 feet,
from any residence, religious institution, hospital building, school or public
park.
      (3)   This provision applies to any existing residence, religious
institution, hospital building, school or public park or where a building
permit has been issued for a protected use on the date the application for a
permit is filed with the gas inspector.
      (4)   The measurement of the 600-foot distance shall be made from the
well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, to the closest exterior point of the building or boundary line of a
public park or property line of a school.
   (b)   Application requirements. In addition to the requirements of §
15-35, an application for a gas well permit to drill a well within 600 feet of
a protected use shall include a letter to the assistant director of planning
and development - gas well division requesting a public hearing to obtain a gas
well permit from city council or a copy of the written notarized waivers from
the protected uses within 600 feet of the proposed well and evidence of filing
of each waiver in the applicable county deed records.
   (c)   Permitting procedure for request of a waiver by the city council.
      (1)   Within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, a site plan
and a request for a waiver to drill a gas well within 600 feet of a protected
use, the gas inspector shall schedule the matter on a city council night agenda
for a public hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose
thereof to the applicant and any other party who has requested in writing to be
so notified. The 45-day period shall not begin to run until the applicant/
operator has provided the gas inspector with a complete application package.
      (2)   At least 20 days, and no more than 30 days prior to the date of the
public hearing before the city council for a waiver and the issuance of a gas
well permit within 600 feet of a protected use, the city shall notify, at
operator’s expense, each surface owner of property, as shown by the current
City of Fort Worth fire department address system and the current tax rolls
within 1,000 feet of the proposed well or boundary of a multiple well site not
owned by or under lease to the operator of the hearing date and time. The
notice shall contain an internet link for information on gas drilling, the
number of wells requested by the applicant, that drilling may commence within
365 days from the date of issuance of the permit, and contact telephone numbers
for city staff and the operator/applicant. Such notice shall be deposited
properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice shall be
sent by the city to all registered neighborhood associations within one-half
mile of the proposed drill site.
      (3)   At least 15 days, and no more than 20 days prior to the date of the
public hearing before city council for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a
protected use under this article, operator shall publish a notice at operator’s
expense, in one issue of the local section of a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, for ten consecutive days. An affidavit by the printer
or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be
filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such
publication. All notices shall follow a format required by the city.
      (4)   At least 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing before
city council for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected use under
this article the operator shall, at operator’s expense, erect at least one
sign, as approved by the gas inspector, no less than three feet by three feet,
upon the premises upon which a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected
use has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a
conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest to
any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such
property. The gas inspector may require additional signage if the premises
fronts on more than one right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare.
         a.   The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a gas well permit
to drill for gas within 600 feet of a protected use has been requested and
state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and shall further set
forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the operator/
applicant at the number indicated on the sign.
         b.   The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed
a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other
official action concerning this article.
         c.   The sign shall remain posted at the pad site for the duration of
the gas well permit to drill within 600 feet of a protected use.
      (5)   All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient
upon substantial compliance with this section.
      (6)   After a permit application and site plan is submitted to drill
within 600 feet of a protected use, the gas inspector shall evaluate the public
impact of the proposed activity. The gas inspector shall consider the proposed
site and the proposed operations or drilling program and shall draft
recommended restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance
for drilling or other operations, special equipment and procedures, recommended
noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements the gas inspector
deems appropriate. The recommendation shall be submitted to the city council
for consideration prior to the public hearing along with evidence that timely
actual notice of the hearing was given to all persons as required by this
article.
      (7)   At the public hearing and before the city council considers the
merits of the application and the recommendations of the gas inspector, the
operator/applicant shall provide evidence of a certificate of publication
establishing timely publication of the notice of the hearing, and that the
operator/applicant has otherwise complied with or satisfied all other
requirements of this article, including full and complete compliance with the
insurance and security requirements.
      (8)   The burden of proof on all matters, except notice, considered in
the hearing shall be upon the applicant/operator.
      (9)   The city council shall review the application and any other related
information. The city council shall consider the following in deciding whether
to grant a waiver and authorize the issuance of a gas well permit to drill
within 600 feet of a protected use:
         a.   Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the
circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular
location and the character of the improvements located thereon;
         b.   Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the
orderly growth and development of the city;
         c.   Whether there are other alternative well site locations that
would allow reasonable access to explore, develop and produce the mineral
estate without creating mineral waste;
         d.   Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health
and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the gas well
permit conditions to be imposed;
         e.   Whether there is approved access for the city fire personnel and
firefighting equipment;
         f.   Whether there is reasonable access to the gas well site that
minimizes the impact to residential properties if the use of non-designated
commercial or truck routes are required;
         g.   Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general
public by operations conducted in compliance with the gas well permit
conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors:
            1.   The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore,
develop and produce the minerals; and
            2.   The availability of alternative drill sites, both presently
and at other times during the lease term.
         h.   The recommendations of the gas inspector.
      (10)   The city council may require an increase in the operator/
applicant’s proposed distance that the well is to be set back from any
residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or
public park or require any change in operation, plan, design, layout or any
change in the on-site and technical regulations in §§
15-42 and
15-43 of this article, including fencing, screening, lighting, delivery times,
noise levels, tank height or any other matters reasonably required by public
interest.
      (11)   The city council may accept, reject or modify the application in
the interest of securing compliance with this article, the city code and/or to
protect the health and welfare of the community.
   (d)   Permitting procedure for a waiver from protected use property owners.
      (1)   No application for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected
use by waiver of protected uses shall be accepted unless the written notarized
waivers are obtained from all protected use property owners within 600 feet of
the proposed well site.
         a.   Waivers must be in a format approved by the city and shall
include an aerial exhibit attached clearly depicting the area of a proposed pad
site where well development could occur and the closest dimension to the
protected use for which the waiver is being requested. Signatures are required
on both the form and exhibit. The waiver form will be double sided and printed
in both Spanish and English allowing the property owner to execute the waiver
in their language of choice.
         b.   Written notarized waivers granted by all the protected use
property owners within a 600-foot radius around the proposed well or boundary
of multiple well site must be filed, at the expense of the operator, in the
applicable county records. All waivers must identify the property address,
block and lot number, subdivision name and plat volume and page number. Copies
of filed protected use property owner waivers must be submitted with the filing
of a completed application for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected
use.
      (2)   If the operator fails to obtain written waivers from all property
owners within a 600-foot radius around the proposed well, or boundary of
multiple well site the operator must submit a request for a waiver to drill a
gas well within 600 feet of a protected use from city council pursuant to the
requirements of subsection (e) below or modify the well location to comply with
the 600 foot setback from all protected uses. Waivers from new protected use
property owners shall not be required for an approved or existing multiple well
site permit.
      (3)   a.   Upon receipt of copies of all protected use waivers filed in
the applicable county deed records and a completed application by the operator,
the city shall notify, at operator’s expense, each surface owner of property as
shown by the current City of Fort Worth fire department addresses within 1,000
feet of the proposed well or boundary of multiple well site not owned by or
under lease to the operator.
         b.   The notice shall contain the information as outlined below, an
internet link for information on gas drilling, the number of wells requested by
the applicant and contact telephone numbers for the city staff and operator/
applicant. Notice shall be sent by the city to all registered neighborhood
associations within one-half mile of the proposed drill site.
      (4)   At least ten days prior to the date of filing of an application for
a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected use by protected use waiver
under this article with the gas inspector, operator shall publish the notice at
the expense of the operator, in one issue of the local section of a newspaper
of general circulation in the city for ten consecutive days. An affidavit by
the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice
shall be filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such
publication. All notices shall follow a format required by the city.
      (5)   At least ten days prior to, but not more than 30 days, the date of
filing of an application for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected
use under this section with the gas inspector, the operator, at operator’s
expense, shall erect at least one sign, as approved by the gas inspector, no
less than three feet by three feet, upon the premises upon which a gas well
permit within 600 feet of a protected use by protected use waiver permit has
been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a
conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest
right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property.
The gas inspector may require additional signage if the premises fronts on more
than one right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare.
         a.   The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a gas well permit
within 600 feet of a protected use by protected use waiver to drill for gas has
been requested and shall further set forth that additional information can be
acquired by telephoning the operator at the number indicated on the sign.
         b.   The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed
a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other
official action concerning this article.
         c.   Any sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the
gas inspector or the city council.
      (6)   All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient
upon substantial compliance with this section.
   (e)   Permitting procedure for gas wells located greater than 600 feet from
a protected use; notice for gas well permit.
      (1)   a.   At least ten days after the date of filing of an application
for a gas well permit with the gas inspector under this article, city shall
notify, at the expense of the operator, each surface owner of property, as
shown by the current City of Fort Worth Fire Department address system and
current tax roll within 1,000 feet of the proposed well not owned by or under
lease to the operator. Such notice, as outlined below, shall be by depositing
the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail.
         b.   The notice shall contain the information as outlined below and
shall also include the date and time of the next monthly informational meeting
at city hall, an internet link for information on gas drilling, the number of
wells requested by the applicant, that drilling may commence within 180 days
from the issuance of the permit and contact telephone numbers for city staff
and operator/applicant. Notice shall be sent to all registered neighborhood
associations within one-half mile of the proposed drill site.
      (2)   At least ten days prior to the date of filing of an application for
a gas well permit under this article with the gas inspector, operator shall
publish a notice at the expense of the operator, in one issue of the local
section of a newspaper of general circulation in the city for ten consecutive
days. An affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating
publication of the notice shall be filed with the application and will be prima
facie evidence of such publication. All notices shall follow a format required
by the city.
      (3)   At least ten days prior to, but not more than 30 days, the date of
filing of an application for a gas well permit under this article with the gas
inspector, the operator, at operator’s expense, shall erect at least one sign,
as approved by the gas inspector, no less than three feet by three feet, upon
the premises upon which a gas well permit has been requested. Where possible,
the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the
property at a point or points nearest right-of-way, street, roadway or public
thoroughfare adjacent to such property. The gas inspector may require
additional signage if the premises fronts on more than one right-of-way,
street, roadway or public thoroughfare.
         a.   The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a gas well permit
to drill for gas has been requested and shall further set forth that additional
information can be acquired by telephoning the operator at the number indicated
on the sign.
         b.   The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed
a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other
official action concerning this article.
         c.   The sign shall remain posted at the pad site for the duration of
the gas well permit.
      (4)   All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient
upon substantial compliance with this section.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 19402-10-2010,
§ 3, passed 10-12-2010)
§ 15-37 ISSUANCE OF GAS WELL PERMITS.
   (a)   It is the responsibility of the gas inspector to review and approve or
disapprove all applications for gas well drilling permits based on the criteria
established by this article. The gas inspector, after the filing of a completed
application and remittance of all fees, insurance and security per the
requirements of this article for a gas well permit, shall determine whether or
not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this
article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled or the facility to be
installed is in compliance with the distance requirements for the requested gas
well permit on the date the completed application is received by the gas
inspector.
   (b)   The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or
buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on
the date the application for a gas well permit is filed with the gas inspector.
   (c)   If all the requirements of this article are met, the gas inspector
shall issue a gas well permit for the drilling of the well or the installation
of the facilities applied for.
   (d)   If the gas inspector denies a gas well permit application for reasons
other than lack of required distance as set out in this article for the
requested gas well permit, he or she shall notify the operator in writing of
such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of
the written decision of the gas inspector to deny the gas well permit, the
operator may:
      (1)   Cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the
application to the gas inspector for approval and issuance of the gas well
permit; or
      (2)   File an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in
this article pursuant to §
15-49, Appeals of this article.
   (e)   If the gas inspector determines that the operator has complied with
all of the provisions of this article but that the proposed drill site does not
comply with the distance requirements of this article the gas inspector shall
notify the operator. The operator may modify the well location or resubmit the
application for a gas well permit within 600 feet of a protected use. Operator
must comply with all the application requirements for a gas well permit within
600 feet of a protected use.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-38 AMENDED GAS WELL PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An operator may request to amend a gas well permit application without re-
noticing, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or
incorporated by reference as part of) the application, provided that the
distance to protected uses is not decreased.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-39 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF GAS WELL PERMIT; ISSUANCE OF A CITATION,
EFFECT.
   (a)   The gas inspector may suspend or revoke the gas well permit or issue a
citation pursuant to the provisions of this article. If the operator is in
compliance with the approved noise management plan of §
15-42(b), Noise and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given 24
hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified
source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-hour period
may be granted in the event that the source of the violation can not be
identified after reasonable diligence by the operator.
   (b)   No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of
the gas well permit issued under this article during any period of any gas well
permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of
the city in suspending or revoking the gas well permit. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide
efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or
revocation of the gas well permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as
required by the commission.
   (c)   If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time
specified in this article, the gas inspector, upon written notice to the
operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any
appropriate action.
   (d)   Operator may, within 30 days of the date of the decision of the gas
inspector in writing to suspend or revoke a gas well permit, file an appeal to
the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to §
15-49, Appeals of this article.
   (e)   If an application for a gas well permit is denied by the gas
inspector, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit application from
being submitted to the gas inspector for the same well.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 19402-10-2010,
§ 1, passed 10-12-2010)
§ 15-40 PERIODIC REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator shall notify the gas inspector of any changes to the
following information within one business week after the change occurs:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the operator;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the person designated to
receive notices from the city (which person must be a resident of Texas that
can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and
      (3)   The operator’s emergency response plan (including “drive-to-maps”
from public rights-of-way to each drill site).
   (b)   The operator shall notify the gas inspector of any change to the name,
address and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority
over drilling or operations activities within one business day.
   (c)   The operator shall provide a copy of any “incident reports” or written
complaints submitted to the commission within 30 days after the operator has
notice of the existence of such reports or complaints.
   (d)   Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing
on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the gas inspector
that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall
submit a written report to the gas inspector identifying any changes to the
information that was included in the application for the applicable gas well
permit that have not been previously reported to the city.
   (e)   Beginning on December 31 after each well is permitted by the city, the
operator shall provide an operational status report for every well permitted to
the operator within the city. The report shall include the well name, API
number, lease name, city case number, commission permit number, commission
lease ID number and current status whether pending, drilling, completing,
producing, plugged or abandoned.
   (f)   An operator and/or a line compressor operator shall notify the gas
inspector of any transfer of operations to a new operator and/or line
compressor operator and shall file all necessary documentation with the gas
inspector. The current operator and/or line compressor operator shall comply
with
Chapter 15 of the city code for all sites until the gas inspector has received
all necessary documentation and has issued written notice that such requirement
has been satisfied. Any sureties and other guarantees assigned to the city
shall not be released until the new operator has shown compliance with the
city’s requirements for gas drilling to the gas inspector.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 21219-04-2014,
§ 1, passed 4-22-2014)
DIVISION VI: INSURANCE, BOND AND INDEMNITY
§ 15-41 BOND, LETTERS OF CREDIT, INDEMNITY, INSURANCE.
   (a)   General requirements. The operator shall be required to:
      (1)   Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the gas
well permit issued hereunder;
      (2)   Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash,
waste and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the operations, and
after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the
same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations;
      (3)   Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and
employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of
action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of
litigation, court costs and attorney’s fees, for injury to or death of any
person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the
work done by operator under a gas well permit:
         a.   Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator’s
sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and any other person or
entity; and
         b.   Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused
in whole or in part by the negligence of operator.
      (4)   Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due
to breach of any terms of the gas well permit; and
      (5)   Promptly restore to its former condition any public property
damaged by the gas operation.
   (b)   Bond, irrevocable letter of credit.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall
provide the gas inspector with a security instrument in the form of a bond or
an irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with this subsection (b).
Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the gas
inspector by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking
institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
         a.   During drilling. An operator drilling between one and five wells
in the city at any time shall provide a blanket bond or letter of credit that
meets the requirements of this subsection (b) in the principal minimum amount
of $150,000. Such blanket bond or letter of credit shall be increased by
$50,000 for the sixth and each additional well being drilled in the city.
         b.   During production. An operator with wells that are producing and
for which all drilling operations have ceased shall provide a blanket bond or
letter of credit that meets the requirements of this subsection (b) in the
principal minimum amounts as follows:
            1.   Up to 75 wells: $100,000;
            2.   Between 76 and 150 wells: $150,000; and
            3.   More than 150 wells: $250,000.
      (2)   a.   The city shall be authorized to draw upon such bond or letter
of credit to:
            1.   Recover any fines or penalties assessed under this article; or
            2.   To pay the city for the cost of doing any work required to
remedy any default by the operator under any provision of this article.
         b.   If the city determines that a default has occurred in the
performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written
notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be
done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed to be reasonably
necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the
operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the
work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city 125% of
the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event,
however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents
a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the
failure involves the operator’s failure to provide periodic reports as required
by this article.
         c.   The city shall be authorized to draw against the bond or letter
of credit provided hereunder to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon
receipt of such moneys, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed
convenient and necessary to cause the required work to be performed and
completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of
said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned
under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded
from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and
restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. In
the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or
refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as
set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to
honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit
or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way
of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the
operator, or by both such methods.
      (3)   Requirements for bonds. A bond shall be executed by a reliable
bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable
to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas well
permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of
six months after the expiration of the gas well permit term or until the well
is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The
operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city,
as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the
terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be
submitted to the gas inspector with a copy of the same provided to the city
secretary.
      (4)   Requirements for letters of credit. A letter of credit shall be
issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become
effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued. The letter of
credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months
after the expiration of the gas well permit term. If the letter of credit is
for a time period less than the life of the well as required by this article,
the operator must agree to either renew the letter of credit or replace the
letter of credit with a bond in the amount required by this article, on or
before 60 days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit. If the
operator fails to deliver to the city either the renewal letter of credit or
replacement bond in the appropriate amount on or before 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the letter of credit, the city may draw the entire face
amount of the attached letter of credit to be held by the City of Fort Worth as
security for operator’s performance of its obligations under this article.
      (5)   When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of
credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations
of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and
notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a
satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in
compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
   (c)   Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required
pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of
insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business
in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the gas
well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator’s
right to operate under such gas well permit shall immediately cease until the
operator files additional insurance as provided herein.
      (1)   General requirements applicable to all policies.
         a.   The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be
endorsed as an “additional insured” to all policies except employers liability
coverage under the operator’s workers compensation policy.
         b.   All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for
environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess
or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis.
         c.   All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-VIII or
better rating by the most current version of the A. M. Best Key Rating Guide or
with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
         d.   Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and
shall be on a “per occurrence” basis unless otherwise stipulated herein.
         e.   Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Fort
Worth, Planning and Development Department, 1000 Throckmorton Street, Fort
Worth, Texas 76102, evidencing all the required coverage, including
endorsements, prior to the issuance of a gas well permit.
         f.   All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation
providing rights of recovery in favor of the city.
         g.   Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance
documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement
specified herein.
         h.   Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum
thirty-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal and/or material change in policy
terms or coverage. A ten days’ notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-
payment of premium.
         i.   During the term of the gas well permit, the operator shall
report, in a timely manner, to the gas inspector any known loss occurrence
which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in
a property loss.
         j.   Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be
furnished to the city.
      (2)   Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must
include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed
operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability,
underground resources and equipment hazard damage, broad form property damage,
independent contractors’ protective liability and personal injury. This
coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence
for bodily injury and property damage.
      (3)   Excess or umbrella liability. Five million dollar excess when
necessary.
      (4)   Environmental pollution liability coverage.
         a.   Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of
the gas well permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable
to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or
of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs;
and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation,
defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from
the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least
$5,000,000 per loss.
         b.   Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental, as well as gradual
pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors,
fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or
other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
         c.   The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall
purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended
coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to
coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the
permit by the city.
      (5)   Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a
well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and
pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses,
including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of
residents:
         a.   Five million dollars per occurrence/combined single limit; and
         b.   Five hundred thousand dollars sub-limit endorsement may be added
for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control.
      (6)   Workers compensation and employers liability insurance.
         a.   Workers compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits.
         b.   Employers liability shall be a minimum of $500,000 per accident.
         c.   Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of
the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws.
      (7)   Automobile liability insurance.
         a.   Combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily
injury and property damage.
         b.   Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles.
      (8)   Certificates of insurance.
         a.   The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the
State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer.
         b.   The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be:
            1.   Underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas
state board of insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the
city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of
well coverage;
            2.   Set forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to
requirements and instructions contained herein; and
            3.   Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation,
termination or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be
endorsed to read “THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30
DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY
IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE TEN DAYS’ ADVANCE
WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.”
         c.   Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section
shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance.
   (d)   Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Each gas well
permit issued by the gas inspector shall include the following language:
Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge all claims, demands,
actions, judgments and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or
assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Fort Worth and/or its
departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors,
volunteers or employees, created by or arising out of personal injuries, known
or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way
incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by
the operator under a gas well permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect,
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Fort Worth, Texas, its departments,
agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors or
volunteers from and against each and every claim, demand or cause of action and
any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines,
penalties, costs, fees and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Fort
Worth, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants or employees,
including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection
therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns or any
third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in
connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a
gas well permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Fort Worth, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees,
successors, assigns, sponsors or volunteers from any liabilities or damages
suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs or judgments against the city,
its departments, its officers, agents, servants or employees, created by, or
arising out of the acts or omissions of the City of Fort Worth occurring on the
drill site or in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas
wells including, but not limited to, claims and damages arising in whole or in
part from the negligence of the City of Fort Worth occurring on the drill site
or in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas wells. It is
understood and agreed that the indemnity provided for in this section is an
indemnity extended by the operator to indemnify and protect the City of Fort
Worth, Texas and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants or employees
from the consequences of the negligence of the City of Fort Worth, Texas and/or
its departments, agents, officers, servants or employees, whether that
negligence is the sole or contributing cause of the resultant injury, death
and/or damage.
   (e)   Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a
resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may
be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall
within ten days notify the gas inspector in writing of any change in such agent
or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and
abandonment is complete.
   (f)   Acceptance and indemnity agreement. The operator who has a net worth
of not less than $50,000,000, as shown in such owner’s or operator’s most
recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity
agreement in lieu of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit and insurance
requirements set forth in this article, provided that such acceptance and
indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the city
attorney and the city’s director of risk management. The gas inspector may
request an annual review of the operator’s most recent audited financial
statements to assure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION VII: ONSITE AND TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
§ 15-42 TECHNICAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Onsite requirements.
      (1)   Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with
the rules of the railroad commission and pursuant to §
15-45 of this article.
      (2)   Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment
shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is
being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas
operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the
commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The
operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow
lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required
by the commission.
      (3)   Closed loop mud systems. A closed loop mud system shall be required
for all drilling and reworking operations for all gas wells. Gas wells located
on an open space of not less than 25 acres with no operations to be conducted
within 1,000 feet of a protected use may use a lined earthen pit instead of a
closed loop mud system.
      (4)   Compliance. Operator shall comply with all applicable federal,
state and city requirements at all times.
      (5)   Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge or cause or
permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum,
asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or
brine from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in
connection with any gas operation in or upon any body of water or any private
property in the city or in or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets,
lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain without permits from the
appropriate city departments.
      (6)   Drilling notice. The operator shall provide 48-hour notice to the
gas inspector before the start of drilling operations, fracture stimulation,
work over or servicing operations.
      (7)   Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing
shall be done during daytime hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if
the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator
to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe prior to the time
the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down
the annulus and up the drill pipe.
      (8)   Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations
shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable,
dust, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best
accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other
hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be constructed
and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying
substances or effects are minimized by the operations carried on at any
drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto to avoid injury
to or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity. The site or structures shall
not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven
technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in
this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing
factors of dust, vibration and odor.
      (9)   Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall
be located in a manner compatible to those already installed in the surrounding
area or subdivision.
      (10)   Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be
permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be
generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform
to the city articles and the appropriate national codes.
      (11)   Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any gas or
other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the gas
inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to
minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas
wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission,
Texas natural resource conservation commission, department of transportation
and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and city fire code. A copy of the
emergency response plan shall be kept on-site.
      (12)   Equipment painted. All production equipment on the site shall be
painted and maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks,
buildings and structures. No company logos or advertisement shall be allowed.
      (13)   Explosives. Use of explosive charges within the city limits shall
require a permit issued by the bomb and arson section of the City of Fort Worth
fire department.
      (14)   Fire notice. In the event of a fire or discovery of a fire, smoke
or unauthorized release of flammable or hazardous materials on any property,
the operator shall immediately report such condition to the fire department in
accordance with the City of Fort Worth Fire Code. The reporting limits for
hazardous materials release shall conform to the requirements of the railroad
commission and not exceed any state or federal permitting limit. A copy of the
hazardous materials release records required by Texas commission on
environmental quality (TCEQ) shall be forwarded to the fire marshal on an
annual basis.
      (15)   Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and
supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable
federal, state or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the
operator’s cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times
during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible
for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped
with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change
in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an appropriately labeled
emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line.
      (16)   Fracturing operations.
         a.   All formation fracture stimulation operations shall be conducted
during daytime hours.
         b.   At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator
shall notify the gas inspector and post a sign at the entrance of the well site
advising the public of the date the operations will commence.
         c.   “Flowback” operations to recover fluids used during fracture
stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, subject to noise
restrictions of §
15-42.
         d.   A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations.
         e.   At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to
the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or
into a portable tank.
      (17)   Fresh water fracture ponds.
         a.   Permit required. The construction of a fresh water fracture pit
shall require a permit from the city after approval from the following city
departments:
            1.   Fire department in order to address the location of the fresh
water fracture pit;
            2.   Water department for sewer line and water line review;
            3.   Transportation and public works for master thoroughfare and
floodplain review;
            4.   Planning and development for forestry review; and
            5.   Any other applicable city department as determined by the
city.
         b.   Fracture pond. No construction of the fracture pond shall
commence until review and approval from all city departments are received and a
permit is issued by the gas inspector.
         c.   Fresh water fracture pond. No fresh water fracture pond may be
placed in any city recognized drainage way or FEMA floodplain or floodway
without a floodplain development permit from the transportation and public
works department. Fresh water fracture pond shall not be placed in existing or
future rights-of-way as shown on the city’s master thoroughfare plan.
         d.   Compliance. Construction and maintenance of the fresh water
fracture pit must comply with all city, state and federal regulations.
         e.   Location. All freshwater fracture ponds located on a tract of
land not adjacent to a gas drilling pad site shall be located in “AG”
Agricultural, “I” Light Industrial, “J” Medium Industrial and “K” Heavy
Industrial zoning districts unless otherwise authorized by the gas inspector
for the purpose of reducing total number of fracture ponds. All freshwater
fracture ponds located in urban villages shall require approval by the city
council.
         f.   On location. The permit or authorization issued by the city shall
be maintained on the location at all times during construction of the fresh
water fracture pit.
         g.   Pit requirements. All pits shall meet the following requirements.
            1.   Fresh water fracture pits shall not be lined with a synthetic
impervious liner unless approved by the gas inspector. Existing liners shall be
removed at the time any pit is reworked, enlarged, restored or altered unless
otherwise authorized by the gas inspector.
            2.   The fresh water fracture pit shall be enclosed with open
design chain link black or dark green fencing on all four sides.
            3.   Pits shall be maintained in a manner utilizing best management
practices to ensure the integrity of pit walls and liners. For purposes of this
subsection (a), BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES shall mean structural, nonstructural
and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and
practical means to control water storage in open pits in an urban or rural
setting.
            4.   No oil and gas waste by-products or salt water shall be
allowed in the fresh water fracture pit.
            5.   A sign at a conspicuous place or places on the property near
any right-of-way, street, road or public thoroughfare. The sign shall provide
the operator’s phone number for additional information.
         h.   Specific surface use agreement. The operator shall enter into a
specific surface use agreement with the surface owner that provides for the
maintenance and operation of the fracture pond when the pond is no longer under
the control or use of the operator or that the operator will restore the
property to its condition prior to the construction of the fracture pond. The
agreement shall be provided to the city.
         i.   Periodic tests. Periodic tests may be required by the city’s gas
well inspector. All costs for testing shall be borne by the operator or
permittee of the fresh water fracture pit. All samples collected for testing
shall be witnessed by the gas inspector or other designated city personnel.
      (18)   Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any well the
center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within 200 feet of
any existing fresh water well unless a waiver is obtained from the property
owner. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to
the fresh water well bore.
         a.   The operator of a gas well shall provide the gas inspector with a
“pre-drilling” and “post-drilling” water analysis and flow rate from any
existing fresh water well within 500 feet of the gas well.
         b.   An operator may drill a fresh water well in compliance with state
law within 200 feet of the wellbore to use for drilling and completion
operations. A fresh water well that is used for drilling and production
operations is excluded from the 200 foot setback for future gas wells drilled
on the permitted pad site.
         c.   A copy of the Texas water development board permit shall be
provided to the gas inspector along with the geographic coordinates of every
water well within 500 feet of the well bore.
         d.   A copy of all plugging and abandonment reports filed with the
state and/or transfer of ownership notice shall be provided to the gas
inspector and the water department.
         e.   The operator of a gas well shall provide the gas inspector with a
“pre-drilling” and “post-drilling” water analysis from the fresh water well if
the well is transferred to private or public use.
      (19)   Gas lift compressor. Any on-site compressor used to “lift gas”
shall be designed to comply with the noise requirements of this article.
      (20)   Gas processing onsite. Except for a conventional gas separator or
line heater, no refinery, processing, treating or absorption plant of any kind
shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises without
appropriate city permits and a certificate of occupancy.
      (21)   Grass, weeds, trash. All drill sites shall be kept clear of high
grass, weeds and combustible trash within a radius of 100 feet around any gas
tank or tanks or producing wells.
      (22)   Hazardous plan. Hazardous materials management plan (HMMP) and all
material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous materials that will be
located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the operations site
shall be submitted to the gas inspector for distribution to the director of the
emergency management office.
      (23)   Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any site to
be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads,
adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the site. To the
extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site
lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on
public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 300 feet.
      (24)   Mobilization and demobilization. Mobilization and demobilization
shall be prohibited before 9:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. Other than
mobilization and demobilization and advancing the bore hole, no other
activities shall be allowed on the site on Sundays.
      (25)   Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or
compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the
drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be
discharged into the open air unless equipped with an exhaust muffler, or
mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials
sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape
of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot.
      (26)   Pits. The following applies for pits used for drilling and
completion operations.
         a.   Lined earthen mud or circulating pits or a closed loop mud system
may be used for gas wells permitted prior to January, 2009.
         b.   All pits shall be approved by the applicable city department.
         c.   All pits and contents shall be de-watered, back-filled and
compacted following the schedule established by the statewide rules of the
railroad commission.
         d.   No drill cuttings, rotary mud or wastewater generated during
drilling operations may be buried on site unless permitted by the commission
and approved by the city after submission of an acceptable pre-burial test.
         e.   No pit shall be placed in a floodplain without obtaining a
floodplain development permit from the transportation and public works
department.
         f.   Every drill pit used for drilling operations shall be fenced on
all open sides during drilling operations and enclosed on all four (4) sides
with a chain link fence in compliance with §
15-43 after drilling operations have ceased.
         g.   No flowback water produced by fracture operations shall be placed
in any open pit without a copy of a valid state permit submitted to the gas
inspector.
      (27)   Private roads and drill sites.
         a.   Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private
roads used for access to the drill site and the site itself shall be at least
15 feet wide, drain appropriately, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet and
shall be surfaced with a crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent
dust and mud. All temporary driveway approaches must be approved by the city
prior to the commencement of any drilling operations. In particular cases these
requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the
discretion of the gas inspector and the city director of transportation and
public works after consideration of all circumstances including, but not
limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways;
distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are
not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners
is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to
wind. Watering, wetting or other methods or materials must be used to control
the dust on all roads adjacent to residential property.
         b.   A gated permanent approach meeting the city design requirements
shall be constructed at the entrance of the access road onto a public street
within 60 days after drilling operations have ceased or at the request of the
gas inspector.
      (28)   Reduced emission completion.
         a.   After fracturing or re-fracturing, operators shall employ
appropriate equipment and processes as soon as practicable to minimize natural
gas and associated vapor releases to the environment. All salable gas shall be
directed to the sales line as soon as practicable or shut in and conserved. All
wells that have a sales line shall be required to employ reduced emission
completion techniques and methods, but operators may request a variance from
the gas inspector if they believe that reduced emission completion techniques
or methods are not feasible or would endanger the safety of personnel or the
public.
         b.   Reduced emission completion techniques and methods shall not be
required for well(s) that do not have a sales line and:
            1.   Were permitted prior to July 1, 2009; or
            2.   Is the first permitted well on a pad site.
         c.   Flaring may be allowed in some instances as an alternative to
venting as allowed by the gas inspector. If burning of gases by open flame is
authorized by the gas inspector, then such open flame shall not be located
closer than 300 feet from any building not used in operations on the drilling
site and such open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize
detrimental effects to adjacent property owners.
      (29)   Salt water disposal wells. Salt water disposal wells shall not be
allowed or permitted within the corporate limits of the city.
      (30)   Signs.
         a.   A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate
on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to §
15-43 of this article. Such sign shall made from be durable material,
maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission,
shall have a surface area of not less than two square feet nor more than four
square feet and shall be lettered with the following:
            1.   Well name and number;
            2.   Name of operator;
            3.   The emergency 911 number; and
            4.   Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who
may be contacted in case of emergency.
         b.   Permanent weatherproof signs reading “DANGER NO SMOKING OR OPEN
FLAME ALLOWED IN THIS AREA” “PELIGRO NO FUMAR O INICIAR LLAMA EN ESTA AREA”
shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the
entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved
or designated by the fire chief of the city. Sign lettering shall be four
inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red
background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the
fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the
commission.
         c.   In accordance with the Fort Worth Fire Code, §§ 2703.5 and
2703.6, a National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA) 704 diamond hazard
identification signs are required on each tank and at the entrance to the site
adjacent to the operator’s sign. A label must be located on each tank
indicating exact chemicals that may be contained in the tank. Text shall be a
minimum of six inches in height, contrasting with the background color.
      (31)   Storage of equipment.
         a.   Onsite storage is prohibited. No equipment shall be stored on the
drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday
operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on
the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being
conducted on the site.
         b.   No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any
street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any site which
constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or
controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or
production operations on the site. The fire department shall be the entity that
determines whether any equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard.
      (32)   Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to
the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other
specifications are approved by the fire chief. The top of the tanks shall be no
higher than ten feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All storage tanks
shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an
impervious synthetic material. The secondary containment system shall be a
minimum of three feet in height and one and one-half times the contents of the
largest tank in accordance with the Fire Code, and buried at least one foot
deep. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connections to contain the
liquids from the storage tanks.
         a.   Secondary containment shall be required for all equipment.
Secondary containment shall be capable of containing a release of 150% of the
largest storage container within the containment and have adequate freeboard to
contain an average annual rain event.
         b.   Temporary flowback tanks shall be removed within 90 days after
completion of the gas well(s) at the pad site unless permission is obtained
from the gas inspector to extend the time period for no more than 30 days.
         c.   Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device
that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of
excess liquid accumulation in the tank.
         d.   No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities or other
aboveground facilities, other than the well head and flow lines, shall be
placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM or the 100-
year floodplain without a floodplain development permit obtained from the
department of transportation and public works.
         e.   All tanks shall be set back at least 75 feet from any public
street, road, highway or future street, or right-of-way or the nearest rail of
an operating railway.
         f.   Tank batteries, separators and equipment shall be set back at
least 200 feet from the protected use, public building or habitable structure
or 100 feet from the property line, whichever is greater. The setback shall
apply for any protected use, public building or habitable structure for which a
building permit has been issued on the date of the application for a drilling
permit. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, well
facilities and/or equipment, in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building.
      (33)   Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped
with a lightning arrestor system.
      (34)   Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full
compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission.
      (35)   Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the
well’s production. The fire department shall have access to the well site and
the shut-off valve in an emergency. Each well shall be equipped with an
automated valve that closes the well in the event of any abnormal increase in
operating pressure.
      (36)   Vapor recovery for storage tanks. Vapor recovery equipment shall
be required for tank batteries that have an estimated rolling annual aggregate
emissions rate of 25 tons or greater of total volatile organic hydrocarbons per
year per well head. Vapor recovery equipment must be operated and maintained in
such a way to ensure a 95% recovery efficiency between the internal and
external atmospheres of the tank(s).
      (37)   Vehicle truck routes. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or
production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to such streets
designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes designated by
the city code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on
a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a
commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to
fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial
delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council
for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-
trailer or any combination thereof. All vehicle truck routes must be approved
by the gas inspector before the gas well permit is issued. The gas inspector
shall have the authority to require an alternate route to minimize the impact
to surrounding uses.
      (38)   Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all
tanks used for storage shall conform to the following.
         a.   Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing
liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute
standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief
valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit
classification.
         b.   Except as provided in subsection (a)(3) above, drilling mud,
cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting
from or connected with the drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall
be discharged into a closed loop mud system. All disposals must be in
accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local,
state or federal agency.
         c.   Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials
shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility
not less often than every 30 days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be
removed as necessary.
         d.   All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with
the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and
any other applicable article of the city.
      (39)   Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel
on site during the drilling or re-working of a well when other workers are not
on the premises.
      (40)   Wellhead status wellbores, mouse holes, rat holes, cellars and
conduit casings.
         a.   Wellhead status wellbores, mouse holes, rat holes, cellars and
conduit casings shall be:
            1.   Covered at all times when not in use by one-half-inch steel
plating, adequately covering the entire bore hole annulus to prevent accidental
entrapment of persons or animals;
            2.   Completed through the production casing flange with a metal
plate or blind flange bolted across the head; and
            3.   Surrounded with a six feet tall chain link fence having a gate
and lock.
         b.   The cellar shall be filled or closed. The Braden head shall be
piped to the surface and open to the atmosphere or have an observable and
adequate pressure gauge with operable test valve.
      (41)   Work hours. No construction activities involving excavation of,
alteration to or repair work on any access road or pad site shall occur during
nighttime hours or at any time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and
materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site
preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited
to daytime hours except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other
emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the
cessation of drilling or production. Other than mobilization and demobilization
and advancing the bore hole, no other activities shall be allowed on the wells
site on Sundays.
   (b)   Noise - gas wells.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit and the commencement of
operations, the operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the
gas inspector, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion,
transportation or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible
noise levels of this section. The noise management plan must:
         a.   Identify operation noise impacts;
         b.   Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior
to construction of any wellhead, compressor or compression facility; and
         c.   1.   Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining
noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including
but not limited to the following:
               i.   Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location and
type;
               ii.   Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind
directions;
               iii.   Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and
               iv.   Topography.
            2.   The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance
with this section and the noise management plan after the installation of the
noise generation equipment
      (2)   No well shall be drilled, re-drilled or any equipment operated at
any location within the city in such a manner so as to create any noise which
causes the exterior noise level when measured at the protected use receiver’s/
receptor’s property line or from the closest exterior point of the protected
use structure or inside the protected use structure if access to the property
is granted by the receiver/receptor, that:
         a.   Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five decibels during
daytime hours and more than three decibels during nighttime hours;
         b.   Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than ten decibels over
the daytime average ambient noise level during fracturing operations during
daytime hours. No fracturing shall be allowed during nighttime hours except for
flowback operations related to fracturing as provided in subsection (b)(2)c.
below;
         c.   Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three decibels
during flowback operations during nighttime hours;
         d.   Creates pure tones where one-third octave band sound-pressure
level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-
pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center
frequencies of 500 Hertz and above, and by eight dB for center frequencies
between 160 and 400 Hertz, and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or
equal to 125 Hertz; or
         e.   Creates low-frequency outdoor noise levels that exceed the
following dB levels:
 
16 Hz octave band   65 dB
31.5 Hz octave band 65 dB
64 Hz octave band   65 dB
 
      (3)   The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to
the city a continuous 72 hour pre-drilling ambient noise level prior to the
issuance of a gas well permit. The 72-hour time span shall include at least one
24-hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The operator shall use the
prior established ambient noise level for the installation of any new noise
generation equipment unless the operator can demonstrate that the increase in
the ambient noise level is not associated with drilling and production
activities located either on or off-site.
      (4)   Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsection
(b)(1)a., (b)(1)b. and (b)(1)c. of this section may be permitted intermittently
in accordance with the following:
 
Permitted Increase (dBA) Duration of Increase (minutes)*
10                       5
15                       1
20                       Less than 1
*   Cumulative minutes during any one hour
 
      (5)   All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours.
      (6)   The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or
other operations of all gas wells located within 600 feet of a protected use
shall be continuously monitored, to ensure compliance. The cost of such
monitoring shall be borne by the operator. If a complaint is received by either
the operator or the gas inspector from any protected use the operator shall,
within 24 hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a 72-hour
period the exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other
operations to ensure compliance. At the request of the gas inspector, the
operator shall monitor the exterior noise level at the source of the complaint.
      (7)   Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative
methods as approved by the gas inspector may be used to ensure compliance. All
soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and be subject to
approval by the city’s fire department.
      (8)   The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall
meet the American National Standard Institute’s Standard for sound meters or an
instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will
provide equivalent data.
      (9)   A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the
provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in compliance with the
approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will
be given 24 hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an
identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-
hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation can
not be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator.
   (c)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Distance.
         a.   It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at
the surface of the ground, is located:
            1.   Within 25 feet from any storage tank or source of ignition;
            2.   Within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway, future
street, right-of-way, property line or the nearest rail of an operating
railway;
            3.   Within 600 feet from any protected use;
            4.   Within 300 feet from any public building;
            5.   Within 200 feet from any habitable structure;
            6.   Within 100 feet of any building accessory to, but not
necessary to the operation of the well;
            7.   Within 200 feet to any fresh water well not drilled by the
operator as a specific source of water used for drilling or completion
operations without the express written permission of the owner of the water
well; or
            8.   Within 300 feet from an outer boundary surface property line
or a distance minus the required zoning setback of the adjacent property at the
time of permitting the first gas well unless one of the following conditions
exist:
               i.   The oil, gas and mineral lease precedes the formation of an
outer boundary surface property line; or
               ii.   The adjacent property is owned or under lease by the
operator.
         b.   The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the
closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (c)(1)a.1. through
(c)(1)a.6. and (c)(1)a.8. above, except that the measurement from a well bore
to a school not located within another protected use shall be from the property
line of the school to the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects.
         c.   The measurement for g. above shall be in a direct line from the
closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. The distance requirement for
fresh water wells is subject to the railroad commission regulations and any
other state or federal requirements.
      (2)   Distance reduction for protected uses. The distance set out in
subsection (c) of this section may be reduced to 300 feet from any protected
use, with a:
         a.   Waiver granted by the city council; or
         b.   Written notarized waivers granted by all the protected use
property owners within a 600-foot radius around the proposed well pursuant to §
15-36 of this article.
   (d)   Compressor stations - natural gas facilities.
      (1)   Compressor noise regulations. For purposes of this subsection (d),
OPERATOR shall refer to either the pipeline operator or the gas well operator,
as applicable.
         a.   1.   Maximum permitted sound levels for all permanent lift or
line compressors shall be limited by the following zoning classifications:
 
Industrial  75 dBA day/65 dBA night
Commercial  65 dBA day/55 dBA night
Residential 55 dBA day/50 dBA night
 
            2.   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two
different land use classifications, the lower noise level standard applicable
to the noise zone shall apply.
         b.   Line compressor operators shall be allowed to demonstrate that
the current actual ambient is greater than allowed which will become the new
ambient for that location (measured at the property line of the noise creator).
         c.   Noise measurement will be taken at the property line of the
compressor station to determine ambient. To determine compliance with the noise
requirements all measurements will be taken at the property line of the
receiver/receptor.
         d.   Compressors shall meet the low and high frequency requirements/
standards as required for gas wells cited above.
      (2)   Lift compressors.
         a.   Lift compressors shall be allowed in all zoning districts, but
shall be restricted to the gas drilling pad site.
         b.   Except as outlined below, lift compressors shall be required to
meet all the noise standards of subsection (a) above.
            1.   Temporary lift compressor for each well shall be classified as
temporary for six months for noise regulations purposes and shall be allowed
five dBA over ambient during the day and three dBA over ambient at night.
            2.   No compressor shall be considered temporary if installed
within six months of removal of the initial compressor for that well.
            3.   Permanent lift compressors shall be required to meet the
zoning noise requirements for their zoning location as outlined in subsection
(d)(1) above.
            4.   Sound blankets shall be permitted for noise abatement on
temporary lift compressors.
            5.   No sound blankets shall be permitted for permanent lift
compressors. All acoustical structures for permanent compressors must be
constructed of permanent material constructed of metal, masonry or other
structurally sound material as approved by the director of planning and
development that significantly screens the equipment, is painted in a non-
contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as
possible and meets all applicable building and fire codes.
         c.   All lift compressors shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from
any protected use, public building or habitable structure or 100 feet from the
property line, whichever is greater.
         d.   All compressor and associated equipment and buildings shall be
enclosed by a six-foot security fence constructed per §
15-43, Fences and landscaping, of this article.
         e.   One three-inch caliper tree shall be planted every 40 linear feet
along the property line abutting a public right-of-way. No heavy equipment,
including but not limited to trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat
tractors, trenchers, compressors and hoists shall be allow inside the critical
root zone of any protected tree on any compressor site without the specific
approval of the city forester. This requirement shall supersede other
landscaping requirements, except for the tree preservation and/or planting
percentage requirements in §
15-43.
         f.   All equipment or buildings associated with the operation of the
compressor located in or within 600 feet of residentially used property or from
the public right-of-way shall be screened from public view by appropriate
landscaping, berming, structure or wall constructed of metal, masonry or other
structurally sound material as approved by the director of planning and
development or his or her designee that significantly screens the equipment and
is painted in a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby
surroundings as nearly as possible.
         g.   Secondary containment. Secondary containment shall be required
around all compressor stations. All secondary containment must meet the
requirements of subsection (a)(32) above.
         h.   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor,
stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any
well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the
open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers or an
exhaust muffler box constructed of non-combustible materials sufficient to
suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of noxious
gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot.
         i.   All facilities shall be inspected by the fire marshal for
compliance with relative fire codes and the gas inspector prior to operation of
the compressor.
      (3)   Line compressor sites.
         a.   Line compressor site permit application requirements.
            1.   A person wanting to engage in and operate a line compressor
shall first apply for and obtain a line compressor site permit as required
under this article.
            2.   The requirements below are for the purpose of evaluating and
processing an application for a line compressor site and are not meant to
supersede any other part of the city code pertaining to development or building
standards.
               i.   Every application for a line compressor site issued
pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the line compressor
operator, or a person duly authorized to sign on behalf of the line compressor
operator, and filed with the inspector.
               ii.   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as set
forth in the city code for gas drilling and production fees.
               iii.   The application shall include the following information:
                  A.   The date of the application;
                  B.   A legal description of the property. The property must
be platted and referenced by subdivision, block and lot numbers;
                  C.   Surface owners’ name(s) and address(es) of the line
compressor site property;
                  D.    Line compressor operator/applicant name and address and
if the line compressor operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation,
and if the line compressor operator is a partnership, the names and addresses
of the general partners;
                  E.   Name and address of individual designated to receive
notice;
                  F.   Location and description of all improvements and
structures within 1,000 feet of the line compressor site;
                  G.   Owner and address of each parcel of property within
1,000 feet of the proposed line compressor site;
                  H.   A surveyed site plan of the proposed line compressor
site shall display a registered professional land surveyor seal, a legend with
scale for measurements and a complete legal description with property lines and
easements shown. The surveyed line compressor site plan shall include specific
details to the projected location of the major components of the line
compressor site, the location of all improvements and equipment, including, but
not limited to, tanks, city regulated pipelines, compressors, separators,
lights, storage sheds, fencing, driveway approaches and any access roads. The
surveyed line compressor site plan shall show the location of specific
compressors, pipelines, tanks and reservoir(s) in relationship to existing and
proposed water and sanitary sewer lines and any other utility easements. The
line compressor site plan shall also indicate floodway, floodplain or city
recognized drainage ways and the elevation and slope of the line compressor
site which indicates compliance with the then current fill article, impacted
vegetation, tree survey, creeks and other topographic features, compliance with
the landscaping requirements as set out in §
15-43 of this article, adjacent buildings and other structures and the measured
distance from the compressors to these buildings and structures, temporary and
permanent fencing and landscaping. Zoning of the property and adjacent property
must be shown;
                  I.   A statement, under oath, signed by the line compressor
operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the
application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the compressor operator or
designated representative, true and correct;
                  J.   Noise management plan demonstrating compliance with
subsection (d)(1)a. above; and
                  K.   A request for waiver as outlined in subsection (d)(4)
below, if applicable.
         b.   Location. Line compressor sites shall be permitted only in “PD”
planned development zoning districts, “I” light industrial, “J” medium
industrial and “K” heavy industrial zoning districts and shall meet the
following setbacks.
            1.   “I” light industrial, “J” medium industrial and “K” heavy
industrial zoning districts setback. The boundary of all line compressor sites
in “I” light industrial, “J” medium industrial and “K” heavy industrial zoning
districts shall be set back a minimum of 600 feet from any protected use. The
setback from protected uses may be reduced to 300 feet from the boundary of the
line compressor site provided the line compressor(s) located within the line
compressor site are fully enclosed.
            2.   “PD” planned development zoning district setback. The boundary
of all line compressor sites in “PD” zoning districts shall be set back a
minimum of 1,000 feet from a protected use. The distance may be reduced to 600
feet when written waivers are obtained from 100% of the protected use property
owners within such distance by the applicant or by the granting of a waiver
from the city council.
            3.   All zoning districts. The boundary of all line compressor
sites shall be setback a minimum of 300 feet from a public building or a
habitable structure.
         c.   Equipment and buildings not part of the operation of the line
compressor site. Equipment and buildings not part of the operation of the line
compressor site shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from the protected use,
public building or habitable structure or 100 feet from the property line,
whichever is greater.
         d.   Setback measurement. The measurement of the setback distance
shall be made from the boundary of the line compressor site, in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest
exterior point of the closest protected use or boundary line of a public park
or property line of a school. The line compressor operator shall designate the
area within the line compressor site where one or more line compressors may be
located. The line compressor site will be defined as an area on the site plan
by coordinates and setback distance will be measured from the defined area.
         e.   Standards. Line compressor sites shall be required to meet the
following standards.
            1.   Line compressor sites shall meet the applicable noise
standards for that zoning classification as set out in subsection (d)(1)a.
above. Landscaping, buffering or acoustical structures shall be required as
required by this section and as required by the zoning regulations for the
applicable zoning district.
            2.   No sound blankets shall be allowed.
            3.   All acoustical structures must be constructed of permanent
material constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally sound material as
approved by the director of planning and development that significantly screens
the equipment is a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby
surroundings as nearly as possible and meets all applicable building and fire
codes.
            4.   All facilities shall be inspected by the inspector prior to
operation of the compressor.
            5.   Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor,
stationary or mounted on wheels shall not be discharged into the open air
unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust
muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress
noise and disruptive vibrations.
         f.   All line compressor sites and associated equipment and buildings
shall be enclosed by a six foot security fence constructed per §
15-43 of this article.
         g.   One three-inch caliper tree shall be planted every 40 linear feet
along the property line abutting a public right-of-way. No heavy equipment,
including, but not limited to, trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat
tractors, trenchers, compressors and hoists shall be allow inside the critical
root zone of any protected tree on any compressor site without the specific
approval of the city forester. This requirement shall supersede other
landscaping requirements, except for the tree preservation and/or planting
percentage requirements in §
15-43.
         h.   All equipment, that is located in or within 600 feet of a
residence or from the public right- of-way shall be screened from public view
by appropriate landscaping, berming, structure or wall constructed of metal,
masonry or other structurally sound material as approved by the director of
planning and development that significantly screens the equipment and is
painted in a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby
surroundings as nearly as possible.
         i.   Secondary containment shall be required around all line
compressors and within the line compressor site. All secondary containment must
meet the requirements of §
15-42(a)(32).
         j.   In addition to the regulations set out above, line compressor
sites located adjacent to residential zoning shall be required to meet the
following standards.
            1.   The six-foot security fence constructed per §
15-43 shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the property line of the
residence and a minimum of 20 feet from the public right-of-way.
            2.   A ten-foot landscaped bufferyard along the entire length of
the boundary line between any line compressor site and the residential zoning
shall be required and maintained. The bufferyard shall consist of an open space
of grass and other landscaping that screens or blocks vision, noise pollutants
and other negative by products. The bufferyard shall be required even when an
alley is located between the line compressor site and the residential zoning.
            3.   A minimum 20-foot landscaped bufferyard shall be required
along all street frontages across the street from residential zoning to screen
the view of the property from the public rights-of-way.
            4.   A minimum of one three-inch caliper large canopy tree, as
defined in
Chapter 6 of the zoning article, with a mature height of 25 feet shall be
required every 40 feet and screening shall be provided using hedges, berms or
mass planting to a height of not less than 24 inches with live groundcover.
            5.   The bufferyard is intended to serve as a buffer between the
compressor station and the residential zoned property. Structures and equipment
or any type of storage shall not be permitted in the bufferyard.
      (4)   Gas line compressor site in PD zoning districts - setback waiver
process.
         a.   A request for a setback waiver for a line compressor site within
1,000 feet of a protected use shall be submitted to the director of planning
and development gas well division.
         b.   A line compressor site shall not be allowed within 1,000 feet of
a protected use in a PD zoning district without a:
            1.   Waiver granted by the city council; or
            2.   Written notarized waivers granted by 100% of the protected use
property owners within a 1,000-foot radius around the proposed line compressor
site pursuant to this section. All waivers must identify the property address,
block and lot number, subdivision name (if applicable) and plat volume and page
and be filed, at the expense of the line compressor operator, in the applicable
county records prior to the application of a line compressor site.
            3.   This setback distance may be reduced, but never less than 600
feet from a protected use.
            4.   This provision applies to any existing protected use or where
a building permit has been issued or applied for a protected use on the date
the application for a line compressor site is filed with the inspector.
         c.   Permitting procedure for request of a waiver by the city council.
            1.   After a line compressor site permit application and waiver
request are submitted for a line compressor site within 1,000 feet of a
protected use, the inspector shall schedule a review of the permit by the GDRC.
Notice provisions for the GDRC and its reporting requirements are provided for
under §
15-34(p).
            2.   At least 20 days, and no more than 30 days prior to the date
of the public hearing before the city council for a waiver to allow the
issuance of a line compressor site within 1,000 feet of a protected use, the
city shall notify, at line compressor operator’s expense, each surface owner of
property, as shown by the current City of Fort Worth fire department address
system and the current tax rolls within 1,000 feet of the proposed line
compressor site of the hearing date and time. The notice shall contain an
internet link for information on gas drilling, and contact telephone numbers
for city staff and the line compressor operator/applicant. Such notice shall be
deposited properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail.
Notice shall be sent by the city to all registered neighborhood associations
within one-half mile of the proposed line compressor site.
            3.   At least 15 days, and no more than 20 days prior to the date
of the public hearing before city council to allow the issuance of a line
compressor site permit within 1,000 feet of a protected use under this article,
the line compressor operator shall publish a notice at line compressor
operator’s expense, in one issue of the local section of a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, for ten consecutive days. An affidavit by the printer
or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be
filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such
publication. All notices shall follow a format required by the city.
            4.   At least 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing
before city council to allow the issuance of a line compressor site permit
within 1,000 feet of a protected use under this article the line compressor
operator shall, at the line compressor operator’s expense, erect at least one
sign, as approved by the inspector, no less than three feet by three feet, upon
the premises upon which a line compressor site waiver within 1,000 feet of a
protected use has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be
located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points
nearest to any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to
such property. The inspector may require additional signage if the premise
fronts on more than one right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare.
               i.   The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a line
compressor site waiver to allow issuance of a line compressor site within 1,000
feet of a protected use has been requested and state the date, time and place
of the public hearing, and shall further set forth that additional information
can be acquired by telephoning the line compressor operator/applicant at the
number indicated on the sign.
               ii.   The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be
deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any
other official action concerning this article.
               iii.   Any sign(s) shall be removed as soon as possible
subsequent to final action by the inspector or the city council.
            5.   All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed
sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section.
            6.   Before the city council considers the waiver request, the line
compressor operator/applicant shall provide evidence of a certificate of
publication establishing timely publication of the notice of the hearing, and
that the line compressor operator/applicant has otherwise complied with or
satisfied all other requirements of this article, including full and complete
compliance with the insurance and security requirements.
            7.   The burden of proof on all matters, except notice, considered
in the hearing shall be upon the line compressor operator/applicant.
            8.   The city council shall review the application and any other
related information. The city council shall consider the following in deciding
whether to grant a waiver and authorize the issuance of a line compressor site
permit within 1,000 feet of a protected use:
               i.   Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the
circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular
location and the character of the improvements located thereon;
               ii.   Whether the line compressor site would conflict with the
orderly growth and development of the city;
               iii.   Whether there are other alternative line compressor site
locations available;
               iv.   Whether there is approved access for the city fire
personnel and fire fighting equipment;
               v.   Whether there is reasonable access to the line compressor
site that minimizes the impact to residential properties if the use of non-
designated commercial or truck routes are required; and
               vi.   The recommendations of the Inspector and zoning
commission.
            9.   The city council may require an increase up to 1,000 feet in
the line compressor operator/applicant’s proposed distance that the line
compressor site is to be set back from any protected use or require any change
in operation, plan, design, layout or any change in the on-site and technical
regulations in this section and §
15-43 of this article, including fencing, screening, lighting, delivery times,
noise levels, tank height or any other matters reasonably required by public
interest.
            10.   The city council may accept, reject or modify the application
in the interest of securing compliance with this article and the City Code.
         d.   Permitting procedure for a waiver from protected use property
owners under division (d)(4)b.2. above.
            1.   No application for a line compressor site within 1,000 feet of
a protected use shall be accepted unless the written notarized waivers are
obtained from 100% of the protected use property owners within 1,000 feet of
the proposed line compressor site.
            2.   Waivers must be in a format approved by the city and shall
include an aerial exhibit attached clearly depicting the area of a proposed
line compressor site with the closest dimension to the protected use for which
the waiver is being requested. Signatures are required on both the form and
exhibit. The waiver form will be double sided and printed in both Spanish and
English allowing the property owner to execute the waiver in their language of
choice.
            3.   Written notarized waivers granted by the all the protected use
property owners within a 1,000-foot radius around the proposed line compressor
site must be filed, at the expense of the line compressor operator, in the
applicable county records. All waivers must identify the property address,
block and lot number, subdivision name and plat volume and page number. Copies
of filed protected use property owner waivers must be submitted with the filing
of a completed application for a line compressor site waiver within 1,000 feet
of a protected use.
      (5)   Existing line compressor sites - grandfathering process.
         a.   Existing line compressor sites within city limits. Line
compressor operators shall notify the inspector of existing line compressor
sites within 45 days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this
regulation in order to designate those sites as “grandfathered” to prior
ordinance requirements. Notification shall include a surveyed site plan that
clearly describes the boundary of the line compressor site and location of
equipment and buildings within the site. All protected uses within 600 feet of
the site perimeter shall be shown and dimensioned from the site boundary.
Setbacks to a protected use of 600 feet from the site boundary must be met.
            1.   Line compressor sites permitted or built prior to February 3,
2009 shall submit a noise management plan that demonstrates compliance with
noise requirements for industrial zoning. Line compressor operators shall be
allowed to demonstrate that the current actual ambient is greater than allowed
which will become the new ambient (requirement) for that location (measured at
the property line of the noise creator).
            2.   Line compressor sites permitted or built on or after February
3, 2009 shall verify that a noise management plan that is in compliance with
this section, as amended, is on file with the Inspector.
         b.   Annexed sites. Compressor operators shall notify the inspector of
existing line compressor sites within 45 days of annexation. Notification shall
include a surveyed site plan that clearly describes the boundary of the line
compressor site and location of equipment and buildings within the site. All
protected uses within 600 feet of the site perimeter shall be shown and
dimensioned from the site boundary. Sites shall adhere to the noise
requirements for industrial zoning districts. Line compressor operators shall
be allowed to demonstrate that the current actual ambient is greater than
allowed which will become the new ambient (requirement) for that location
(measured at the property line of the noise creator).
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 18910-2009, §
4, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19022-02-2010, § 1, passed 2-2-2010; Ord. 20166-04-
2012, § 2, passed 4-10-2012; Ord. 20927-09-2013, §§ 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, passed 9-10-
2013; eff. 9-20-2013; Ord. 22420-09-2016, § 1, passed 9-13-2016, eff. 9-20-
2016)
§ 15-43 FENCES AND LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   Fences. All pad sites and off-site fracture ponds shall be secured
with a permanent fence with a secured gate and Knox box as follows:
      (1)   The fence shall be at least six feet in height;
      (2)   Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into
the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the fence;
provided, however, so long as stability of the fence is maintained, temporary
fence posts shall not be required to be set in concrete;
      (3)   The site shall be completely enclosed by a permanent dark green or
black steel chain link or wrought iron fence on at least two sides of the pad
site, one of which will face the city’s right-of-way, if applicable. A solid
masonry fence may be constructed on the remaining two sides of the pad site;
      (4)   The chain link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11 gauge;
      (5)   Posts and rails shall be standard black or dark green welded pipe;
      (6)   Tension rods shall be three-eighths-inch round steel bolt stock.
Adjustable tighteners shall be turnbuckle or equivalent having a six-inch
minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness of one-fourth by
three-fourths inch; and
      (7)   Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial
drilling, completion or re-working operations as long as 24-hour onsite
supervision is provided. A secured entrance gate on the access road containing
a Knox box shall be required and all gates are to be kept locked when the
operator or his or her employees are not on the premises.
   (b)   Gate specifications. All chain link fences shall be equipped with at
least one gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of
two gates, each of which is not less than six feet wide, or one sliding gate
not less than 12 feet wide. If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock
in the center of the span;
      (2)   The gates shall be of black or dark green chain link construction
that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that
are at least as secure as a chain link fence and shall be included in the chain
link or wrought iron portion of the fence;
      (3)   The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking
attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being
used for access to the site;
      (4)   Gates shall be designed so that they do not interfere or obstruct
the public rights- of-way; and
      (5)   Operator must provide the fire chief with a “Knox Padlock” or “Knox
Box with a key” to access the well site to be used only in case of an
emergency.
   (c)   Landscaping.
      (1)   a.   All gas well, compressor and fracture pond permits will
require tree preservation and/or planting measures. A tree canopy requirement
through preservation and/or planting will apply as follows:
            1.   A 40% requirement in one- and two-family residential zoned
areas;
            2.   A 30% tree canopy requirement in multifamily, institutional
and commercial zoned areas; and
            3.   A 20% tree canopy requirement in industrial zoned areas.
         b.   Payment to the tree fund of $200 per diameter inch will be
required for 25% of the removed trees greater than six inches on pad sites
located in Agricultural (AG) zoned areas. The operator may chose to plant a 20%
tree canopy in lieu of payment into the tree fund.
         c.   The following requirements shall apply to all wells, including
wells located along city rights-of-way. Wells located in Agricultural (AG)
zoned areas are exempted from the requirements:
            1.   A minimum retention of 25% of the existing trees will be
required as with other land uses unless removal necessary for location of
equipment as determined by the gas inspector;
            2.   No more than 25% of the same species may be planted at one
site;
            3.   A minimum of 25% of the planted trees must be an evergreen
species;
            4.   A minimum of 75% of the planted trees must be located between
the gas well site and protected uses or public right-of-way. An administrative
waiver of the 75% placement can be approved by the city forester with proof
that the proposed planting will screen the views into the well site from the
protected uses;
            5.   The percent coverage is established by the actual canopy
coverage area retained and tree plantings. For planted trees, 2,000 square feet
will be credited for large canopy trees, 700 square feet will be credited for
medium canopy trees and 100 square feet will be credited for small canopy trees
at normal grow out;
            6.   The minimum size of tree planted will be three inches in
diameter measured one foot above ground level. If the tree is multi trunk, the
main stem will be given full credit for its diameter and all other stems will
receive one-half credit. The total of all must be three inches or greater. All
planted trees will be credited its canopy coverage at normal grow out;
            7.   All trees that die within two years of the date of project
completion will be replaced by another replacement tree. The replacement tree
carries the same two-year replacement requirement. A replacement of any tree
that dies within two years of planting will be replaced by the operator or
agent and a new two year guarantee will begin at the time of replacement;
            8.   All other interpretations of the tree canopy coverage and
regulations will be made by the city forester and/or the designated city board
or commission; and
            9.   Landscaping shall be installed no later than 180 days after
completion of the first well.
      (2)   Except as allowed in subsection (c)(3) below, fracture ponds
established for the intent of storing and supplying water for fracturing
operations are required to comply with the city’s tree preservation article.
The document shall identify the
delineated scope of work area of any surface disruption related to the
“fracture pond” installation, operations and shall exhibit any existing tree
canopy coverage based on the applicable zoning classification.
      (3)   Upon approval of the assistant director of planning and development
- gas well division, payment may be made into the city’s tree fund at an amount
of $600 per required tree in lieu of planting requirements for gas well sites
and fracture ponds.
      (4)   The following list of trees is considered desirable and adapted
trees for the Fort Worth area. Planting of trees from this list is acceptable.
Other trees will be considered by the city forester and granted on a case-by-
case basis. The approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability,
long-term health and growing characteristic of the tree type.
Common Name Scientific Name Canopy Size
Common Name       Scientific Name                Canopy Size
Mexican Plum      Prunus mexicana                Small
Redbud            Cercis Canadensis              Small
Bradford Pear     Pyrus calleryana var. Bradford Medium
Cherry Laurel     Prunus caroliniana             Medium
Crab Apple        Malus angustifolia             Medium
Eve’s Necklace  Sophora affinis                Medium
Golden Raintree   Koelrueteria paniculata        Medium
American Elm      Ulmas americana                Large
Bald Cypress      Taxodium distichum             Large
Bigtooth Maple    Acer grandidentatum            Large
Black Walnut      Carya nigra                    Large
Blackjack Oak     Quercus marilandica            Large
Bur Oak           Quercus macrocarpa             Large
Cado Maple        Acer saccharum                 Large
Cedar Elm         Ulmas crassifolia              Large
Chinquapin Oak    Quercus muhlenbergii           Large
Green Ash         Fraxinus pennsylvanica         Large
Lacebark Elm      Ulmas parvifolia               Large
Live Oak          Quercus virginiana             Large
Pecan             Carya Illinoensis              Large
Post oak          Quercus stallata               Large
Red Maple         Acer rubrum                    Large
Shumard Red Oak   Quercus shumardii              Large
Southern Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora           Large
Texas Ash         Fraxinus                       Large
Texas Red Oak     Quercus texana                 Large
 
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-44 CLEANUP AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or
plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the site, complete restoration
activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations
within 60 days.
   (b)   Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak
or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the
satisfaction of the fire chief and the gas inspector all waste materials from
any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction.
Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site
clean-up immediately the gas inspector may then employ any cleanup expert or
experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any
other expenses for labor and material which the gas inspector deems necessary
to clean-up such spill, leak or malfunction.
   (c)   Free from debris. The public street entrance and property on which a
well site is located shall at all times be kept free of mud, debris, pools of
water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste
material within a radius of 100 feet around any separators, tanks and producing
wells.
   (d)   Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at
all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, secondary containment and
buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the gas
inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of
which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its
appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding
uses. Neutral colors shall include sand and unobtrusive shades of black or dark
green. No company logos or advertisement shall be allowed.
   (e)   Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator
shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any
other provision of this article and shall notify the gas inspector as soon as
practicable. The gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the
same, to the city manager. If the gas inspector, in his or her opinion,
believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of
well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all
reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the gas
inspector may then employ any well control expert or experts or other
contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses
for labor and material which the gas inspector deems necessary to regain
control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the
interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any
expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the gas inspector in
gaining control of said well.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-45 PLUGGED AND ABANDONED WELLS.
   (a)   Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever
abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator
abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its
original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations
of this article.
   (b)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Abandonment shall be approved by the gas inspector after
restoration of the drill site has been accomplished in conformity with the
following requirements at the discretion of the gas inspector:
         a.   The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be
removed from drill site;
         b.   All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be
removed from the drill site;
         c.   All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other
foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed
from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission;
         d.   All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactible
soil;
         e.   All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the
drill site; and
         f.   During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable
sections in this article.
      (2)   A five-foot no-build easement around the center of the plugged and
abandoned well bore shall be required and recorded in the applicable county
deed records.
   (c)   Abandoned well requirement.
      (1)   The operator shall furnish the following to the gas inspector:
         a.   A copy of the W-3A “Notice of Intention to Plug and Abandon” and
“W-3 Plugging Record” forms on the same date these forms are submitted to the
commission; and
         b.   A 48-hour notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of
this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may
then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.
      (2)   All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the
commission; however, all well casings and cellars shall be cut and removed to a
depth of at least three feet below the surface. A permanent abandonment marker
pipe, with the well identity and location permanently inscribed, shall be
welded to the casing and shall be at least four inches in diameter with a
length of four feet visible above the ground level.
   (d)   Surface reclamation plan requirements.
      (1)   Each operator must submit as part of the gas well permit
application a surface reclamation plan that must include information outlined
in this subsection (d), in the degree of detail necessary to demonstrate that
full site reclamation can be accomplished.
      (2)   The reclamation plan must include:
         a.   Measures to be taken to restore property to allow use under the
city comprehensive plan;
         b.   The control of surface water drainage and of water accumulation
and measures to be taken during the reclamation process to provide for the
protection of the quantity and quality of surface and groundwater systems;
         c.   Cleaning up polluted surface and ground water;
         d.   Backfilling, soil stabilization, compacting, grading and
appropriate re-vegetation;
         e.   Soil reconstructions, replacement and stabilization;
         f.   Configuration of the reshaped topography;
         g.   Waste disposal;
         h.   A plan for re-vegetation of affected lands;
         i.   Road reclamation; and
         j.   Other practices necessary to ensure all disturbed areas will be
reclaimed.
   (e)   Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or
deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment
requirements of the commission and this article prior to the issuance of any
building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built
over an abandoned well.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION VIII: PIPELINES
§ 15-46 OIL AND GAS PIPELINES TECHNICAL AND PERMITTING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General regulations.
      (1)   As determined in the sole, but reasonable, discretion of the city,
pipelines may not interfere with or damage existing utilities, including but
not limited to: water, sewer or gas lines, storm drains, electric lines or the
facilities of any public utilities located in public rights-of-way, utility
easements or other city-owned property or in private residential areas.
      (2)   The pipeline operator shall be required to comply with all
regulations regarding noise in §
15-42(b) of this article.
      (3)   The pipeline operator shall be responsible to grade, level and
restore the property affected by pipeline construction to the same surface
condition, as nearly practicable, as existed before operations were first
commenced within 30 days after completion of the pipeline.
      (4)   The pipeline operator shall construct, repair and/or maintain all
pipelines so as to meet or exceed the applicable minimum criteria established
by the statutory or regulatory requirements of the state and federal
governments for such pipeline.
      (5)   At least ten days prior to the commencement of any pipeline
construction, the pipeline operator shall give written mailed notice to all
residents, tenants and property owners that are located adjacent to the
proposed pipeline. The mailing shall include the operator’s publication on
pipeline safety.
      (6)   At the time the required pipeline records are submitted to the
railroad commission, the pipeline operator shall provide the city the following
information, including GPS information sufficient to locate the pipelines in
the future, including the beginning and end points of the pipeline and
sufficient points in between the pipeline route and the depth of cover
information. This information shall be submitted to the city in a format
compatible with the city’s own GIS system.
         a.   As-built or record drawings of the pipelines. Accuracy of the
record drawings shall meet a survey level of one foot to 50,000 feet. The scale
of the record drawings shall be a minimum of one inch to 40 feet. The drawings
shall also be supplied in a DFF digital file format with the location tied to
at least one nearby GPS (global positioning system) city monument. If the new
pipeline length exceeds 1,000 feet within the city, the pipeline shall be tied
to at least two GPS city monuments;
         b.   The origin point and the destination of the pipeline;
         c.   The substance to be transported;
         d.   A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS);
         e.   Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized
specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths and location of
shutoff valves of the subject pipeline. Drawings shall show the location of
other pipelines and utilities that are crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of
the pipeline right-of-way;
         f.   Detailed cross-section drawings for all public rights-of-ways and
easement crossings on city property as permitted by the city; and
         g.   A list of the names and mailing addresses of all the property
owners, residents and tenants adjacent to the pipeline construction.
      (7)   A pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids or
hydrocarbons through a pipeline located in the city shall be a member in good
standing with the one call system or other approved excavation monitoring
system as required by state law. The pipeline operator that transports gas,
oil, liquids or hydrocarbons through a pipeline shall contract for service with
the selected underground utility coordinating system for a minimum of five
years unless there is an agreement to change to an alternate system between the
city and the pipeline operator. Said pipeline operator shall maintain such
services without interruption for the life of the pipeline permit and as
required under this section.
      (8)   a.   At the time of permitting and each year thereafter that the
pipeline remains active, each pipeline operator shall provide to the gas
inspector, the fire marshal and the chief of police the names, mailing
addresses and telephone numbers of at least two primary persons, officers or
contacts available on a 24-hour basis and at least two alternative persons,
officers or contacts to be reached in the event that the primary contacts are
unavailable who:
            1.   Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency;
            2.   Have access to information on the location of the closest
shutoff valve to any specific point in the city; and
            3.   Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried
by the pipeline.
         b.   Any change in the above information must be provided to the city
by contacting the gas inspector prior to such change.
      (9)   Each pipeline operator shall file a copy of all initial or follow-
up reports provided to the U.S. Department of Transportation or the railroad
commission of Texas on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline emergencies or
pipeline incidents within the city concurrently with the city. In addition,
such pipeline operator shall file any initial or follow-up reports filed with
state and federal environmental regulatory agencies pertaining to pipeline
releases within the city concurrently with the city.
      (10)   Every pipeline operator shall be required to file with the city an
annual verified report in letter form on or before June 30 of each year to
cover a reporting period of the previous June 1 through May 31. Said written
report shall contain a statement that the pipeline has no outstanding safety
violations within the City of Fort Worth as determined in an inspection or
audit by either the railroad commission of Texas and/or the U.S. Department of
Transportation with regard to any pipeline operating within the city.
Alternatively, if there are any safety violations as determined by the railroad
commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation that have not been
corrected, these shall be described to the city with an action plan to correct
the safety violations. Said action plan shall include a timeline for corrective
action and the individual or firm responsible for each action.
   (b)   City regulated pipelines - permit required.
      (1)   City regulated pipelines shall adhere to all standards outlined in
subsection (a) above. Federal and state statutory or regulatory requirements
shall apply to pipelines between the well and the point of custody transfer.
Prior to the transport of gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons, the operator shall
provide to the city certification from a professional engineer registered with
the State of Texas that the design and installation of the pipelines meet all
state and federal requirements.
      (2)   Prior to pipeline construction and the issuance of notice required
in subsection (a)(5) above, a pipeline operator shall obtain a pipeline permit
from the city for all city regulated pipelines. Exceptions to this permitting
requirement are those pipelines from the well to the first point of custody
transfer and for construction necessary to respond to a pipeline emergency.
      (3)   At the same time the operator submits a gas well drilling permit
application, the operator shall require the pipeline operator to submit a
proposed pipeline route from the well bore to the transmission line, for all
city regulated pipelines.
      (4)   The pipeline operator shall be required to submit an application
for a pipeline permit to the city prior to making any offer or initiating any
negotiation or action to acquire any easement or other property right to
construct, install, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove or operate a
pipeline in private residential areas.
      (5)   The pipeline operator shall backfill all trenches and compact such
trenches to 95% standard density proctor in eight-inch lifts and construct the
Pipeline so as to maintain a minimum depth of ten feet below the finished grade
except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top of the pipe
shall be at the discretion of the city based on existing or planned utilities.
During the backfill of any pipeline excavations in open cut sections, the
pipeline operator shall bury “buried pipeline” warning tape one foot above any
such pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline.
The gas inspector may also require that a proposed or existing pipeline be
relocated should it conflict with the proposed alignment and depth of a gravity
dependent utility.
      (6)   The pipeline operator shall equip all city regulated pipelines with
an automated pressure monitoring system that detects leaks and shuts off any
line or any section of line that develops a leak. In lieu of such system, the
pipeline operator may have 24- hour pressure monitoring of the pipeline system
which provides monitoring of the pipeline within the city limits.
      (7)   Review by the gas drilling review committee for all proposed
pipelines through private residential areas shall be required prior to the
issuance of a permit for the commencement of pipeline construction.
      (8)   A pipeline permit application shall be required as follows:
         a.   Applications for a city regulated pipeline or other activities
regulated by this subsection (b)(8) shall be submitted to the city in a form
prescribed by the city.
         b.   Plans submitted with each application for a pipeline permit shall
be in a format approved by the city showing the dimensions and locations of the
pipeline and related items or facilities, as well as all proposed lift
stations, pumps or other service structures related to such pipeline and the
location, type and size of all existing utilities, drainage, Right-of-way and
roadway improvements. The plans must additionally show the elevation and
location of all known public utilities within 15 feet of the centerline of the
proposed pipeline. Any application that fails to meet these requirements will
be returned unfiled to the applicant.
         c.   The following information shall be provided in the application:
            1.   The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the
pipeline operator;
            2.   The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following:
               i.   The person signing the application on behalf of the
pipeline operator;
               ii.   The person designated as the principal contact for the
submittal; and
               iii.   The person designated as the 24 hour emergency contact.
            3.   The origin point and the destination of the proposed subject
pipeline;
            4.   A text description of the general location of the proposed
subject pipeline;
            5.   A description of the substance to be transported through the
proposed subject pipeline;
            6.   A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS);
            7.   Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized
specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths and location of
shutoff valves of the proposed subject pipeline. To the extent that information
can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and
utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within 15 feet of the proposed
subject pipeline right-of-way;
            8.   A description of the consideration given to matters of public
safety and the avoidance, as far as practicable, of existing habitable
structures and private residential areas;
            9.   Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-
of-way and easement crossings;
            10.   The proposed method or methods to be used for the
installation of the pipeline;
            11.   Methods to be used to prevent both internal and external
corrosion;
            12.   A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance; and
            13.   A proposed alignment strip map showing name and address of
all affected property owners.
   (c)   Gas drilling review committee.
      (1)   After the filing of an administratively complete application, the
gas drilling review committee shall review all applications for pipelines
located in a private residential area. For other pipeline locations, an
administrative conference may be conducted to seek resolution of any
substantive, non-resolvable technical issues. If deemed necessary by the city,
a third-party technical advisor may be employed as set out in §
15-48. The costs associated with the technical advisor shall be borne by the
pipeline operator. Any recommendation by the gas drilling review committee to
the planning and development department - gas well division is final.
      (2)   If the gas drilling review committee determines that the city
should obtain an independent study or analysis of an application to construct a
new pipeline, upon approval by the city council, the city shall engage duly
qualified independent consultant(s) or contractor(s) to conduct such special
studies or analyses as required to fully evaluate and act upon an application
for a new pipeline as set forth in §
15-48. The actual cost for said consultant or contractor, including the cost of
any inspections deemed necessary by the gas drilling review committee or
otherwise required, shall be paid by the pipeline operator.
   (d)   Pipeline information reporting requirements. If the pipeline operator
has no reporting responsibility to the railroad commission or the U.S.
Department of Transportation and is otherwise exempt from the safety
regulations of either of such agencies, the following documents pertaining to
the preceding reporting period of June 1 through May 31 shall be furnished to
the city:
      (1)   Copies of internal reports of responses to pipeline emergencies;
      (2)   Current operations and maintenance logs; and
      (3)   Current emergency response plan.
   (e)   Abandoned pipelines.
      (1)   All pipelines shall be maintained in an active condition unless
abandoned according to applicable state and federal regulations. The pipeline
operator shall notify the city within 30 days of abandonment of any pipeline.
      (2)   Reactivation of abandoned pipelines shall require notification to
the city pursuant to the standards and requirements specified in §
15-46. Reactivation shall require pressure testing for integrity and compliance
with railroad commission and/or United States Department of Transportation
regulations.
   (f)   Emergency response plans and emergency incident reporting.
      (1)   Each pipeline operator shall maintain written procedures to
minimize the hazards resulting from an emergency. These procedures shall at a
minimum provide for the following:
         a.   Prompt and effective response to emergencies, including but not
limited to the following:
            1.   Leaks or releases that can impact public health safety or
welfare;
            2.   Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a pipeline or
pipeline easement;
            3.   Natural disaster;
            4.   Effective means to notify and communicate required and
pertinent information to local fire, police and public officials during an
emergency;
            5.   The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials
as necessary at the scene of an emergency;
            6.   Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and
probability of accidental death or dismemberment;
            7.   Emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a pipeline;
            8.   The safe restoration of service following an emergency or
incident; and
            9.   A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of
the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures.
      (2)   Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, any affected
pipeline operator shall as soon as practical communicate to the city’s 911
system the following information:
         a.   A general description of the emergency or incident;
         b.   The location of the emergency or incident;
         c.   The name and telephone number of the person reporting the
emergency or incident;
         d.   The name of the pipeline operator;
         e.   Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and
identification of the hazardous material so involved; and
         f.   Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or
other such official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident.
   (g)   Pipeline repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   All repairs and maintenance of pipelines are to be performed in
accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation and railroad commission
mechanical integrity requirements.
      (2)   If non-emergency repairs necessitate excavation of a pipeline, the
pipeline operator shall send notification to occupants of business
establishments and residential dwellings located adjacent to the pipeline to be
excavated at least five days prior to commencing such repairs.
      (3)   If above-ground non-emergency repairs that are not routine
maintenance are required, the pipeline operator shall send notification to
occupants of businesses and residential dwellings located within 500 feet from
the centerline of the pipeline section to be repaired at least five days prior
to commencing such repairs.
      (4)   The notice required in subsections (g)(2) and (g)(3) of this
section shall be sent by United States regular mail, postage prepaid mailed at
least five days prior to commencing any non-emergency repair; provided,
however, that the pipeline operator may use hand delivery notice as an
alternative, at the pipeline operator’s discretion.
      (5)   Inspection of the interior of all regulated pipelines shall comply
with United States Department of Transportation and railroad commission rules.
   (h)   Protection and painting of structures. A pipeline operator shall keep
protected and painted all pipeline risers and all appurtenances related to
pipeline construction and operations which are composed of materials which are
generally protected or painted. Such operator shall repaint all such items at
sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain same in good condition. It shall be
a violation of this article for any pipeline operator to permit any pipeline
riser and/or appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations to
be in a state of disrepair or to have chipped, peeling or unpainted portions.
   (i)   No implied grant of use of public rights-of-way, utility easements or
other city- owned property. Nothing in this subsection (i) grants permission
for the use of any street, public rights-of-way, utility easements or city-
owned property. In the event a pipeline operator wishes to undertake any
pipeline construction on, over, under, along or across any public rights-of-
way, utility easements or other city-owned property, the pipeline operator
shall apply for and execute a written agreement with the city governing the
terms and conditions for such use; obtain all required permits and comply with
any other applicable provisions of the city code.
   (j)   Expiration of pipeline permit. If construction of a pipeline has not
commenced within one year of the date of issuance of the pipeline permit, or if
the pipeline has not been completed and the surface restored within two years,
the pipeline permit shall expire; provided, however, that the director of
planning and development services may grant an extension of time not to exceed
an additional one year if the director of planning and development services
determines that weather or other unexpected physical conditions justify such an
extension.
   (k)   No assumption of responsibility by city. Nothing in this subsection
(k) shall be construed as an assumption by the city of any responsibility of a
pipeline operator of a pipeline not owned by the city.
   (l)   Responsibility of owner and pipeline operator. It is the joint and
several responsibility of the owner and the pipeline operator of any and all
pipeline to maintain the markers in accordance with this article. The location
of all new or replacement pipe and pipelines shall be marked by the owner(s)
thereof or by the person installing or operating such pipelines as follows.
      (1)   Marker signs shall be placed at all locations where pipe or
pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public street or
road right-of-way which the pipe or pipeline crosses.
      (2)   The top of all marker signs shall be a minimum of four feet above
ground level, and the support post must be sufficient to support the marker
sign and shall be painted yellow or such other color as may be approved by the
director of transportation and public works or his or her designee.
      (3)   All marker signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches square and shall
be marked as “gas pipe line.”
      (4)   All marker signs shall contain the name of the owner and operator
of the pipeline and a 24-hour local contact number.
      (5)   Pipelines shall be marked along there entire length with a buried
metal wire and metallic flag tape.
      (6)   All signs shall also contain an 811 designation “Call Before You
Dig” statement.
      (7)   The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been
lost, damaged or removed.
   (m)   Public awareness information. Annually, all pipeline operators will
provide affected landowners, public official and emergency providers with
appropriate public awareness information as outlined in API 1162.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
§ 15-47 SALT WATER PIPELINES.
   (a)   All references in this section to PIPE or PIPELINES shall mean salt
water pipelines.
   (b)   No pipeline for the transportation of saltwater shall be constructed,
installed, maintained, repaired, replaced, modified, removed or operated within
the city without first obtaining a pipeline permit from the city.
   (c)   Salt water pipe shall be installed beneath all city utilities, no
seams shall be allowed within city right-of-way and minimum cover to the top of
the pipe shall be at the discretion of the city based on existing or planned
utilities. The pipeline crossings must pass through a casing of a design and
constructed in accordance with the United States Department of Transportation
standards set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 192.323 (Casing) as same exists on the date
of the adoption of this article.
   (d)   All infrastructure included under this section shall be designed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas.
   (e)   (1)   All new or replacement pipe or pipelines shall be installed in
such a manner that the pipelines clear the lowest city utility by a minimum of
five feet. In areas where no city utilities are present, pipelines shall be
covered and must be not less than 36 inches below the existing ground level as
verified and approved by the inspector. Prior to installation, the owner of the
pipeline shall submit to the director of planning and development and the gas
inspector the pipeline design criteria, including but not limited to, operating
pressures, pipeline gradient and elevation to sea level, location, pipe ASTM
grade, pipe manufacturer, pipe wall thickness, pipeline capacity and volume.
Prior to and subsequent to installation of each segment of new or replacement
pipeline, the pipe and pipeline must receive and pass an on-site inspection of
the compliance with design criteria and the process of installation. The design
submittal must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in
the State of Texas.
      (2)   The depth requirements in this subsection (d) shall not apply to
piping constructed or installed within the secondary containment perimeter of
the tank battery, which piping may be placed at ground level.
   (f)   Pipe location information shall be provided to the city in an
electronic format acceptable to the director of planning and development.
   (g)   It is the joint and several responsibility of the owner and the
operator of any and all pipeline to maintain the markers in accordance with
this article. The location of all new or replacement pipe and pipelines shall
be marked by the owner(s) thereof or by the person installing or operating such
pipelines as follows.
      (1)   Marker signs shall be placed at all locations where pipe or
pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public street or
road right-of-way which the pipe or pipeline crosses.
      (2)   The top of all marker signs shall be a minimum of four feet above
ground level, and the support post must be sufficient to support the marker
sign and shall be painted yellow or such other color as may be approved by the
director of transportation and public works or his or her designee.
      (3)   All marker signs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches square
and shall be marked as “S.W. Pipe Line.”
      (4)   All marker signs shall contain the name of the owner and operator
of the pipeline and a 24-hour local contact number.
      (5)   Pipelines shall be marked along their entire length with a buried
metal wire and metallic flag tape.
      (6)   The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been
lost, damaged or removed.
   (h)   General pipeline design requirements. All infrastructure included
under this memorandum shall be designed and sealed by a registered professional
engineer in the State of Texas and all pipelines shall:
      (1)   Have a maximum inside diameter of 12 inches;
      (2)   Consist of material approved by the city; and
      (3)   Be monitored by a SCADA system that allows shutdown via automatic
valves spaced at each well head, major pipeline junctions, at the influent and
effluent of the recycling unit(s), and prior to ultimate disposal.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION IX: TECHNICAL ADVISOR
§ 15-48 TECHNICAL ADVISOR.
   The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who
are experienced and educated in the gas industry or the law as it pertains to
gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or
represent the city on such matters relating to gas operations within the city
as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and
future, on the health, welfare, comfort of the citizens of the city. In the
event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising,
counseling or representing the city relative to an operator’s unique and
particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then
the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed
against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges
assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a technical
advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and
the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall
be approved by the city council.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION X: APPEALS
§ 15-48.1 APPEALS.
   (a)   The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and
determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion
regarding the issuance of a gas well permit or the revocation or suspension of
any gas well permit issued hereunder as provided by this article. Any person or
entity whose application is denied by the gas inspector (other than for
distance requirements set out in this article) or whose gas well permit is
suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the gas inspector
to be abandoned may, within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the
gas inspector file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the
following procedure.
      (1)   An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with
the city secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and
the error described, by the appellant.
      (2)   Within 45 days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall
transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city
council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and
purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing
to be so notified. No other notice need be given.
   (b)   Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of $300.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009)
DIVISION XI: PENALTY
§ 15-48.2 PENALTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the
following:
      (1)   Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas well
permit issued under this article;
      (2)   Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas well permit
issued under this article; or
      (3)   Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
   (b)   Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,000 per day in accordance with §
1-6(c), subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 18449-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009, eff. 2-10-2009; Ord. 23569-02-2019,
§ 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
ARTICLE III: GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION FEES
§§ 15-49—15-50 RESERVED.
§ 15-51 GAS WELL FEES.
   For services rendered, the following schedule of fees and charges is hereby
adopted:
Amended permit (per well/pad site)                                      $540
Annual fee (per well)                                                   $1,000
City regulated pipeline (per constructible segment)                     $1,500
Compressor facility                                                     $500
Extended permit (per well)                                              $270
Fresh water fracture pond                                               $500
Gas well permit (per well)                                              $3,000
Gas well permit requiring a waiver granted by city council (in addition $5,000
to the gas well permit (per well) fee)
Line compressor site                                                    $500
Operator transfer (per well site)                                       $720
Seismic site inspection                                                 $360
Supplemental permit                                                     $180
 
(Ord. 16153, § 1, passed 10-5-2004; Ord. 17206, § 1, passed 9-26-2006; Ord.
18474-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-10-2009, eff. 2-20-2009; Ord. 19082-03-2010, § 1,
passed 3-23-2010; Ord. 20402-09-2012, § 1, passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 21219-04-
2014, § 2, passed 4-22-2014; Ord. 25772-09-2022, § 1, passed 9-27-2022, eff.
10-1-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Section 15-51 was formerly § 15-49.
CHAPTER 16: HEALTH AND SANITATION
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
      
III.   RESERVED
      
IV.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
      
V—VIII.   RESERVED
      
IX.   RESERVED
      
X.   RESERVED
      
XI.   RESERVED
      
XII.   NUISANCES
      
XIII.   OUTDOORS PUBLIC GATHERINGS
      
XIV.   MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS
      
XV.   RATPROOFING OF BUSINESS BUILDINGS
      
XVI.   VITAL STATISTICS
      
XVII.   CHILD-CARE CENTERS
      
XVIII.   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
      
XIX.   RECREATIONAL AQUATIC SPRAY GROUNDS
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all
things detrimental to the health of the inhabitants of the city, see
Ch. II, § 1
   Authority of city to make and enforce local police, health and sanitary
regulations, see
Ch. II, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 4
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 6
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Ch. 7
   Emergency reporting equipment and procedures, see
Ch. 12
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Nuisances, see
App. B, §§
11A-17 et seq.
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Smoking, see
Ch. 29.5
   Transportation of hazardous materials, see §
22-116
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Water safety, see §§
18-36 et seq.
   Weeds and brush, see
App. B, §§
11A-8 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Local public health reorganization act, see V.A.C.S. Article 4436b
Section
Article I: In General
   
16-1   Manufacturing establishments, requirements as to toilet facilities,
safety devices, etc.
   
16-2   Persons operating water supplies to furnish annual list of customers
   
16-3   Collections of offensive substances within two hundred feet of wells
   
16-4   Raw milk
   
16-5—16-10   Reserved
   
16-11   Samples of water
   
16-12   Duty of police as to enforcement of chapter
   
16-13   Public health service fees
   
16-14   Applicability of service fees
   
16-15   Penalty
   
16-16—16-30   Reserved
Article II: Department of Public Health
   
16-31   Established; supervision
   
16-32   Director; qualifications; duties generally
   
16-33   Selection of members of the department
   
16-34   Powers and duties of officers generally
   
16-35   Expenditure of money for public health programs through donations,
grants or contracts
   
16-36   Fees
   
16-37—16-50   Reserved
Article III: Reserved
   
16-51—16-100   Reserved
Article IV: Food Establishments
Division 1: General Provisions
   
16-101   Definitions
   
16-102   Purpose
   
16-103   Administration
   
16-104   Inspections
   
16-105   Risk analysis
   
16-106—16-110   Reserved
Division 2: Permits and Plans Review
   
16-111   Food establishment permits—General requirements
   
16-112   Classification of permits
   
16-113   Permit denial, suspension and revocation
   
16-114   Submission and review of plans
   
16-115   Fees
   
16-116   Prepermit requests for services
   
16-117—16-120   Reserved
Division 3: Regulation of Sanitation
   
16-121   State laws and regulations adopted
   
16-122   Equipment and sanitary facilities
   
16-123   Meat, poultry and fish
   
16-124   Miscellaneous food protection requirements
   
16-125   Roadside vending
   
16-126—16-130   Reserved
Division 4: Requirements for Certain Establishments
   
16-131   Mobile food units
   
16-132   Reserved
   
16-133   Catering services
   
16-134   Bed and breakfast homes
   
16-135   Farmers markets
   
16-136—16-139   Reserved
Division 5: Food Managers and Food Handlers
   
16-140   Food manager certification
   
16-141   Food handler certification
   
16-142—16-145   Reserved
Division 6: Enforcement
   
16-146   Enforcement options
   
16-147   Criminal citation
   
16-148   Emergency closure of a food establishment
   
16-149   Reconsideration
   
16-150   Hearings
   
16-151   Nuisance
   
16-152   Nuisance abatement
   
16-153   Judicial remedies and penalties
   
16-154—16-170   Reserved
Division 7: Pushcarts
Subdivision I: General Requirements for All Pushcarts
   
16-171   Generally
   
16-172   Permit requirements for all pushcarts
   
16-173   Pushcart sanitation requirements
   
16-174   Attention-getting devices
   
16-175   Single service articles
   
16-176   Central preparation facility
   
16-177   Servicing area
   
16-178   Servicing operation
   
16-179   Water system
   
16-180   Waste retention
   
16-181   Enforcement
   
16-182   Appeal
Subdivision II: Requirements for Pushcarts that Operate Elsewhere Than in the
Downtown Area
   
16-183   Pushcart specifications
   
16-184   Pushcart locations, hours, and products
   
16-185   Flower pushcarts
Subdivision III: Special Requirements for Downtown Area Pushcarts
   
16-186   Permits
   
16-187   Downtown area hours of operation and location
   
16-188   Slot permit fees
   
16-189   Revocation of slot permit
Articles V—VIII: Reserved
   
16-190—16-225   Reserved
Article IX: Reserved
   
16-226—16-250   Reserved
Article X: Reserved
   
16-251—16-265   Reserved
Article XI: Reserved
   
16-266—16-280   Reserved
Article XII: Nuisances
   
16-281—16-293   Reserved
   
16-294   Depositing filth on public and private property
   
16-295   Same—Duty of police
   
16-296   Allowing slaughtered hogs, beeves, etc., to remain unclean
   
16-297   Green or unsalted hides
   
16-298   Rendering materials from dead animals
   
16-299—16-307   Reserved
   
16-308   Abatement—Ordering owner or occupant of premises to abate or remove
   
16-309   Same—Failure of owner or occupant to obey orders, etc.; abatement by
city; expense to be charged against owner and constitute lien
   
16-310   Same—Statement of expenses to be forwarded to city attorney;
collection
   
16-311   Same—Right of owner to appear and show cause why order should not be
complied with; extension of time
   
16-312   Authority of director of public health in case of public epidemic
   
16-313   Power of director of public health and his or her assistants to make
arrests, administer oaths, enter premises, etc.
   
16-314   Power of director of public health and assistants to require
identification
   
16-315—16-325   Reserved
Article XIII: Outdoors Public Gatherings
   
16-326   Definition
   
16-327   Toilet facilities
   
16-328   Solid waste facilities
   
16-329   Food sanitation
   
16-330—16-345   Reserved
Article XIV: Miscellaneous Permits
   
16-346   Definitions
   
16-347   Permit required
   
16-348   Application and issuance of permit
   
16-349   Fees
   
16-350   Submission and review of plans
   
16-351   Criminal offense
   
16-352   Prepermit request for service
   
16-353—16-370   Reserved
Article XV: Ratproofing of Business Buildings
   
16-371   Definitions
   
16-372   New construction to be ratproofed
   
16-373   Inspection of existing building; notice to ratproof
   
16-374   Minimum requirements for rat stoppage
   
16-375   Material and installation
   
16-376   Protective coatings required
   
16-377   Masonry or concrete exterior wall construction—Foundation and exterior
wall openings
   
16-378   Same—Doors
   
16-379   Same—Windows and other openings
   
16-380   Same—Pipes, wires and conduits
   
16-381   Same—Light wells in sidewalks
   
16-382   Wood frame exterior construction—When curtain walls required
   
16-383   Same—Openings in ground floors
   
16-384   Same—Wall openings, doors and windows
   
16-385   Precautions against climbing or roof rat
   
16-386   Construction of markets
   
16-387   Business buildings
   
16-388   Trapping
   
16-389   Poisoning
   
16-390   Accumulations of lumber, boxes, etc.
   
16-391—16-405   Reserved
Article XVI: Vital Statistics
   
16-406   City registrar of vital statistics designated
   
16-407   Vital statistics fees
   
16-408   Reserved
   
16-409—16-419   Reserved
Article XVII: Child-Care Centers
   
16-420   Purpose
   
16-421   Definitions
   
16-422   child-care establishment permit; inspection and compliance
   
16-423   Child-care establishment permit application
   
16-424   Child-care establishment permit duration and renewal
   
16-425   Conditions of a child-care establishment permit
   
16-426   Inspection fee
   
16-427   Display of child-care establishment permit
   
16-428   Minimum requirements
   
16-429   General facility design standards
   
16-430   Interior design, activity areas
   
16-431   Exterior premises
   
16-432   Sanitation and hygiene standards for child-care center personnel
   
16-433   Food service requirements
   
16-434   Animal care
   
16-435   Child care worker certificate required
   
16-436   Applicable building code permits
   
16-437   Requirements for change of ownership of business
   
16-438   Applicability of other city permits and certificates
   
16-439   Enforcement
   
16-440   Penalty for violations
   
16-441—16-455   Reserved
Article XVIII: Public Swimming Pools and Spas
   
16-456   Purpose
   
16-457   State standards adopted and applied
   
16-458   Definitions
   
16-459   Fees
   
16-460   Swimming pool permit required
   
16-461   Issuance of permit
   
16-462   Permit conditions
   
16-463   Plans review; new and remodeled pools and spas
   
16-464   Pre-operation inspection
   
16-465   Nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operators
   
16-466   Maintenance of pool/spa records
   
16-467   Grounds for permit denial
   
16-468   Grounds for suspension or revocation of permit
   
16-469   Right of entry
   
16-470   Inspection reports
   
16-471   Closure order
   
16-472   Hearings procedures
   
16-473   Nuisance
   
16-474   Penalties and enforcement
   
16-475—16-499   Reserved
Article XIX: Recreational Aquatic Spray Grounds
   
16-500   Purpose
   
16-501   State standards adopted and applied
   
16-502   Definitions
   
16-503   Permit required
   
16-504   Technical standards
   
16-505   Filing application for permit
   
16-506   Fees
   
16-507   Examination, water testing and maintenance of records
   
16-508   Plans review
   
16-509   Pre-operation inspection
   
16-510   Right of entry
   
16-511   Inspection reports
   
16-512   Issuance of permit
   
16-513   Denial of permit
   
16-514   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
16-515   Closure order
   
16-516   Hearings procedures
   
16-517   Nuisance
   
16-518   Penalties and enforcement
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 16-1 MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS, REQUIREMENTS AS TO TOILET FACILITIES,
SAFETY DEVICES, ETC.
   All manufacturing establishments and other businesses in the city employing
more than five employees shall have, accessibly located, sufficient toilet and
lavatory facilities. In case as many as two women are employed, a separate
toilet and rest room shall be provided for women. Such toilets and rest rooms
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times, and no common towel
shall be used. Safe drinking water shall be provided and made available in a
sanitary manner. Common drinking cups are expressly prohibited. All rooms shall
be well-lighted and well-ventilated. Employers shall provide proper safety
devices for all machinery which is dangerous to the life or limb of any
employee. Seats, benches, tables, machines, etc., shall be of such height and
construction that no unnatural or harmful position need be maintained by any
workman. All processes or operations which require or give off obnoxious smoke
or fumes shall be carried on under a hood provided with such draft as may be
necessary to prevent such fumes escaping outside of the hood to the annoyance
or detriment of their own employees or others.
(1964 Code, § 19-434)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 16-2 PERSONS OPERATING WATER SUPPLIES TO FURNISH ANNUAL LIST OF CUSTOMERS.
   All persons owning or operating water supplies from which water is sold
through piping shall furnish to the director of the department of public health
once annually a complete list of the names and addresses of all customers so
supplied and shall also furnish the name and address of each new customer as
added.
(1964 Code, § 19-436)
§ 16-3 COLLECTIONS OF OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES WITHIN TWO HUNDRED FEET OF WELLS.
   No dry toilet, septic tank, cesspool, insanitary cow lot, horse lot, hog pen
or any collection of filth, garbage or other offensive or filthy thing or
substance shall be permitted within 200 feet of any well; provided, that if it
is evident that pollution is reaching the well from a source farther away than
the distance mentioned above, the source of the pollution shall be eliminated.
(1964 Code, § 19-437)
§ 16-4 RAW MILK.
   No person may distribute any unpasteurized milk or unpasteurized milk
product to any person not a member of their immediate household without
possessing a grade A raw for retail milk permit from the State of Texas.
Cheeses produced from grade A raw milk in compliance with state and federal
laws and regulations are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 21274-06-2014, § 3, passed 6-3-2014; eff. 6-11-2014)
§§ 16-5—16-10 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274 repealed §§ 16-5 through 16-10. Formerly, said
sections pertained to connecting private water supply with city water supply;
permits required; cross-connections—standards, inspection, maintenance, permit
required, annual permit fees and abatement of hazardous connections; and
derived from §§ 19-438.1 through 19-438.6; § 1 of Ord. 8987, adopted December
6, 1983; § 1 of Ord. 10840, adopted May 7, 1991.
§ 16-11 SAMPLES OF WATER.
   The department of public health may take samples of water from any well, any
part of the system, or from any bottles of water, for analysis and bacterial
and chemical contents of such water shall meet the requirements of the U.S.
Public Health Service drinking water standards.
(1964 Code, § 19-439)
§ 16-12 DUTY OF POLICE AS TO ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to watch for any
violation of the provisions of this chapter and to report at once all the facts
of any violation to the office of the director of the department of public
health.
(1964 Code, § 19-440)
§ 16-13 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FEES.
   (a)   The department of public health shall be authorized to collect fees
from those individuals using the facilities and/or services of the department.
   (b)   The fee for the facilities and/or services shall be in an amount
established by city council.
(1964 Code, § 19-440.1) (Ord. 8652, § 2, passed 9-28-1982; Ord. 8820, § 1,
passed 5-10-1983; Ord. 8902, § 1, passed 8-23-1983; Ord. 9230, § 2, passed 10-
2-1984; Ord. 9452, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-6-1985; Ord. 10034, § 1, passed 12-22-
1987; Ord. 10681, § 1, passed 10-2-1990; Ord. 10730, § 1, passed 11-20-1990;
Ord. 10840, § 1, passed 5-7-1991; Ord. 13622, § 1, passed 10-20-1998)
§ 16-14 APPLICABILITY OF SERVICE FEES.
   Authority is hereby delegated to the director of public health to establish
and promulgate such additional guidelines as in his or her judgment may be
necessary to ensure that no one is denied public health services based upon an
inability to pay the fees established under §
16-13.
(1964 Code, § 19-440.2) (Ord. 8652, § 3, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 16-15 PENALTY.
   Any violation, disobedience, omission, neglect, failure or refusal to comply
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
stated, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each violation
in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1964 Code, § 19-461) (Ord. 8918, § 1, passed 9-13-1983; Ord. 13622, § 1,
passed 10-20-1998; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§§ 16-16—16-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 16-31 ESTABLISHED; SUPERVISION.
   A department of public health is hereby established, charged with promoting
and protecting the public health of the community. The department shall be
under the supervision of the director of public health, who shall be subject to
appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the director of
public health shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city.
(1964 Code, § 19-1) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 16-32 DIRECTOR; QUALIFICATIONS; DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The director of public health or his or her designee shall enforce all
relevant laws for this jurisdiction. The director or his or her designee shall
also enforce for this jurisdiction codes and regulations promulgated by the
Texas department of health. The director of public health or his or her
designee shall coordinate activities with the Texas department of health and
with other local public health units, departments and districts.
(1964 Code, § 19-1.1) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982; Ord. 13622, § 1,
passed 10-20-1998)
§ 16-33 SELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   The director of public health shall have the power to appoint, employ and
remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel according to budgeted
authorized positions or authorized personnel overages for the efficient
administration of the affairs of the department of public health and to
prescribe and fix their duties, scope and authority and qualifications.
(1964 Code, § 19-1.2) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 16-34 POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS GENERALLY.
   The director and other members of the department of public health shall have
the right to enter the premises of citizens for the purpose of inspecting the
condition of the premises and for the purpose of enforcing the rules and
regulations concerning the public health and the ordinances relating thereto
now in force or that may be hereafter passed by the city council. In the
exercise of this right the department and its employees shall act with good
judgment and in a reasonable manner, so as not to unnecessarily invade the
privacy of the homes and premises belonging to citizens.
(1964 Code, § 19-1.3) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 16-35 EXPENDITURE OF MONEY FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS THROUGH DONATIONS,
GRANTS OR CONTRACTS.
   Subject to the approval of the city manager and the city council, this
department will provide for the expenditure of money for public health programs
through receipt of donations, grants or contracts.
(1964 Code, § 19-1.4) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 16-36 FEES.
   All fees collected by the department shall be paid over to the city
treasurer and deposited in the general fund.
(1964 Code, § 19-1.5) (Ord. 8648, § 1, passed 9-28-1982)
§§ 16-37—16-50 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 13622, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1998, repealed Art. III, §§ 16-51 through
16-100, which pertained to communicable or contagious diseases. See the Code
Comparative Table.
§§ 16-51—16-100   RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12553, adopted June 18, 1996, repealed Article IV in its
entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to food and food establishments
generally, and derived from § 1 of Ord. 9469, adopted August 27, 1985; §§ 1 and
2 of Ord. 9497, adopted October 15, 1985; and § 1 of Ord. 9827, adopted
February 17, 1987. Further, § 1 added §§
16-101 through
16-105,
16-111 through
16-116,
16-121 through
16-124,
16-131 through
16-135,
16-140 through
16-142 and
16-146 through
16-153, as herein set out.
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 16-101 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the
following list, it shall have the definition provided for such word or term in
Tex. Administrative Code Title 25.
   ABANDONED SLOT. A slot for which the user has failed to meet the
requirements for minimum operating hours under §
16-186(c)(11).
   ANIMAL FOOD. Meat, poultry, shell eggs and ratites intended for human
consumption. Examples of meat may include the flesh of cattle, swine, sheep and
game animals. Poultry may include the flesh of birds such as chicken, turkey,
duck and game birds.
   ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICES. Any mechanical or electronic sound producing
device or lighting device employed to attract patrons to any pushcart.
   AVAILABLE SLOT. One of the permissible slots available for use.
   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME. A property with a structure(s) existing on December
21, 1993, designed for and occupied as a single-family residence providing
overnight accommodations to transient guests. The structure(s) serves as the
primary residence or homestead of its owneroperator, with the bed and breakfast
home considered to be an accessory use under the city's zoning ordinance, and
not the primary use of the property. The person who owns the property must also
be the operator of the establishment.
   BEVERAGE. A liquid for drinking, including water.
   CERTIFIED FOOD MANAGER. Any person who holds a valid food manager
certificate issued under Chapter 438, Subchapter G of the Texas Health and
Safety Code.
   CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. A change of owner or operator of a food establishment
business, and does not refer to a change of owner of the building where the
business is located.
   CITY MANAGER. The city manager for the City of Fort Worth or his or her
designated representative.
   COMMERCIALLY MANUFACTURED VEHICLE. A vehicle originally manufactured as, or
converted or retrofitted to be, a mobile food vehicle by a person regularly in
the business of manufacturing, converting, or retrofitting mobile food vehicles
to be used for the preparation of TCS food.
   CENTRAL PREPARATION FACILITY. A fixed food service establishment permitted
and regularly inspected by a regulatory health agency where food is prepared,
stored, and packaged.
   DEPARTMENT. The environmental services department of the City of Fort Worth.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the environmental services department or his or
her designee.
   DOWNTOWN AREA. The area lying within the boundaries of the Fort Worth Public
Improvement District No. 1 as established by the findings of the Fort Worth
City Council in Resolution 3756-06-2009 or by future resolution adopted in
accordance with state law.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual working with unpackaged food, food equipment or
utensils, or food-contact surfaces. The permit holder, person in charge, food
employee, person having supervisory or management duties, person on the
payroll, family member, volunteer, person performing work under contractual
agreement, or other person working in a food establishment.
   EXTENSIVELY REMODELED. Any type of construction that results in remodeling
of 20% or greater of the food preparation area or any remodeling that
substantially alters the food storage or preparation area, including but not
limited to enlarging the kitchen or reducing the size of the kitchen; adding or
removing plumbing, including the wastewater lines; adding or removing plumbing
fixtures, especially sinks; or adding or removing equipment that results in a
layout modification.
   FARMERS MARKET. An operation at a designated location used primarily for the
distribution and sale directly to consumers of food products by farmers or
other food producers of agricultural products. A FARMERS MARKET for the
purposes of §
16-135 does not include a "flea market" or a retail grocery store.
   FARMERS MARKET FOOD VENDOR. A farmer or other food producer that sells or
distributes food at a farmers market.
   FARMERS MARKET FOOD VENDOR PERMIT. An annual permit issued pursuant to the
requirements of §
16-135(b).
   FARMERS MARKET PERMIT. A food service establishment permit to operate a
farmers market.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, or chewing gum.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food is manufactured, packaged,
produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, vended
or otherwise handled. The term includes any such place regardless of the
duration of the permit or whether there is a charge for the food. The term does
not include private homes where food is prepared or served for guests and
individual family consumption.
   FOOD HANDLER. Any person who prepares, serves, packages or handles open food
or drink, or who handles clean utensils, pots, pans or single-service articles,
   FOOD OPERATIONS. Manufacturing, packaging, producing, processing,
transporting, storing, selling, commercially preparing or otherwise handling
food, ice or drinks, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given away
for use as food or offered for human consumption.
   FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PUSHCART. Pushcarts with at least 75% of the inventory
of the cart consisting of whole fruits and vegetables, with the remainder
consisting of Non-TCS packaged foods.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A vehicle-mounted food service operation designed to be
readily movable.
   NON-TIME/TEMPERATURE FOR SAFETY FOOD (NON-TCS). All food that is not time/
temperature for safety food. The following list is exemplary of such food and
shall not be construed to be exclusive of any other non-TCS:
      (1)   Popcorn;
      (2)   Shelled, unshelled, raw or roasted nuts; and
      (3)   Pretzels.
   NONPROFIT FACILITY.
      (1)   All government entities and political subdivisions and public
school districts;
      (2)   Organizations chartered under the Texas non-profit corporation act;
and
      (3)   Operations recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service
as exempt under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   OPEN. Not covered or sealed. Not so closed as to exclude the risk of
contamination.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, firm or corporation.
   TIME/TEMPERATURE FOR SAFETY FOOD (TCS). A food that requires time/
temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or
toxin formation.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any building, grounds or place:
         a.   Owned by the city, a unit of county, state or federal government
or any other political subdivision of the State of Texas; or
         b.   Used or occupied by or/on behalf of the city, a unit of county,
state, or federal government, or any other political subdivision of the State
of Texas.
      (2)   The term PUBLIC PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to, public
parks, public sidewalks and government buildings.
   PUSHCART. A mobile food unit powered by human beings only. A pushcart may
have a bicycle-type propulsion system, so long as there is no motorized
component. It shall not include a fixed or mobile unit solely intended for use
as a mobile bar, accessory drink stand, or part of a service area or buffet
line, if it is part of or an extension of a fixed food or Beverage facility
operating under a food service establishment permit and it is located on the
permitted premises.
   REGULATORY HEALTH AGENCY. A government entity having responsibility for
enforcing public health laws and regulations in the jurisdiction where a food
establishment is located. In the City of Fort Worth, this term includes the
environmental services department.
   RISK ANALYSIS. An analysis using commonly known public health risks to
determine the degree of hazard a food establishment poses to the public.
   SAMPLING. A food product promotion where only a bite-sized portion of food
is offered free of charge to demonstrate its characteristics and shall not
consist of a whole meal, an individual portion or a whole sandwich.
   SANITIZE. The process of applying cumulative heat or chemicals on cleaned
food-contact surfaces that, when evaluated for efficacy, yield a reduction of
five logs, which is equal to a 99.999% reduction of representative disease
microorganisms of public health importance.
   SERVICING AREA. A designated area provided for the supplying, cleaning or
servicing of pushcarts or mobile units.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES. Tableware, carry-out utensils and other items such
as bags, containers, placemats, stirrers, straws, toothpicks and wrappers that
are designed and constructed for one time, one person use.
   SLOT. A designated general location, as approved by the city council, for
the placement of a pushcart in the downtown area. Only the city council may
create or alter slot designations in the downtown area.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment that operates at
a fixed location for not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a
single event or celebration.
   TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES. The current food establishment rules
promulgated by the Texas Department of State Health Services, abbreviated as
the TFER.
   UTENSIL. Any food-contact implement or container used in the storage,
preparation, transportation, dispensing, sale or service of food, such as
kitchenware or tableware that is multiuse, single-service or single-use; glove
used in contact with food; and food temperature measuring devices.
   VARIANCE. A written document issued by the department that authorizes a
modification or waiver of one or more requirements of this chapter if, in the
opinion of the director, a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the
modification or waiver.
   WHOLESALE FISH TRUCKER. A person who, at other than a definite and fixed
place of business, sells or offers to sell or exchange fish or seafood to
dealers or retailers, and at the time of such sale or offer to sell, delivers
or offers to deliver the fish or seafood to the buyer.
   YARD EGGS. Ungraded shell eggs.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
15241, § 1, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 20665-03-
2013, § 1, passed 3-19-2013, eff. 3-23-2013; Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 3, passed 5-
24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-102 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is the protection of the public health of the
citizens and visitors of Fort Worth by establishing minimum standards of
sanitation for food establishments and mobile food units.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-103 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The director and the director's authorized representatives are
authorized to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article
and the provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the rules of the
Texas Department of State Health Services relating to food, and to issue orders
requiring compliance with same.
   (b)   The director may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the
requirements of the chapter if, in the opinion of the director, a health
hazard, nuisance, or violation of state or federal law will not result from the
variance. If a variance is granted, the department shall retain the information
specified in subsection (1).
      (1)   Before a variance is approved, the person requesting the variance
must deliver the following information to the department, which shall be
retained in the department's file on the food establishment:
         a.   A written statement requesting the proposed variance that cites
to the specific section or sections of this chapter;
         b.   A written analysis of the rationale for how the potential public
health hazard and nuisances addressed by the relevant sections of this chapter
will be alternatively addressed by the proposal; and
         c.   A hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) plan, if
required by the department.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-104 INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The director may enter premises or vehicles regulated by this article
at all reasonable times, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this article or other laws regulating food, to
inspect permits, certificates and other records required by this article and
state and federal laws regulating food, to collect samples of food and other
substances as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or
adulteration, or whenever probable cause exists to believe that a violation of
this article or other laws regulating food exists thereon.
   (b)   The director shall first present credentials and demand entry if the
premises are occupied. If the premises are unoccupied, the director shall first
make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner, operator or other person in
control of the premises and demand entry.
   (c)   If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the
director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure entry, including
obtaining a search warrant under the guidelines of the Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§ 16-105 RISK ANALYSIS.
   The director may, through risk analysis, determine the risk of every food
establishment not exempt from this article. Based on the results of the risk
analysis, the director may:
   (a)   Determine the minimum inspection frequency of an establishment; and
   (b)   Require high risk establishments to provide the department with a
hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) plan. The director may conduct a
HACCP inspection of any high-risk establishment.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-106—16-110 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: PERMITS AND PLANS REVIEW
§ 16-111 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMITS—GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a food establishment without a current, valid
food establishment permit issued by the department.
   (b)   A separate permit shall be required for every food establishment with
separate and distinct facilities and operations, whether situated in the same
building or at separate locations. Separate and distinct lounge operations
within a food establishment that are in addition to food operations require a
separate permit. Multiple lounges on the same floor in the same building and
under the same liquor license will not require a separate permit.
   (c)   Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not
transferable. A permit shall be valid for the period of time shown on the face
of the permit, unless earlier suspended or revoked by the director.
   (d)   The application for a new or a renewed permit shall be made on an
application form prescribed by the director.
      (1)   At a minimum the application shall require the applicant's name,
type of business organization, the name and address of the owner or principal
officer of the business, the nature of the business, the location of the
business, and such other information as the Director deems necessary.
      (2)   Applications for permits for mobile food units or temporary event
establishments which operate from a fixed food facility located outside of the
city shall include a copy of the facility's current, valid, permit (state or
local) and the most recent facility inspection report (state or local).
   (e)   The department may not renew an expired or expiring permit until the
owner or operator of the food establishment provides proof of compliance with
current minimum department requirements.
   (f)   The owner or operator of a food establishment shall post and maintain
the current permit in a conspicuous public place in the establishment for which
the permit was issued.
   (g)   Upon change of ownership of a business, the new owner shall be
required to meet current food establishment standards as defined in this code
and state law before a permit will be issued by the department.
   (h)   The following types of establishments are exempt from the requirements
of this article:
      (1)   Group homes;
      (2)   Establishments selling only commercially packaged, non-TCS Foods;
      (3)   Vending machines selling non-TCS Food items;
      (4)   Nonprofit facilities, except that nonprofit facilities are not
exempt when food service is provided in conjunction with a childcare facility,
retirement center, hospital, school, indigent feeding program or public
fundraising events; and
      (5)   Private schools that do not have a kitchen.
   (i)   Criminal offenses.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly owns, operates
or is in control of a food establishment that is operating without a valid food
establishment permit.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a food
establishment and knowingly fails to post and maintain a permit in accordance
with subsection (f) above.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-112 CLASSIFICATION OF PERMITS.
   Food establishment permits shall be classified according to the duration of
operation and location of such operation.
   (a)   The duration of a permit shall fall within one of three categories,
either annual, temporary or seasonal, as follows:
      (1)   Annual. An establishment that operates throughout the year;
      (2)   Temporary. An establishment that operates 14 consecutive days or
fewer, in conjunction with a special event; and
      (3)   Seasonal. An establishment that operates more than 14 consecutive
days but less than 180 days each year, and not associated with a special event.
   (b)   The location classification of a permit shall fall within one of two
categories, either fixed or mobile, as follows.
      (1)   Fixed food establishments.
         a.   Food service establishment: restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars,
bakeries, snow cone stands, caterer's central preparation facilities, private
school cafeterias, halfway house food services, hospital kitchens/cafeterias,
institutional food services, etc., where food is prepared and served;
         b.   Retail food stores handling prepackaged, TCS foods;
         c.   Retail food stores handling, processing or selling open foods;
         d.   Food warehouses/wholesalers;
         e.   Farmer's markets/produce stands;
         f.   Bars/lounges; and
         g.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      (2)   Mobile food units.
         a.   Retail food unit handling prepackaged food;
         b.   Retail food unit (including trailers, mobile barbecues, snow cone
units, etc.) handling, processing or selling open food. A separate permit is
required for each different type of mobile unit owned or operated by an
individual or company;
         c.   Mobile produce unit;
         d.   Mobile units delivering or selling meat, poultry, fish, sea foods
or shellfish (except retail grocery delivery trucks and units that are
otherwise prohibited by this article). Except for wholesale fish truckers, any
person who operates, sells or engages in the distribution of any meat, poultry,
fish, sea foods or shellfish in the city shall operate from a fixed and
permitted place of businesses. Roadside vending of meat, poultry, fish, sea
foods or shellfish shall not be permitted in the city;
         e.   Pushcarts; and
         f.   Catering units.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-113 PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   The director may deny a permit, or after notice and hearing suspend or
revoke a permit for failure to comply with the requirements of this article or
any state law adopted by this article.
   (b)   Notice of a permit denial shall be served upon the owner or operator
of the food establishment either in person or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at the mailing address specified in the permit application. Notice
of a hearing to suspend or revoke a license shall be sent in accordance with §
16-150 of this article.
   (c)   When the director revokes or suspends a food establishment permit, the
director may require:
      (1)   All food handlers employed by the establishment to satisfy the
training requirements for initial certification as a food handler; and
      (2)   All managerial and supervisory personnel employed at such location
to satisfy the training requirements for initial certification as a food
manager.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-114 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW OF PLANS.
   (a)   When a food establishment is newly constructed or extensively
remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the development
services department for review and approval before construction, remodeling or
conversion is begun.
   (b)   If a food establishment is not required to obtain a building permit
from the development services department under (a), then the director may
conduct an onsite plan review in lieu of the food establishment submitting
plans and specifications to the development services department.
   (c)   The plans and specifications under (a) shall indicate the proposed
layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, types of construction materials in work
areas and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment to be installed. The
director of the development services department shall give the department the
opportunity to review and approve the plans and specifications to determine if
they meet the requirements of this article. No food establishment shall be
constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the department. Food facility owners/operators
shall ensure during plans review, construction and operation that their
facilities comply with all applicable city plumbing, mechanical, electrical,
building, zoning and fire prevention and protection codes.
   (d)   The director shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start
of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications, the requirements of this article and the regulations of the
Texas Department of State Health Services.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-115 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for:
      (1)   Food establishment permits, including an additional fee for the
reissuance of a permit after its expiration;
      (2)   Re-inspection;
      (3)   Plans review;
      (4)   Change of ownership; and
      (5)   Pre-permit requests for services.
   (b)   The department may not issue a permit until all requisite fees have
been paid.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 12707, § 1, passed 10-8-1996; Ord.
25772-09-2022, § 1, passed 9-27-2022, eff. 10-1-2022; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1,
passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-116 PREPERMIT REQUESTS FOR SERVICES.
   Department staff members may respond to requests to determine whether a
property is suitable for development as a food service facility. The requestor
shall pay the department a pre-permit site evaluation fee, at a rate
established by the city council.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-117—16-120 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: REGULATION OF SANITATION
§ 16-121 STATE LAWS AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   (a)   The following statutes, in their current form and as they may
hereafter be amended, are adopted and incorporated into this article as if they
were set forth at length herein:
      (1)   The "Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act," Tex. Health and Safety
Code Chapter 431; and
      (2)   The "Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection
Measures,” Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter 341.
   (b)   The following regulations adopted by the Texas Department of State
Health Services, in their current form and as they may hereafter be amended,
are adopted and incorporated into this article as if they were set forth at
length herein. If there is a conflict between a rule and any section of this
article, the more restrictive provision shall apply:
      (1)   The "Sanitary Rules for Food and Drug Establishments," Tex.
Administrative Code Title 25, §§ 229.41 et seq.; and
      (2)   The rules for "Texas Food Establishments Rules," Tex.
Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 228.
   (c)   The director will ensure that a current copy of each rules manual will
be kept on file in the office of the city secretary.
   (d)   A food establishment's owner, manager or operator commits an offense
if an employee, owner, manager or operator of the food establishment violates a
rule adopted pursuant to subsection (b) above.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
22822-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-
2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-122 EQUIPMENT AND SANITARY FACILITIES.
   (a)   Generally. Only commercial quality equipment or Utensils that meet or
exceed National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) standards or their equivalent will
be approved. Auxiliary equipment such as water heaters, remote connected
refrigerator compressors and air conditioners shall be located outside Food
preparation areas.
   (b)   Plumbing; grease traps. Grease traps should be located outdoors. If
they are located indoors, the top of the trap shall be flush with the floor,
except when located above another floor. When installed above floor level,
grease traps shall be sealed to the floor. Grease traps shall be easily
accessible for cleaning and shall comply with the city's plumbing code and
environment code.
   (c)   Lavatory installation. Lavatories shall be located every 15 feet or as
determined necessary by the department in food preparation and utensil washing
areas to permit convenient use by all employees.
   (d)   Lavatory facilities and supplies. Hand cleansing soap or detergent in
a sanitary dispenser shall be available at each lavatory.
   (e)   Cleaning facilities. Establishments that are required to undergo plans
review or which have a change of ownership shall have at least one utility sink
or curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain and supplied with hot
and cold water by means of a mixing valve. The cleaning facility shall be used
for cleaning mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of
mop water and similar liquid wastes. The use of lavatories, utensil or
equipment washing sinks, or food preparation sinks for this purpose is
prohibited.
   (f)   Offense. A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
food establishment that is in violation of any provision of this section.
(Ord. 12533, passed 2-28-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff.
4-18-2025)
§ 16-123 MEAT, POULTRY AND FISH.
   (a)   The processing and packaging of meat or poultry shall be conducted in
a refrigerated room:
      (1)   Where the temperature is kept at 50°F or less; or
      (2)   Which, along with processing equipment, undergoes a midshift
cleanup after four hours of operation.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a food
establishment that is in violation of subsection (a) of this section.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-124 MISCELLANEOUS FOOD PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The director is authorized to detain suspected contaminated,
adulterated, or otherwise unwholesome food.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 21274-06-2014, § 1, passed 6-3-2014,
eff. 6-11-2014; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-125 ROADSIDE VENDING.
   (a)   Roadside vending of unprocessed TCS food is prohibited.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person violates subsection (a)
above.
(Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-126—16-130 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 16-131 MOBILE FOOD UNITS.
   (a)   Sticker. The mobile food unit permit sticker for a mobile food unit
shall be displayed on the upper left rear area of the vehicle in a conspicuous
location. If such location is not practicable, the permit shall be located in a
location approved by the director.
   (b)   Mobile barbecue trailers. Mobile barbecue trailer cooking surfaces
shall be tightly enclosed and constructed in such a way as to protect all food
contact surfaces from possible contamination both in transit and during use.
Mobile barbecue trailers shall be used in conjunction with an approved and
permitted central preparation facility and mobile food unit.
   (c)   Central preparation facility.
      (1)   All mobile food units (except catering units) and pushcarts
handling TCS Foods shall operate from a central preparation facility or other
fixed food service establishments that are regularly inspected by a regulatory
heath agency. All mobile food units handling TCS food shall report at least
once a day to their central preparation facility to clean and service the
mobile unit.
      (2)   The following are exempt from these requirements:
         a.   Catering operations with their own central preparation facility;
         b.   Snow cone trailers;
         c.   Com roasters; and
         d.   Pre-packaged ice cream units.
   (d)   Commercially manufactured vehicle. All mobile food units handling TCS
Foods shall be commercially manufactured. This requirement shall not apply to
snow cone vendors, prepackaged ice cream, com roasters or other Foods as
determined by the director.
   (e)   Mobile unit log. Each mobile unit operator must maintain a log that
contains the date of servicing and the signature of the central preparation
facility operator. This log will be made available to the director upon
request.
   (f)   Central preparation facility log. Each approved central preparation
facility must maintain a log that contains the date of servicing for each
mobile food unit operator and the signature of the mobile food unit operator
after each servicing. This log will be made available to the director upon
request.
   (g)   Servicing area. All mobile food units and pushcarts handling open
foods shall have a servicing area which shall have overhead protection, a
location(s) for draining and flushing liquid wastes, and a location(s) for the
loading and unloading of food and related supplies.
   (h)   Servicing area operation.
      (1)   All liquid waste containers shall be thoroughly flushed and drained
daily during servicing operations.
      (2)   Flushing and draining activities shall be conducted in the
servicing area. No flushing or draining of liquid waste shall be permitted on
public streets or in any area other than the servicing area.
   (i)   Waste retention.
      (1)   Solid waste shall be contained in an easily cleanable, self-
closing, lidded trash receptacle which shall be kept on or near the mobile unit
at all times. The area around the mobile vending unit shall be kept clean and
free from litter, garbage and debris.
   (j)   Water system. All mobile food units handling open tcs foods shall
provide not less than 15 gallons, and be of sufficient capacity to meet the
peak water demands of the food establishment, of hot/cold potable water under
pressure at all times for use in utensil cleaning, sanitizing and hand washing.
A single water inlet shall be located so as not to be contaminated by waste
discharge. Such inlet shall be capped at all times except when being filled,
and shall contain only potable water. Connection or direct hook-up to water
sources other than those on the mobile unit is prohibited unless approved by
the director.
   (k)   Temporary events. Mobile food units and caterers may operate at
temporary events by possessing a valid mobile food unit permit or by obtaining
a temporary food establishment permit and meeting the requirements of a
temporary food service establishment as described in this article.
   (l)   Seasonally or annually permitted mobile units. All seasonally or
annually permitted mobile units that operate at the same location throughout
the day shall either:
      (1)   Provide a sanitary restroom facility built in the mobile unit; or
      (2)   Have access to the primary business owner's commercially plumbed
restroom that is accessible during all hours of food preparation and vending,
provides hot and cold running water through a mixing valve or combination
faucet and is within 300 feet of the unit.
   (m)   Operating location. All mobile units that will operate at the same
location throughout operating hours will provide the director with the address
of the operating location. If the operating location changes during the period
of the permit, the operator will provide the director with the new operating
address seven days prior to moving to the new location. A notarized letter from
the primary business granting bathroom access must also be provided to the
director.
   (n)   Violation. The owner or operator of a mobile food unit commits an
offense if the mobile food unit is operated in violation of any provision of
this section.
   (o)   Offense. The owner or operator of the primary business, as defined by
the director of development services, on which the unit is located commits an
offense if the mobile food unit is operated during preparation and vending
without access to the restroom as required by this section.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
15241, § 2, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 27523-03-
2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-132 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 2, adopted May 24, 2016, repealed § 16-132 which
pertained to requirements for pushcarts, derived from Ord. 12553, adopted June
18, 1996. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 16-133 CATERING SERVICES.
   (a)   A person operating a catering service shall be affiliated with a fixed
food establishment that is permitted by the department having jurisdiction over
the area where the facility is located.
   (b)   A catering service shall serve only food that requires limited
additional preparation at the service site unless approved by the director.
   (c)   The owner or operator of a catering service commits an offense if the
catering service is operated in violation of this section.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-134 BED AND BREAKFAST HOMES.
   The Texas Department of State Health Services "Texas Food Establishment
Rules" shall apply to bed and breakfast homes with the following exceptions.
   (a)   Pets may be present on the premises, but shall be excluded from food
preparation and indoor dining areas at all times.
   (b)   Laundry facilities installed in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions may be present in the residential kitchen.
   (c)   TCS foods shall be cooked and served only for immediate consumption
and only for registered, overnight houseguests or guests at private breakfasts,
luncheons, dinners or receptions.
   (d)   A three compartment sink shall be provided and used for manual
cleaning and sanitizing of cooking equipment, utensils and tableware. The
director may allow the use of a portable dish tub in lieu of a third
compartment if no health hazards will result.
   (e)   A domestic or homestyle dishwasher may be used if the following
criteria are met.
      (1)   The dishwasher must effectively remove physical soil from all
surfaces of dishes.
      (2)   The dishwasher must sanitize dishes by the application of
sufficient accumulative heat.
      (3)   The operator shall provide and use daily a maximum registering
thermometer or a thermal label to determine that the final rinse or drying
cycle raises the surface temperature to a minimum of 160°F.
      (4)   The dishwasher must be installed and operated according to
manufacturer's instructions for the highest level of sanitization possible when
sanitizing residential kitchen utensils and tableware; a copy of the
instructions must be available on the premises at all times.
   (f)   The owner or operator of a bed and breakfast home commits an offense
if the bed and breakfast home is operated in violation of any provision of this
section.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-135 FARMERS MARKETS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate a farmers market without a valid farmers
market permit issued by the department. A copy shall be conspicuously posted at
the site of the farmers market.
      (2)   Farmers markets shall be located only on appropriately zoned
property. The owner or operator of the farmers market shall obtain a notarized
letter from the property owner stating that the market has permission to vend
food on the property. The notarized letter shall be submitted to the director
along with the farmers market permit application.
      (3)   Conveniently located, commercial, fixed-plumbed toilet facilities
shall be available for market vendors. A notarized letter from the business
owner granting the market vendors access to toilet facilities during all hours
of the farmers market operation shall be submitted with the farmers market
permit application. A copy of the letter shall be made available to the
director upon request. All toilets shall conform to the city code and shall
have tight fitting, self-closing solid doors. Toilet rooms and fixtures shall
be clean and in good repair. Toilet paper shall be available and easily
accessible at all times. Toilets accessible to women shall have a trash
receptacle that is covered with a lid.
      (4)   A handwash lavatory with hot and cold water under pressure and
tempered through a mixing valve shall be provided in or immediately adjacent to
the toilet room. A soap dispenser and disposable paper towels shall be
available at all times. All wastewater shall be captured and disposed of in an
approved sewage disposal system.
      (5)   A farmers market that is operated at any one specific location for
fewer than three hours per month may provide portable toilets and portable
handwashing facilities instead of the permanent facilities required by §§
16-135(a)(3) and
16-135(a)(4). A copy of the rental receipt or other appropriate proof of the
availability of the portable facilities shall be submitted with the farmers
market permit application. All portable toilets shall be maintained in good
working condition without any broken surfaces or leaks, in a clean and sanitary
manner, and be adequately supplied with toilet paper. All portable handwashing
facilities shall be maintained in good working condition without any broken
surfaces or leaks, in a clean and sanity manner, and be adequately supplied
with hand soap and paper towels.
      (6)   The permit holder shall ensure that all trash, refuse and garbage
is removed from the site at the end of each day or that trash, refuse and
garbage is placed in appropriate containers for later disposal. The premises
occupied by the farmers market shall be kept clean and free of accumulated
trash, refuse or garbage during and after the hours of operation. All trash,
refuse and garbage that remains at the market site shall be sealed in plastic
bags and discarded in waste containers. Sufficient durable, nonabsorbent and
easily cleanable, leak proof, rodent and insect proof refuse and garbage
containers shall be available on site.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any farmers market food vendor to engage
in food preparation other than that involved in sampling.
   (b)   Sale and distribution of food at farmers markets.
      (1)   Farmers market food vendor permit required:
         a.   A farmers market food vendor that sells or distributes food,
other than packaged food that is non-TCS food, whole uncut fresh produce, or
food from a cottage food production operation, as defined by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 437.001 (2-b), must obtain a farmers market food vendor permit;
         b.   A farmers market food vendor that sells only whole uncut fresh
produce or packaged non-TCS food will not be required to obtain a farmers
market food vendor permit.
      (2)   No person shall sell or distribute food, other than packaged food
that is non-TCS or, whole uncut fresh fruits and vegetables, or food from a
cottage food production operation, as defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code §
437.001 (2-b), unless a farmers market food vendor permit is obtained from the
department.
      (3)   A farmers market food vendor permit holder must comply with the
requirements for temporary food establishments specified in Texas Food
Establishment Rules and this chapter.
      (4)   Food shall be safe, unadulterated and honestly presented to the
consumer.
      (5)   Food sold at a farmers market must comply with applicable state and
federal laws.
      (6)   Individuals distributing or offering TCS foods for sale at farmers
markets must have a valid food handler certificate.
      (7)   Foods not from an approved source, as defined in Texas Food
Establishment Rules, shall not be offered for sale at a farmers market.
      (8)   Packaged food sold or distributed at farmers markets shall be
labeled in accordance with the requirements of applicable state and federal
laws.
      (9)   All products distributed, offered for sale, or sold at a farmers
market must have been raised, grown, made, crafted, processed or produced by
the farmers market food vendor.
      (10)   Food products obtained from food retailers or wholesalers may not
be offered for resale at farmers markets.
      (11)   Food displays shall be confined to tables or to the bed of a
vehicle. Food must be at least six inches above the ground.
      (12)   Food displays shall be situated above smooth, hard, paved surfaces
such as concrete or machine laid asphalt, and not above grass or dirt surfaces.
      (13)   Farmers market food vendors selling or distributing only whole
produce, packaged food from an approved source that is non-TCS, or Food from a
cottage food production operation, as defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code §
437.001 (2-b), are exempt from obtaining additional health permits.
   (c)   Sale and distribution of TCS foods at farmers markets. farmers market
food vendors must meet the following public health and sanitation requirements
for TCS foods, whether in the raw (uncooked) or ready-to-eat form.
      (1)   Source. TCS foods must be from a source in compliance with all
applicable laws and which is licensed by the regulatory authority having
jurisdiction over the processing and distribution of the food.
         a.   Meat and poultry products must have either the State of Texas or
the federal USDA mark of inspection if required by state or federal law.
         b.   Yard eggs from an individual vendor's own flock may be sold at a
farmers market. The labeling and temperature requirements for TCS foods must be
met.
         c.   Graded shell eggs may be sold at farmers markets. The
requirements of the Texas Egg Law (Tex. Administrative Code Title 4, §§ 15.1
through 15.13) must be met.
      (2)   Packaging. Animal foods shall be packaged to meet the requirements
of state and federal laws including but not limited to those in the Texas Food
Establishment Rules.
         a.   Animal meat products must be in the package in which it was
placed at the Food processing plant from which it originated.
         b.   Unpackaged raw animal food products shall not be offered for sale
or distribution to the consumer at a farmers market.
         c.   Yard and graded shell eggs must be sold in cartons or other
containers and labeled.
         d.   TCS foods sold at farmers markets must be packaged and labeled in
accordance with state and federal law.
      (3)   Labeling. Animal food sold or distributed at farmers markets shall
be labeled to meet the requirements of state and federal laws and:
         a.   Animal foods that are not ready-to-eat in a packaged form and
shell eggs that have not been specifically heat treated to destroy all viable
Salmonella shall be labeled to include safe handling instructions as specified
in the Texas Food Establishment Rules;
         b.   Yard eggs cartons shall be labeled with the word "ungraded" and
the name and address of the producer (Tex. Administrative Code Title 4, §
15.2); and
         c.   Graded shell eggs must meet the labeling requirements of the
Texas Egg Law (Tex. Administrative Code Title 4, §§ 15.1 through 15.13).
      (4)   Time and temperature controls.
         a.   Raw animal meats, poultry, and fish/seafood must be sold frozen
at a farmers market.
         b.   Shell eggs must be stored at 45°F or less while offered for sale
or in distribution at a farmers market.
         c.   Time and temperature requirements for all other TC S Foods not
specified herein must meet the requirements specified under the Texas Food
Establishment Rules where applicable.
      (5)   Prohibited food items.
         a.   The sale and distribution of unpasteurized fluid milk and milk
products as defined by Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, § 217.1 is prohibited
at a Farmers Market.
         b.   The sale and distribution of game animal and exotic animal meats,
as defined in the Texas Food Establishment Rules are prohibited at a farmers
market, unless such game animal and exotic animal meat can be demonstrated to
meet the requirements of the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
         c.   The sale or distribution of live animals is prohibited at a
farmers market.
   (d)   Offense. A person commits an offense if that person violates any
provision of this section, or fails to perform an act required by this section.
(Ord. 20665-03-2013, § 2, passed 3-19-2013, eff. 3-23-2013; Ord. 22822-08-2017,
§ 2, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 23997-01-2020, § 1, passed 1-14-2020, eff. 1-22-
2020; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-136—16-139 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: FOOD MANAGERS AND FOOD HANDLERS
§ 16-140 FOOD MANAGER CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   A certified food manager shall present his or her certificate to the
director for inspection immediately upon request. The owner or operator of a
food establishment shall make food manager certificates available for immediate
inspection upon request by the director.
   (b)   Criminal offenses.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner or operator
of a food establishment and violates a provision of this section.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person is the food manager of a
food establishment and fails to obtain a food manager certificate.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if the person is the food manager of a
food establishment and fails or refused to present his or her food manager's
certificate to the director for inspection immediately upon the director's
request.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-141 FOOD HANDLER CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   Within seven days of beginning work as a food handler (except for
temporary event food handlers), an individual shall attend a food handler class
approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services. All temporary event
food workers shall attend an approved food handler class and obtain a food
handler's certificate before working at the temporary event.
   (b)   The owner or operator of a food establishment shall ensure that all
food handlers obtain the certificate within seven days of starting to work at
the food establishment.
   (c)   A food handler shall present his or her certificate to the director
for inspection immediately upon request.
   (d)   The following persons are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
      (1)   Certified food managers;
      (2)   Cashiers, hosts and hostesses, grocery sackers, delivery persons,
food stockers who handle only prepackaged items, and bus help who handle only
soiled cooking and serving utensils and dishware;
      (3)   Persons participating as volunteer Food Handlers performing
charitable activities for periods of four days or less; and
   (e)   Criminal offenses.
      (1)   A person working in a food establishment as a food handler commits
an offense if the person does not have a food handler's certificate as required
by this section.
      (2)   A person working in a food establishment as a food handler commits
an offense if the person fails or refuses to present his or her food handler's
certificate to the director for inspection upon the director's request.
      (3)   The owner or operator of a food establishment commits an offense if
a person works as a food handler in the establishment in violation of this
section.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-142—16-145 RESERVED.
DIVISION 6: ENFORCEMENT
§ 16-146 ENFORCEMENT OPTIONS.
   When the director determines that a violation of this article has occurred
or is occurring, the following remedies are available to the director. The
remedies provided for in this section or elsewhere in this article are not
exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator, consecutively or concurrently:
   (a)   Issuance of a warning notice;
   (b)   Issuance of one or more citations;
   (c)   Emergency closure order;
   (d)   Nuisance abatement, if applicable;
   (e)   Permit suspension or revocation proceedings, if applicable;
   (f)   Request the city attorney to institute suit for civil remedies as
provided by this article, or state law; or
   (g)   Any other remedy provided by law.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-147 CRIMINAL CITATION.
   The director is authorized to issue citations for violations of this article
and is also authorized to issue citations for violations of state health laws
which are punishable only by a fine not to exceed the jurisdictional limits of
the Fort Worth municipal court, unless such authority is denied under state
law.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-148 EMERGENCY CLOSURE OF A FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   When the director finds any food establishment in a condition which
poses an imminent risk to the health or safety of the public or the employees
of the establishment, the director shall be authorized:
      (1)   To close summarily such food establishment and prevent its use as a
food establishment until such unsanitary conditions have been removed or abated
and the food establishment no longer endangers public health; and
      (2)   To post and maintain at the entrance of the food establishment,
notice of the conditions therein, or to require the owner, operator or person
in charge of the establishment to post and maintain at the entrance of the
establishment notice that the establishment is closed.
   (b)   Conditions which warrant the actions authorized under subsection (a)
above include but are not limited to loss of electrical power, interruption of
water service, sewage backing up into the establishment, serious lack of
sanitation or catastrophic occurrence.
   (c)   The owner, operator or other person in charge of the establishment
will be given written notice of the reason for the closure.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the notice, the food establishment shall immediately
cease food operations.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in food operations
in an establishment which has been closed pursuant to this section.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person removes or tampers with any
notice posted pursuant to subsection (a) above.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-149 RECONSIDERATION.
   (a)   A person who has been denied a permit; the owner or operator of a food
establishment which has received an emergency closure issued by the director;
and the owner or operator of a food establishment which has received an order
issued by the director to come into compliance with this article or the laws
adopted by this article, may petition the director to reconsider the basis for
the action.
   (b)   In order for the petition to be considered, it shall be filed with
such director within ten days of the person being served with notice of the
action.
   (c)   Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall
be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration
or reviews of the action.
   (d)   In its petition, the petitioner shall indicate the provisions of the
action objected to, and the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are
contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, and
whether the petitioner requests a hearing on its petition.
   (e)   The effect of a permit or certificate denial or of an order shall not
be stayed pending the director's reconsideration or any hearing, unless the
director expressly and in writing stays the denial or order.
   (f)   Within a reasonable time of the submittal of a petition for
reconsideration, the director shall either grant the petition and withdraw or
modify the order or grant the permit or certificate; deny the petition if no
material issue of fact is raised; or if a hearing has been requested and a
material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-150 HEARINGS.
   (a)   The director may set a hearing after determining that grounds exist to
close a food establishment or if a hearing is deemed necessary pursuant to a
petition for reconsideration.
   (b)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the petitioner/
violator at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
   (d)   Notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail
receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, the director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
   (f)   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday,
Sunday or a city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular
city business day.
   (g)   The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this section
shall be deemed to be the date it is signed.
   (h)   Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. The city
shall have the burden of proof in all hearings except permit and certificate
denial hearings. In permit or certificate denial hearings, the burden of proof
shall be on the petitioner.
   (i)   The director shall act as the hearings officer.
   (j)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make written
findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written decision
without undue delay.
   (k)   A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the petitioner/
violator.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-151 NUISANCE.
   (a)   Misbranded, spoiled, diseased, or adulterated Food intended for human
consumption is hereby declared to be a public health nuisance.
   (b)   TCS food which is stored, displayed, prepared or served in a food
establishment at a temperature that is not in compliance with this article is
hereby declared to be a public health nuisance.
   (c)   A food establishment that is not maintained in a sanitary condition is
hereby declared to be a public health nuisance.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 21274-06-2014, § 2, passed 6-3-2014,
eff. 6-11-2014; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-152 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (a)   The director may give notice to the owner of the property upon which a
nuisance under this article is located, to cease, abate, remove or otherwise
remedy such nuisance immediately. if the person creating, maintaining or
allowing the nuisance is not the owner of the property, notice shall also be
given to such person.
   (b)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner/person in writing; or
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner/person at the owner's/person's
post office address and sent certified mail, return receipt requested. However,
if personal or certified mail service cannot be obtained or the owner's/
person's post office address is unknown, notice may be given:
         a.   By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least
twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (c)   If the property owner/person does not comply with the notice within
ten days of service, the director may enter the property containing the
nuisance and do any work necessary to abate the nuisance, except the demolition
of buildings.
   (d)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by the
director to protect the public health, safety or welfare from an imminent and
substantial endangerment, the director may, without complying with the notice
provisions of this section or without waiting the ten-day period, enter the
property containing the nuisance and do or cause to be done any work the
director deems necessary to abate the nuisance.
   (e)   After abating the nuisance, the director may inform the owner/person
in a notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner/
person commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger
to the public health, safety or welfare on or before the first anniversary date
of the original notice, the city may without further notice correct the
violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property.
   (f)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance, including the cost
of giving notice as required, shall be initially paid by the city and charged
to the owner of the property.
   (g)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk for the county in which the
property is located. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if
known, and the legal description of the property. The lien shall be security
for the costs incurred and interest accruing at the rate of 10% on the amount
due from the date of payment by the city.
   (h)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-153 JUDICIAL REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Criminal remedies.
      (1)   An offense as defined under this Article is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   If an offense defined under this article does not include a
culpable mental state, then intent, knowledge, or recklessness suffices to
establish criminal responsibility.
   (b)   Civil remedies.
      (1)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.012 through
54.017 and petition the state district court or the applicable county court at
law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties
or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article
that relates to:
         a.   The preservation of public health; or
         b.   Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other
matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents.
      (2)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, the city may
obtain against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
         a.   Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article
that relates to any matter specified in subsection (b)(1) above; or
         b.   Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary
for compliance with any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (b)(1) above.
      (3)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017, the City may
recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation of
any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
subsection (b)(1) above if the city proves that:
         a.   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
article; and
         b.   After the defendant received notice of the article provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the article.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019,
eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§§ 16-154—16-170 RESERVED.
DIVISION 7: PUSHCARTS
SUBDIVISION I: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PUSHCARTS
§ 16-171 GENERALLY.
   All pushcarts operating within the corporate city limits of the City of Fort
Worth shall comply with the applicable requirements of this division. The
regulatory health agency may impose additional requirements to protect against
health hazards related to the pushcart operation, may prohibit the sale of some
or all TCS food, and when no health hazard will result, may waive or modify
requirements of this division relating to physical facilities or operations.
Non-food items shall not be sold from pushcarts selling food.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-172 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PUSHCARTS.
   (a)   The owner or operator of any pushcart vending food within the
corporate city limits of the City of Fort Worth shall obtain a valid food
establishment permit, except that pushcarts from which only whole, raw, uncut
produce or individually packaged, non-TCS Foods are vended is not a food
establishment and does not require a food establishment permit, however, the
owner or operator must comply with the other applicable provisions of this
article.
   (b)   All food establishment pushcarts and their central preparation
facilities shall be inspected by the regulatory health agency prior to the
issuance of a permit.
   (c)   Acceptance of a pushcart permit is an express acknowledgment and
consent to the terms and restrictions of the permit.
   (d)   To fulfill the important public purpose of ensuring that nutritious
foods are available to all people in the city, if a food establishment permit
is otherwise required for a fruit and vegetable pushcart (such as one offering
cut produce) a reduced fee of 50% off the regular food establishment permit fee
in accordance with the city fee schedule shall be charged if at least 75% of
the inventory of the cart consists of fruits and vegetables, with the remainder
consisting of non-TCS packaged foods.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-173 PUSHCART SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All pushcarts shall comply with the following requirements:
   (a)   Configuration.
      (1)   Pushcarts shall be constructed of a smooth and cleanable material
and be constructed in a manner in which cleaning can be easily accomplished. A
cleanable canopy shall extend over the pushcart and cover the top surface of
the pushcart if unpackaged foods are offered.
      (2)   Separate space shall be set aside from areas where food is served
or prepared, for nonfood related items which are displayed on pushcarts.
      (3)   A pushcart body shall not exceed four feet in height, three feet in
width, or six feet in length.
   (b)   Operation.
      (1)   All food and condiments shall be dispensed in a sanitary manner.
      (2)   Food shall be stored, displayed and served in a fly-and rodent-
proof manner. Unpackaged foods shall be protected by a properly installed
sneeze guard shield.
      (3)   Bulk food items shall be properly labeled and dispensed through
sanitary devices or utensils.
      (4)   Pushcart operators and their staff shall not cook on or adjacent to
a pushcart unless such activity is in conjunction with another facility
permitted and inspected by the regulatory health agency.
   (c)   Sink requirements.
      (1)   A pushcart that sells only packaged food that does not require the
use of utensils and carts selling only whole, raw fruit or produce, will not be
required to have a ware wash sink or a hand washing sink.
      (2)   A pushcart that sells open foods that do not require the use of
utensils, such as a cart that sells roasted com, will not be required to have a
ware wash sink but will be required to have a hand washing sink.
      (3)   A pushcart that sells open foods that require utensils such as a
hot dog cart, will be required to have a ware washing sink and a hand washing
sink.
      (4)   Scooped ice cream sellers shall have a running water dipper well.
      (5)   A pushcart shall have a supply of paper towels, soap and detergent
which shall be conveniently accessible if sinks are provided.
      (6)   Each pushcart having sinks shall have an adequate amount of hot and
cold water under pressure to operate all sinks.
      (7)   Each pushcart having sinks shall also have adequate drain board
space.
   (d)   Fire safety.
      (1)   Each pushcart employing butane or propane tanks shall comply with
any and all applicable fire department regulations. Ground fault interrupters
may be required by the fire department as a safety feature to prevent
electrical shock. Each pushcart shall be equipped with an approved fire
extinguisher with a 2A 10BC rating.
      (2)   Pushcarts using flammable substances, including, but not limited
to, liquefied petroleum gas shall not be permitted inside of buildings.
   (e)   Trash container. All pushcarts shall have a trash container, such as a
trash bag or bin, available to customers for the disposal of food wrappers and
other waste. The trash container may be attached to the pushcart or standalone
within ten feet of the pushcart.
   (f)   Generally.
      (1)   In addition to these requirements, a person owning or operating a
pushcart shall comply with any applicable provisions of the Texas Food
Establishment Rules.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-174 ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICES.
   (a)   No mechanical or electronic sound producing device shall be employed
by a pushcart.
   (b)   Hawking and solicitation are strictly forbidden.
   (c)   Lights of sufficient illumination for vendors to operate during
nighttime or darkness shall be permissible in addition to safety reflectors and
lights required by traffic ordinances. Lights shall not be used as attention-
getting devices.
   (d)   No text shall be displayed on pushcart canopies.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-175 SINGLE SERVICE ARTICLES.
   Pushcarts shall provide only single-service articles for use to the
consumers.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-176 CENTRAL PREPARATION FACILITY.
   (a)   All pushcarts shall operate from an authorized storage facility,
central preparation facility or other fixed food service establishment
permitted and regularly inspected by a Regulatory Health Agency.
   (b)   The central preparation facility or base of operations shall be
constructed and operated in compliance with the requirements of the Texas Food
Establishment Rules and regulations of pertinent regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-177 SERVICING AREA.
   (a)   All pushcarts shall have a servicing area which shall have a location
(s) for draining and flushing liquid wastes and location(s) for loading and
unloading of food and related supplies.
   (b)   The surface of the service area shall be constructed of a smooth
nonabsorbent material graded to drain, and shall be kept in good repair.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-178 SERVICING OPERATION.
   (a)   Potable water servicing equipment shall be installed and maintained in
a manner that protects the water and equipment from contamination.
   (b)   Pushcart liquid waste containers shall be thoroughly flushed and
drained during servicing operations.
   (c)   Flushing and draining activities shall be conducted in the required
servicing areas. No flushing or draining of liquid waste shall be permitted on
public streets or in any area other than the required servicing area.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-179 WATER SYSTEM.
   All pushcarts requiring sinks shall provide not less than five gallons of
water under pressure at all times for use in utensil cleaning, sterilization
and hand-washing. One water inlet shall be located so as not to be contaminated
by waste discharge. Such inlet shall be capped at all times except when being
filled, and shall contain only potable water. Connection or direct hookup to
water sources other than those on the pushcart shall be approved by the
Regulatory Health Agency.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-180 WASTE RETENTION.
   (a)   All liquid waste shall be stored in a retention tank that shall have a
minimum capacity of seven and a half gallons or that is at least 15% larger in
capacity than the fresh water supply tank, whichever is greater. Liquid waste
shall only be discharged into a sanitary sewer disposal system. Waste
connections shall be located lower than the water inlet connection in a manner
to preclude contamination of the potable water system.
   (b)   Solid waste generated by permittees and employees shall be contained
in an easily cleanable, self-closing, lidded trash receptacle. All pushcarts
that remain stationary for longer than one hour shall provide and have
available for the public, a fly-proof, lidded trash container for the disposal
of refuse. Such trash container may be either on the pushcart or located
conveniently nearby.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-181 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The owner or operator of a pushcart unit commits an offense if the
pushcart is operated in violation of any provision of this division. An offense
as defined under this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
l-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. If an offense defined under this
division does not include a culpable mental state, then intent, knowledge, or
recklessness suffices to establish criminal responsibility.
   (b)   The department shall have the authority to enforce any and all
provisions of this division.
   (c)   It shall be within the power and discretion of the department to
suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder for continued or repeated
violation or infraction of any provision of this division or any rule,
direction or regulation of the department.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-
12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 4-18-
2025)
§ 16-182 APPEAL.
   Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action
taken under the provisions of the division, other than for an offense or
violation, may file an appeal in writing with the city manager or that
individual's authorized representative. An appeal must be filed within five
days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing with
the office of the city manager a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the
basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no more than 15 days
after receipt of the letter of appeal unless extended by mutual agreement of
the parties. Appellant shall be given at least five days' notice of the time
and place of the hearing. The city manager or authorized representative shall
give the appellant, and any other affected party, a reasonable opportunity to
be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the Regulatory Health
Agency should not be upheld. In all such cases the burden of proof shall be
upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support
the action taken by the Regulatory Health Agency. The city manager or
authorized representative shall make his or her determination and shall notify
the appellant in writing of his or her determination. The decision of the city
manager or authorized representative shall be final.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
SUBDIVISION II. REQUIREMENTS FOR PUSHCARTS THAT OPERATE ELSEWHERE THAN IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA
§ 16-183 PUSHCART SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   With the exception in subsection (b) below, a pushcart body shall not
exceed four feet in height, three feet in width, or six feet in length.
   (b)   A pushcart for selling frozen ice cream and popsicles in a residential
zone shall not exceed these Pushcart body dimensions: two feet in height, two
feet in width and three feet in length. It may have one attached nonabsorbent
container that does not exceed 16 gallons in size, if maintained in good
condition and clean, to display and store additional approved foods.
   (c)   Pushcarts operating outside the downtown area which are on commercial
or industrial private property, within 20 feet of the public entrance or exit
to an operating commercial or industrial business, and not within 100 feet of
the public right-of-way may also have the following allowed accessories which
shall be limited to:
      (1)   Coolers;
      (2)   Attached counters;
      (3)   Canopies;
      (4)   Up to two stools for use by employees; and
      (5)   Trash cans for use by pushcart operators and customers.
      (6)   Allowed accessories must be kept in close proximity to the pushcart
body.
   (d)   When placed for operation, the pushcart body, allowed attachments and
allowed accessories shall be limited to a total combined area not to exceed ten
feet in height, six feet in width, or ten feet in length.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-184 PUSHCART LOCATIONS, HOURS, AND PRODUCTS.
   (a)   Pushcarts which operate in residentially zoned areas shall be governed
by the following requirements:
      (1)   Pushcarts shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through
sunset and shall operate from and on sidewalk areas, except as otherwise
provided in this division.
      (2)   Products sold from pushcarts shall be limited to fresh produce,
packaged non-TCS foods, packaged frozen ice cream and popsicles. All foods
other than produce shall be labeled according to the requirements of the Texas
Food Establishment Rules.
      (3)   A pushcart may have attached one nonabsorbent container that does
not exceed 16 gallons in size to display and store approved foods as long as
size does not exceed dimensions in §
16-183(a).
      (4)   No pushcart may be located on a vacant lot. However, a pushcart may
be permitted to operate on a vacant lot in a nonresidential district with
written permission from the property owner and the director. In a residential
area or district, a pushcart shall not be permitted to operate on a
residentially used lot or vacant lot, but shall be permitted to operate on a
lot with an existing nonresidential use such as a church or school with
permission from the property owner and the director.
   (b)   Pushcarts may operate from commercially or industrially zoned private
property, not in the public right-of-way, and which is located outside of the
downtown area with the advance approval of the owner or duly authorized
representative of said property. Pushcarts shall not, however, be permitted on
private property in the downtown area.
   (c)   No sale or offering to sell shall be made from any pushcart of any
edible or potable substance on any property which is used or zoned for
residential purposes, or within 500 feet of any school property, nor on any
municipal recreation facility, except as specifically provided herein or with
the written approval of the director based upon special circumstances. No sale
or offering to sell shall be made from any pushcart within a city park, except
that sales may be made from the sidewalks on the perimeter of city parks.
   (d)   During special events, Pushcarts that are in accordance with the
special event permit may operate during the prescribed location and hours of
the special event, notwithstanding any provision of this Section to the
contrary.
   (e)   On lots or properties where pushcarts are allowed under this section,
no more than one pushcart shall be permitted at one time. Schools, however,
shall not be subject to this limitation so long as the school has provided
permission to the pushcart operators.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-185 FLOWER PUSHCARTS.
   Flower pushcarts. Pushcarts which stock and sell flowers shall be governed
by the following requirements.
   (a)   A cleanable canopy shall extend over the cart and cover the top
surface of the cart.
   (b)   Food and/or beverages shall not be sold from carts selling flowers nor
shall flowers be sold from carts selling food and/or beverages.
   (c)   Flower carts shall have a holding facility to retain water or fluids
used to keep flowers fresh.
   (d)   Flower carts shall be subject to the same operation, permitting,
spacing and location requirements as other pushcarts, except that flower carts
shall be exempt from those provisions with reference to equipment and
facilities which by their very nature have no application.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
SUBDIVISION III. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DOWNTOWN AREA PUSHCARTS
§ 16-186 PERMITS.
   (a)   Generally. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, vend,
operate, maintain or serve any item from a pushcart in the downtown area
without a valid slot permit and a food establishment permit issued in
accordance with this division. This slot permit shall be required in addition
to any other license, permit or certification that may be required by law,
including, but not limited to, food handler certification required under
Chapter 16 of this code.
      (1)   Application for a slot permit shall be made in written form to the
director.
      (2)   Slot permits for pushcarts shall only be available under the terms
of this division. No encroachment agreement shall be granted for any pushcart
unless such pushcart complies with all applicable requirements of this division
and
Chapter 16 in addition to requirements relating to encroachment.
      (3)   All pushcarts and required attendant facilities shall be inspected
by the Regulatory Health Agency prior to the issuance of a vending permit.
      (4)   In the interest of public health and safety, all slot permits shall
be issued for a specific location. Vendors shall locate in compliance with the
noted location so that the Regulatory Health Agency may conduct inspections in
compliance with city ordinances and investigate reports of unsanitary
conditions or food borne illnesses.
      (5)   Acceptance of a vending permit is an express acknowledgment and
consent to the terms and restrictions set by the Regulatory Health Agency. The
use of a permit is a privilege, not a right, subject to reasonable restrictions
as set out herein or as may be promulgated by the Regulatory Health Agency.
      (6)   As an express condition of the acceptance of a slot permit
hereunder for an available slot on public property in the downtown area,
recipient agrees to police for trash and debris, an area within a 25-foot
radius of the pushcart location.
      (7)   In connection with issuing a slot permit, the director shall,
following consultation with the director of the park and recreation department,
assign an exact location within the designated slot and shall indicate such
location on the slot permit documentation. The director may periodically adjust
the exact location within the council-designated slot to allow for construction
or other changed circumstances; any such adjustment shall be documented in
writing and attached as an addendum to the slot permit documentation.
   (b)   Insurance and indemnification.
      (1)   No permit shall be issued to an applicant vending on public
property in the downtown area unless verification of insurance is confirmed by
a representative from the Risk Management Division of the Human Resources
Department. The applicant shall have filed with the city's risk manager a
certificate showing that the applicant has secured and agrees to keep in force
during the term of the permit a policy providing for bodily injury and property
damage in the amounts as follow:
 
Property damage, per accident          $100,000
Personal injury or death, per person   $100,000
Personal injury or death, per accident $300,000
Product liability                      $300,000
 
Such insurance policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or amended
without at least 30 days' notice in writing to the director and the city's risk
manager.
      (2)   As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the
permit holder thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, its
officers, agents, servants and employees against any loss or liability or
damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for
property damage sustained by any person as a result of the operation, use or
maintenance of a pushcart, within the City of Fort Worth.
      (3)   As a further condition, permit holder by acceptance of the permit
expressly agrees to indemnify and hold harmless and defend the city, its
officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any and all claims
or suits for personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or character,
whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the consumption
of food products sold on any public property herein described.
   (c)   Pushcart standards on public property in downtown area. Any pushcart
which rests in whole or in part upon any public property in the downtown area
shall comply with all of the following standards.
      (1)   Pushcarts must be originally manufactured for use as a non-self-
propelled mobile food vending vehicle by a person regularly in the business of
manufacturing food preparation vehicles for sale and does not include any
vehicle that is converted or retrofitted as a non-self-propelled mobile food
vending vehicle.
      (2)   Pushcart body shall not exceed four feet in height, three feet in
width or six feet in length, exclusive of allowed attachments and allowed
accessories.
      (3)   Allowed attachments shall be limited to coolers and counters.
      (4)   To provide a uniform appearance, allowed attachments must be
constructed of or surrounded by the same type of material as the pushcart body.
      (5)   Allowed attachments must fold out from or be clipped on to the
pushcart body. Allowed attachments must be readily removable or retractable so
as not to cause pushcart body to exceed the size limitations of subsection (c)
(2) above.
      (6)   Allowed accessories shall be limited to:
         a.   Canopies;
         b.   Umbrellas;
         c.   Up to two stools for use by employees; and
         d.   A trash can for use by pushcart customers.
      (7)   Allowed accessories must be kept in close proximity to the pushcart
body.
      (8)   When placed for operation, the pushcart body, allowed attachments
and allowed accessories shall be limited to a total combined area not to exceed
ten feet in height, six feet in width, or ten feet in length.
      (9)   [Reserved.]
      (10)   No pushcart shall be used to display information other than a
valid permit, list of items served, the prices thereof and the name of the
vendor, all of which must be contained on the body of the pushcart. No
pushcart, allowed attachment or allowed accessory shall be used to display or
depict artwork or advertising materials of any kind, including, but not limited
to, the name, logo or mascot of any product or service.
      (11)   During the months of March through October, pushcarts must be open
to the public for a minimum of two hours per day on at least eight days of each
month, provided however, that the director may reduce or waive this requirement
due to inclement weather, demonstrated viability issues related to a particular
slot or other extenuating circumstance.
      (12)   Each vendor operating in a slot in the downtown area shall
maintain an operations log in a form prescribed by the director to show the
days and times on which the vendor operated and/or document the specific reason
that a vendor was unable to operate on a particular date. The operations log
shall be made available to the code compliance department on request. Failure
to maintain or produce an operations log shall give rise to a presumption that
the permittee has failed to comply with the minimum operating hours requirement
and that the slot has been abandoned.
   (d)   Number of slot permits. The number of slot permits available for
vending on public property in the downtown area shall be determined by the city
council after receiving comments and recommendations by the city manager, the
director and the director of park and recreation department. Only the city
council may create or alter slot designations in the downtown area.
   (e)   Permit conditions, limitations and restrictions. Permits on public
property in the downtown area shall be subject to the following conditions,
limitations and restrictions.
      (1)   Slot permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed 24 months.
      (2)   On or about February 1 of every odd numbered year, all slots in the
downtown area shall be put out for bid by the city. Slots shall be awarded to
the highest bidder that is in compliance with all requirements of this
subsection (e).
      (3)   If a slot becomes available outside of the typical bid cycle, it
shall be put out for bid by the city for the remainder of the unexpired term
and awarded to the highest bidder that is in compliance with all requirements
of this subsection (e).
      (4)   No slot shall be awarded and no slot permit shall be issued unless
the permit applicant can demonstrate that: He or she has a pushcart available
for dedicated and exclusive use in that slot; and that such pushcart complies
with all of the requirements of this division, including but not limited to,
size and construction requirements outlined in subsection (c) of this Section.
      (5)   No more than two permits to operate pushcarts on public property in
the downtown area shall be issued to an individual, a single business entity or
to two or more affiliated entities. For purposes of this provision AFFILIATED
ENTITIES shall include:
         a.   Individuals related within the third degree by consanguinity or
within the second degree by affinity as defined by Tex. Government Code Chapter
573;
         b.   Business entities with at least 10% common ownership; and
         c.   An individual and a business entity that the individual controls
or in which the individual has at least a 2% ownership interest.
   (f)   Slot permits nontransferable.
      (1)   Use of a slot as approved by city council on public property in the
downtown area is a privilege, not a property right. Such a designated slot
shall not be transferable; it shall be available only to the person designated
by slot permit.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to attempt to sell, lease or otherwise
transfer the use of such a designated slot from the original permittee to any
other person natural or unnatural. Such action shall result in automatic
revocation of the permits of the parties involved, and those parties shall be
banned from operating within the city limits for one year from the date of
revocation. Such revocation shall not preclude any other legal action.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-187 DOWNTOWN AREA HOURS OF OPERATION AND LOCATIONS.
   (a)   No sale or offering to sell shall be made from any downtown pushcart
at any time between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (b)   During special events, pushcarts with special event permits may
operate during the prescribed hours of the special event.
   (c)   It shall be permissible for pushcarts to operate within the following
designated areas:
      (1)   Designated slots on public property in the downtown area in
accordance with the terms of a valid slot permit issued by the director;
      (2)   At temporary special events with a special event permit.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-188 SLOT PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   After inspection and approval by the code compliance department of
each pushcart, each pushcart shall be assessed a slot permit fee in the amount
of the permittee's bid under §
16-186(e).
   (b)   Permits shall be issued in accordance with the application procedures
and upon payment of the permit fees per pushcart in the amount established by
city council.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
§ 16-189 REVOCATION OF SLOT PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may revoke a slot permit issued under this division if
the holder or an employee:
      (1)   Has abandoned the assigned slot;
      (2)   Fails to comply with any requirement of this division;
      (3)   Violates or fails to comply with any provision of city code or
other applicable law;
      (4)   Is discovered to have provided false or inaccurate information on
or in connection with the original permit application; or
      (5)   Is discovered to have provided false or inaccurate information on
or in connection with the operations log or any other documentation required
under this division.
   (b)   The director shall notify the permittee in writing of the revocation.
   (c)   The revocation of a slot permit may be appealed in accordance with the
process outlined in §
16-182.
(Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 4, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 27523-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-
11-2025, eff. 4-18-2025)
ARTICLES V—VIII: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12553, adopted June 18, 1996, repealed Arts. V through
VIII in their entirety. Formerly, Arts. V through VIII pertained to frozen
desserts, meat and meat products, milk and milk products and poultry processing
and derived from the unamended codification of the 1986 Code.
§§ 16-190—16-225 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 16-226
through 16-250. Formerly, said sections pertained to ambient air and emission
standards, and derived from §§ 19-451 through 19-460 of the 1964 Code; §§ 1
through 10 of Ord. 7547, adopted May 17, 1977; and §§ 1 through 3 of Ord. 8024,
adopted December 27, 1979.
§§ 16-226—16-250 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9664, § 2, adopted June 24, 1986, repealed §§ 27-35 through 27-38 of
the 1964 Code, from which Article X, §§ 16-251 through 16-254, concerning lot
clearing, derived, as amended by Ord. 6904, § 1, adopted September 5, 1973;
Ord. 7367, § 1, adopted June 14, 1976; Ord. 8066, § 1, adopted March 19, 1980;
and Ord. 8408, § 1, adopted September 8, 1981.
§§ 16-251—16-265 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 16-266
through 16-280. Formerly, said sections pertained to liquid waste and derived
from § 1 of Ord. 9978, adopted October 6, 1987.
§§ 16-266—16-280 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: NUISANCES
Charter reference:
   Authority to define and abate nuisances, see
Ch. II, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
App. B, §§
11A-17 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9664, § 2, adopted June 24, 1986, repealed §§ 19-371 through 19-383 and
19-389 through 19-398 of the 1964 Code, which comprised §§ 16-281 through 16-
293 and 16-299 through 16-307 of this article, as amended by Ord. 6410, §§ 1
through 5, adopted December 21, 1970. See
Article II, Division 3 of
Appendix B for additional nuisance provisions.
Statutory reference:
   Investigation of nuisances, see V.A.C.S. Article 4421
   Power of home rule cities re nuisances, see V.A.C.S. Article 4477-1, § 23
   State law as to power of home rule cities to define and prohibit nuisances,
see V.A.C.S. Article 1175, par. 19; V.A.C.S., Civil Stats., Article 1175, par.
16
   State law as to sanitation and health protection, see V.A.C.S. Article 4477-
1, §§ 1 to 4 and 7
§§ 16-281—16-293 RESERVED.
§ 16-294 DEPOSITING FILTH ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall deposit or allow to accumulate on private property, or
discharge from any place onto private or public property, or discharge from any
place onto private or public property in the city, any dead animal, human or
animal waste, foul water, solid waste or any noxious liquid waste.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person violates subsection (a)
above.
   (c)   The application of this section does not include discharges to the
city’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), which are regulated by the
city’s environment code.
(1964 Code, § 19-384) (Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 16-295 SAME—DUTY OF POLICE.
   In addition to the authority of the health department, the city’s police
department is authorized to enforce §
16-294.
(1964 Code, § 19-385) (Ord. 12274, § 1, passed 11-28-1995)
§ 16-296 ALLOWING SLAUGHTERED HOGS, BEEVES, ETC., TO REMAIN UNCLEAN.
   If any owner or occupier of any slaughterhouse, market or meat shop, wherein
any hogs, beeves or other animals are slaughtered or sold, either in such
slaughterhouse or on the premises of such owner or occupier, shall permit the
same to remain unclean, the same shall be deemed a nuisance.
(1964 Code, § 19-386)
§ 16-297 GREEN OR UNSALTED HIDES.
   No person shall keep in the city any green or unsalted hides for a period
exceeding six hours.
(1964 Code, § 19-387)
§ 16-298 RENDERING MATERIALS FROM DEAD ANIMALS.
   The business or any part thereof, or any or either of them, of bone
crushing, bone boiling, bone grinding, bone burning, bone drying, fat burning,
fat boiling, fat rendering, fat drying, gut cleaning or the making of glue or
the manufacture of fertilizing material of any kind or description, from any
dead animal, or parts thereof, or any boiling of offal, swill, fat or grease of
any description, which shall be done or carried on in an offensive, unclean or
defective manner in any building, yard or lot of ground within the city shall
be deemed a nuisance.
(1964 Code, § 19-388)
§§ 16-299—16-307 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   See the editor’s note to
Article XII.
§ 16-308 ABATEMENT—ORDERING OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES TO ABATE OR REMOVE.
   Wherever any nuisance exists within the city, the director of the department
of public health shall order the owner or occupant of the premises whereon such
nuisance exists to abate or remove the same within such time as may be
specified upon the order.
(1964 Code, § 19-399)
Cross-reference:
   Abatement of nuisances declared by
App. B, §§
11A-17 et seq., see
App. B, §§
11A-52 et seq.
§ 16-309 SAME—FAILURE OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO OBEY ORDERS, ETC.; ABATEMENT BY
CITY; EXPENSE TO BE CHARGED AGAINST OWNER AND CONSTITUTE LIEN.
   If the owner or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to obey any order,
issued under the provisions of the preceding section, or if the premises are
unoccupied, and the owner or his or her agent cannot be found, the director of
the department of public health shall abate or remove such nuisance and shall
defray the expenses thereof out of any moneys in the city treasury available
for such purposes. All expenses so incurred shall be charged against the owner
and shall be a lien on the lot and premises whereupon such nuisance exists.
(1964 Code, § 19-400)
§ 16-310 SAME—STATEMENT OF EXPENSES TO BE FORWARDED TO CITY ATTORNEY;
COLLECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the director of the department of public health to
forward to the city attorney a written statement of such expenditure by him or
her, under the provisions of §
16-309, in carrying out the provisions of that section, and it shall be the
duty of the city attorney to foreclose such lien or otherwise compel the owner
of such premises to repay the amount thereof to the city, together with all
charges of collection.
(1964 Code, § 19-401)
§ 16-311 SAME—RIGHT OF OWNER TO APPEAR AND SHOW CAUSE WHY ORDER SHOULD NOT BE
COMPLIED WITH; EXTENSION OF TIME.
   Whenever an order has been given by the director of the department of public
health to abate or remove any nuisance that may exist upon any lot or premises,
under the provisions of §
16-308, the owner thereof shall have the right, within the period of time given
in the order for abatement, to appear at the office of the director of the
department of public health to show cause why such order should not or cannot
be complied with, and the director of the department of public health may, at
his or her discretion, give such extension of time for the abatement or removal
of such nuisance as may be necessary; provided, however, there is no immediate
danger to the public health.
(1964 Code, § 19-402)
§ 16-312 AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN CASE OF PUBLIC EPIDEMIC.
   In case of any public epidemic, the director of the department of public
health shall employ any sanitary measure deemed necessary by him or her for the
control of such epidemic and to prevent its spread.
(1964 Code, § 19-403)
§ 16-313 POWER OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND HIS OR HER ASSISTANTS TO MAKE
ARRESTS, ADMINISTER OATHS, ENTER PREMISES, ETC.
   The director of the department of public health and other regularly
appointed employees of such department shall have the right and power to arrest
any person who may violate the rules, regulations, orders or requirements of
the department, or any ordinance or general laws relating to the maintaining of
the public health and sanitation of the city. They shall have the authority to
administer oaths and to require the giving of sworn testimony in matters
connected with the department of public health. They shall have the right to go
upon the premises of citizens for the purpose of inspecting the conditions of
the premises and for the purpose of enforcing the rules and regulations
concerning the public health and the provisions of this code relating thereto
or other ordinances that may be hereafter passed by the city council. In the
exercise of this right, the department and its employees shall act with good
judgment and in a reasonable manner so as not to unnecessarily invade the
privacy of the homes and premises belonging to the citizens.
(1964 Code, § 19-404)
§ 16-314 POWER OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND ASSISTANTS TO REQUIRE
IDENTIFICATION.
   The director of the department of public health and other regularly
appointed employees of such department shall have the right and power to
request and require any person to give his or her true name and residence
address to such director or employee when acting in an official capacity in
matters connected with the department of public health. It shall be unlawful
for any person to intentionally refuse to report or give a false report of his
or her name or residence address to the director of the department of public
health or any regularly appointed employee of such department who has requested
the information when acting in an official capacity in a matter connected with
the department of public health.
(1964 Code, § 19-404.1) (Ord. 7512, § 1, passed 3-7-1977)
§§ 16-315—16-325 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIII: OUTDOORS PUBLIC GATHERINGS
§ 16-326 DEFINITION.
   As used in this article, PUBLIC GATHERING means any meeting or gathering
held within the corporate city limits which attracts or can be expected to
attract more than 1,000 persons and will remain at the location for a period of
four hours.
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 16-327 TOILET FACILITIES.
   (a)   Toilet facilities, separate for each sex and plainly marked “men” and
“women,” shall be provided for outdoors public gatherings at a rate of no more
than 100 persons per toilet seat. Such facilities shall be designed to shield
the occupants from public view.
   (b)   Portable type toilets, if provided for outdoors public gatherings,
shall have waste therefrom collected at intervals of sufficient frequency to
preclude overflow and the wastes therefrom shall be disposed of in a manner
that does not create a health hazard or nuisance.
§ 16-328 SOLID WASTE FACILITIES.
   At outdoors public gatherings:
   (a)   All solid waste shall be stored in suitable containers with tight-
fitting lids and such containers shall be conveniently located throughout the
area; and
   (b)   All solid waste shall be collected daily or at more frequent intervals
as may be necessary to maintain sanitary conditions at the site and be disposed
of in a manner that does not create a health hazard or nuisance.
(Ord. 11209, § 1, passed 11-24-1992)
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 11209, adopted Nov. 24, 1992, repealed § 16-328 in its
entirety. Formerly § 16-328 pertained to vector control. Section 1 of said
ordinance also renumbered §§ 16-329 and 16-330 as §§
16-328 and
16-329.
§ 16-329 FOOD SANITATION.
   Food sanitation requirements for outdoors public gatherings shall be as
provided in the regulations adopted by §
16-102 of this chapter.
(Ord. 11209, § 1, passed 11-24-1992)
§§ 16-330—16-345 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIV: MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12553, adopted June 18, 1996, repealed Art. XIV in its
entirety. Formerly, Art. XIV pertained to permits for certain businesses,
occupations and vocations and added a new Art. XIV as herein set out.
§ 16-346 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. A change of owner or operator of a business, and does
not refer to a change of owner of the building where the business is located.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the health department and the director’s
authorized representatives.
   EXTENSIVE REMODELING. Any type of construction of facilities and/or
replacement of equipment of an establishment which:
      (1)   Results in a final job cost of $10,000 or more;
      (2)   Results in a significant modification of the operation or
facilities of the establishment; and
      (3)   Requires a building permit from the department of planning and
development of the city.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Fort Worth health department.
   MOTEL-HOTEL. Any facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations on a day-to-day basis, and shall include hotels,
motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, bed and breakfast
homes, bed and breakfast inns, rooming houses, dormitories and apartments
occupied by transient residents.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 16-347 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any of the following businesses without a valid
health permit issued by the health department: motel-hotel.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§ 16-348 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The application for a new or a renewed permit shall be made on an
application form prescribed by the director, and shall at a minimum require the
applicant’s name, type of business organization, the name and address of the
owner or principal officer of the business, the nature of the business, the
location of the business and such other information as the director deems
necessary.
   (b)   The health department may not renew an expired or expiring permit
until the owner or operator of the establishment provides proof of compliance
with current minimum health department requirements.
   (c)   A permit is not transferable.
   (d)   A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance. A permit
may be renewed upon proof of compliance with all applicable city and state
health laws.
   (e)   The owner or operator of the facility shall display the permit in a
conspicuous public place in the permitted facility.
   (f)   Upon change of ownership of a facility, the new owner shall be
required to meet all applicable city and state health laws before a permit will
be issued.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§ 16-349 FEES.
   The city council shall adopt schedules of fees for permits, plans review,
change of ownership and prepermit requests for services required or provided
pursuant to this article. The health department may not issue a permit or
conduct a plans review until all requisite fees have been paid.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§ 16-350 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW OF PLANS.
   (a)   When a motel-hotel is newly constructed or extensively remodeled, or
when an existing structure is converted to use as a motel-hotel, properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or
conversion shall be submitted to the department of planning and development for
review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun.
   (b)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans, types of construction materials in work areas
and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment to be installed. The
director of planning and development shall give the health department the
opportunity to review and approve the plans and specifications to determine if
they meet the requirements of this article and state law. No motel-hotel shall
be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the health department.
   (c)   The director shall inspect the motel-hotel prior to the start of
operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications,
the requirements of this article and state law.
(Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 16-351 CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly owns or operates a
business without a valid permit required by this article.
   (b)   An offense as defined under this article is a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§ 16-352 PREPERMIT REQUEST FOR SERVICE.
   Health department staff members may respond to requests to determine whether
a property is suitable for development as a motel-hotel facility. The requestor
shall pay the health department a prepermit site evaluation fee, at a rate
established by the city council.
(Ord. 12553, § 1, passed 6-18-1996)
§§ 16-353—16-370 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XV: RATPROOFING OF BUSINESS BUILDINGS
Statutory reference:
   State law declaring place or condition harboring rats to be a nuisance, see
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 2(j)
   State law requiring rodent control and eradication, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-
1, § 21
§ 16-371 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply.
   BUSINESS BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, regardless of
the type of material used in its construction, located within the boundaries of
the city, that is adopted to the occupancy for transaction of business, whether
vacant or occupied, for the rendering of professional services, for the
display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance
of work or labor, including hotels, rooming houses, beer taverns, office
buildings, public buildings, churches, stores, markets, restaurants, grain
elevators and abattoirs, warehouses, workshops and factories.
   OPENING. Any opening in the foundation, sides or walls of any business
building, including the roof, chimney, eaves, grills, windows, sidewalk grates
and sidewalk elevators, through which a rat may enter.
   PREMISES. Include all business buildings, sheds, barns, garages, docks,
grain elevators and abattoirs, whether public or private, and any and all other
structures used in connection with the operation of any business building, as
herein defined.
   RAT HARBORAGE. Any condition found to exist under which rats may find
shelter or protection, and shall include any defective construction which would
permit the entrance of rats into any business building.
   RAT STOPPAGE. Any feasible form of ratproofing designed to prevent the
ingress or egress of rats into or out of any business building. It is
essentially the closing or protecting of all openings in exterior walls and
foundations, or the grates in any sidewalk of business buildings, with
ratproofing materials installed in such a manner as to prevent rats from
gaining entrance.
(1964 Code, § 19-351)
§ 16-372 NEW CONSTRUCTION TO BE RATPROOFED.
   No person shall construct within the city any business building unless such
building is provided with rat stoppage in accordance with the regulations
prescribed in this article.
(1964 Code, § 19-352)
§ 16-373 INSPECTION OF EXISTING BUILDING; NOTICE TO RATPROOF.
   The director of the department of public health, or his or her
representative, shall inspect at frequent intervals and maintain strict
surveillance over all existing business buildings for the purpose of
determining any rat infestation. In the event any rat-infested business
building is found to exist, the director or his or her representative shall
notify immediately, in writing, the person in custody of such building to
protect such building by rat stoppage, as herein provided, regardless of the
need of the building for remodeling or repairs, and to take such measures as
will make the building free from rats. The written notice shall specify the
time, which shall in no event be less than 30 days from completion of such work
and improvements. Failure to comply with such written notice within the time
specified shall constitute a violation of this article.
(1964 Code, § 19-353)
§ 16-374 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR RAT STOPPAGE.
   The regulations set out in §§
16-375 through
16-384 shall constitute minimum requirements in equipping a business building
with rat stoppage.
(1964 Code, § 19-354)
§ 16-375 MATERIAL AND INSTALLATION.
   The material used in equipping a business building with rat stoppage shall
be approved and the installation supervised by the director of the department
of public health or his or her authorized representative.
(1964 Code, § 19-355)
§ 16-376 PROTECTIVE COATINGS REQUIRED.
   Solid sheet metal, expanded metal and wire cloth specified herein shall have
a rust-resisting protective coating of hot dip zinc galvanizing or equal.
(1964 Code, § 19-356)
§ 16-377 MASONRY OR CONCRETE EXTERIOR WALL CONSTRUCTION—FOUNDATION AND EXTERIOR
WALL OPENINGS.
   (a)   All foundation wall ventilator openings shall be covered for their
entire height and width with perforated sheet metal plates of a thickness not
less than 18 gauge, or with expanded sheet metal of a thickness of not less
than 18 gauge, or with cast iron grills or grates, or with any other material
of sufficient strength and equal rat-resisting properties. The openings herein
shall be small enough to prevent the ingress or egress of rats, and in no
instance shall be larger than one-half inch.
   (b)   All foundation, exterior wall and roof openings, excluding doors,
windows and those openings used for the purpose of ventilation and light, such
as those openings around pipes, electric cables, conduits, openings due to
deterioration or damage, broken masonry or concrete, or other openings which
may allow the ingress or egress of rats, shall be protected by closing such
openings with cement mortar, concrete or masonry, or close-fitting sheet metal,
or suitable size pipe flanges, or other material with equal rat-resisting
properties, which shall be securely fastened in place.
(1964 Code, § 19-357)
§ 16-378 SAME—DOORS.
   (a)   All exposed edges of the lower six inches or more, if necessary, of
wooden doors and door jambs serving as front, rear or side entrances into
business buildings from the ground, basement or cellar floors, and other doors
accessible to rats, shall be protected, if necessary, against the gnawing of
rats by covering such doors and jambs with solid sheet metal of not less than
24 gauge thickness. The same material shall be used on doorsills or thresholds,
or such doorsills or thresholds may be constructed of cement, stone, steel or
cast iron.
   (b)   Doors, door jambs and sills of coal chutes and hatchways that are
constructed of wood shall be covered with solid sheet metal of 24 gauge or
heavier, or they may be replaced with metal chutes of 24 gauge or heavier,
installed in such manner as will prevent the ingress or egress of rats.
   (c)   All doors on which metal flashing has been applied shall be properly
hinged to provide for free swinging. When closed, doors shall fit snugly so
that the maximum clearance between any door, door jambs and sills shall not be
greater than three-eighths of an inch.
   (d)   Door jambs and sills constructed of metal, concrete, masonry, stone or
cement mortar, or cast iron and steel, when fitting closely to exclude rats,
are not required to comply with this provision.
(1964 Code, § 19-358)
§ 16-379 SAME—WINDOWS AND OTHER OPENINGS.
   (a)   All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or
ventilation, located within 30 inches above the existing ground or roof level
immediately below such openings, shall be covered, if necessary, for their
entire height and width, including frames, with wire cloth of 19 gauge or
heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch.
   (b)   All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation
in the exterior walls, which may be accessible to rats by way of exposed pipes,
wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be covered with guards of wire
cloth of 19 gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch,
or, in lieu of wire cloth covering, such pipes, wire, conduits and other
appurtenances shall be blocked from rat usage by installing sheet metal guards
as provided in the following section.
(1964 Code, § 19-359)
§ 16-380 SAME—PIPES, WIRES AND CONDUITS.
   (a)   Poles, wires, conduits and other appurtenances which may cause
openings to be accessible to rats shall be blocked from rat usage, where such
openings are not ratproofed as provided in the preceding section, by installing
sheet metal guards of 24 gauge or heavier.
   (b)   Such guards, when used on horizontal pipes, wires, conduits or other
appurtenances, shall be placed in a vertical position and shall be snugly
fitted around the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenances. Such guard shall
measure not less than 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the pipe, wire,
conduit or other appurtenances where the intervening space between the wall and
pipe permits, and shall extend 30 inches in an upward direction and 12 inches
in a downward direction, and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire,
conduit or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever
practicable, so that the guard will remain in a vertical position at all times.
   (c)   Such guards, when used on vertical pipes, wires, conduits or other
appurtenances, shall be fitted snugly around the pipe, wire, conduit or other
appurtenance, shall be placed in a horizontal position at a right angle
thereto, and shall extend horizontally from the pipe, wire, conduit or other
appurtenance for a minimum distance of 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the
pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance where the intervening space between
pipe and wall permits, and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire,
conduit or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever
practicable, in such manner that the guard will remain in a horizontal position
at all times.
(1964 Code, § 19-360)
§ 16-381 SAME—LIGHT WELLS IN SIDEWALKS.
   Light wells with windows in exterior walls that are located below the
outside ground level shall be protected from the ingress and egress of rats by
one of the following methods.
   (a)   Installing over light wells cast iron or steel grills or steel
gratings or other material of equal strength and rat-resisting properties, with
opening in grills or gratings not to exceed one-half inch in shortest
dimension.
   (b)   Installing securely to and completely covering existing metal grills
that are broken or have openings larger than one-half inch in shortest
dimension, or otherwise defective, with expanded metal of 18 gauge or heavier,
having openings not greater than one-half inch in shortest dimension, or with
16 gauge or heavier wire cloth with one-half inch mesh.
   (c)   At the option of the person in custody of the business building, the
opening in the wall of the building below the grate may be entirely closed with
brick or concrete or partially closed and the remaining open space covered with
19 gauge or heavier wire cloth, with mesh not to exceed one-half inch.
(1964 Code, § 19-361)
§ 16-382 WOOD FRAME EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION—WHEN CURTAIN WALLS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floors with
sills less than 18 inches above the surface of the ground shall have the
intervening space between the floor sill and the ground protected against the
ingress or egress of rats by installing a solid masonry or concrete wall not
less than four inches thick or solid sheet metal curtain wall of 18 gauge or
heavier around the entire perimeter of the business building, extending such
curtain wall to a depth of not less than 18 inches below the surface of the
ground level and extending outward laterally a distance of 12 inches from
bottom of the curtain wall and fastening securely such curtain wall to the
outside of the building with 24 gauge sheet metal in such manner as will
prevent rats from entering the building.
   (b)   Business buildings constructed on piers having the lower surface of
wooden floor sills more than 12 inches above the ground level shall have the
intervening spaces between the floor sill and the ground protected against the
ingress or egress of rats by installing curtain walls in accordance with the
preceding subsection (a) above, or by protecting such business buildings
against the ingress or egress of rats as provided in §
16-383.
   (c)   In lieu of the installation of curtain walls, all ground floors of
wood construction may be replaced with concrete of not less than three inches
in thickness, with the exterior walls protected for a height of 24 inches above
the concrete floor with masonry, concrete or solid sheet metal of 24 gauge or
heavier. Such exterior wall protection shall be securely tied into the concrete
floor at all points.
(1964 Code, § 19-362)
§ 16-383 SAME—OPENINGS IN GROUND FLOORS.
   In business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills greater
than 18 inches above the ground level, solid sheet metal coverage of 24 gauge
or heavier may be installed snugly around each pipe, cable, wire, conduit or
other utility service passing through wooden ground floor in lieu of curtain
walls. The diameter of such metal coverage shall not be less than eight inches
larger than the diameter of pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility
service, and shall be securely fastened to the wooden floor. All other openings
in wooden ground floors through which rats may gain entrance into double walls
or the interior of business buildings, such as openings that may exist in
floors and double walls above floor sills, shall be closed with 24 gauge or
heavier solid sheet metal or 16 gauge or heavier wire cloth of one-half inch
mesh, or with concrete or masonry. The intervening space between the ground and
the floor sill shall be kept clean and clear. If the distance from the top of
the floor sill to the under surface of a wooden floor is less than 18 inches,
rat-stoppage treatment, as provided in other sections of this article, shall be
used.
(1964 Code, § 19-363)
§ 16-384 SAME—WALL OPENINGS, DOORS AND WINDOWS.
   Wood frame constructed business buildings having concrete or masonry
foundation walls shall have ventilators in foundation walls protected as
provided in §
16-377. All miscellaneous wall openings, doors and windows shall be protected
in accordance with this article.
(1964 Code, § 19-364)
§ 16-385 PRECAUTIONS AGAINST CLIMBING OR ROOF RAT.
   In addition to the other provisions of this article relative to the
protection of business buildings, the building shall be further protected by
compliance with the following provisions.
   (a)   Leaning objects against buildings. No person in custody of such
business building shall permit any fishing poles, ladders or other objects to
lean against the side or wall of such business building in such manner that
rats could climb on and reach any part of the structure or roof.
   (b)   Elevator shafts, etc. The person in custody of a business building
shall also protect elevator shafts, fire escapes and guy wires in such manner
that rats will not be able to gain ingress into such business buildings.
   (c)   Adjacent trees and limbs. It shall be the duty of any person in
custody of a business building to trim the branches of all trees extending
over, against or near any business building, and the same shall be cut and
trimmed and kept cut and trimmed so that no part of any branch or any part of
such tree shall be closer than ten feet to any business building, and the tops
of all trees shall be cut back ten feet from the line extending perpendicularly
from any exterior wall of a business building.
(1964 Code, § 19-365)
§ 16-386 CONSTRUCTION OF MARKETS.
   Curb or farmers markets in which fruit or vegetables or any other food
products are exposed and offered for sale on racks, stands, platforms and in
vehicles outside of business buildings shall have floors paved with concrete,
asphalt or other similar material for the entire surface area of the market.
Display racks, stands or platforms on which fruits or vegetables or any other
food products are displayed or offered for sale shall be of sufficient height
so that all such fruits, vegetables or other food products shall be kept at a
distance of not less than 18 inches above the floor pavement, and shall be so
constructed that rats cannot harbor therein or thereunder.
(1964 Code, § 19-366)
§ 16-387 BUSINESS BUILDINGS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of business buildings to
maintain such buildings so as to comply with the ratproofing provisions of this
article.
(1964 Code, § 19-367)
§ 16-388 TRAPPING.
   For the purpose of eliminating all rats that may remain in or gain access to
any business building after rat stoppage shall have been carried into effect,
all storerooms, warehouses or other business buildings in the city shall be
provided with rat traps, which shall be properly set and maintained in good
working order at all times by persons in custody of such business buildings.
(1964 Code, § 19-368)
§ 16-389 POISONING.
   Rats shall also be destroyed by poisoning or other such means, in addition
to trapping, as may be required to maintain the premises free of rats.
(1964 Code, § 19-369)
§ 16-390 ACCUMULATIONS OF LUMBER, BOXES, ETC.
   No person shall permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or
unimproved, on which evidence of rat infestation is found, or any lots or
alleys adjacent to such property, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or
any other character of materials that may be used as a harborage for rats
unless the same shall be placed on open racks and elevated not less than 18
inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath.
(1964 Code, § 19-370)
§§ 16-391—16-405 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVI: VITAL STATISTICS
Statutory reference:
   Local registrars to charge same as state registrar, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477,
Rule 54a(a)
   Vital statistics, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477, Rules 34a through 55a
§ 16-406 CITY REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS DESIGNATED.
   The city registrar of vital statistics shall be taken to mean the director
of the department of public health or any duly authorized assistant appointed
by the director of the department of public health.
(1964 Code, § 19-21)
§ 16-407 VITAL STATISTICS FEES.
   The vital statistics registrar shall be entitled to certain fees as may be
established from time to time by the state legislature for the search of and/or
making copies of the records of vital statistics. The schedule of fees to be
charged for such services shall be displayed in a public place by the vital
statistics division of the health department.
(1964 Code, § 19-21.1) (Ord. 8652, § 1, passed 9-28-1982; Ord. 10035, § 1,
passed 12-22-1987; Ord. 10368, § 1, passed 8-29-1989)
§ 16-408 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 16-408, pertaining to Open Record Act fees, and derived from 1964
Code, § 19-21.2, and Ord. 8807, § 1, adopted May 10, 1983, was deleted by § 1
of Ord. 10840, adopted May 7, 1991.
§§ 16-409—16-419 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVII: CHILD-CARE CENTERS
§ 16-420 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to supplement state statutes and regulations
governing child-care centers by providing standards for operation of child-care
centers in the City of Fort Worth to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the occupants and patrons of child-care centers.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 2, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-421 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CHILD. A person under 18 years of age.
   CHILD-CARE CENTER. A facility that provides care for more than 12 children
under 14 years of age, who are not the natural or adopted children of the owner
or operator of the child-care center, for less than 24 hours a day.
   CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT. A certificate issued by the City of Fort
Worth Department of Environmental Services upon application and inspection of a
child-care center at the time the facility complies with applicable city
ordinances.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   CITY CODE. The code of the City of Fort Worth, as amended from time to time.
   CITY MANAGER. The city manager of the City of Fort Worth, Texas or his or
her duly authorized representative, such as an assistant city manager.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Fort Worth environmental services department.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the City of Fort Worth Public health department or
his or her designee.
   EASILY CLEANABLE. Surfaces are readily accessible and made of such materials
and finish and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal
methods.
   FOOD SERVICE. The preparation or serving of meals or snacks.
   HANDWASHING LAVATORY. A basin with hot and cold running water for the
washing of hands.
   INFANT. A child younger than 18 months old.
   OWNER. A person having any legal or equitable interest in the business or
operation of a child-care center. A person is deemed to be an OWNER for
purposes of this chapter if that person operates, conducts, manages, maintains
or controls, either directly or indirectly, a child-care center.
   PERSON. An individual or any other legal entity.
   PREMISES. A tract of land with the buildings thereon, or a building or part
of a building with its grounds or other appurtenances.
   PRESCHOOLERS. Children between two and five years of age.
   REFUSE. All wastes resulting from domestic, commercial or industrial
operations incident to urban life, except sewage, but including garbage, brush
and trash.
   REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The City of Fort Worth public health department.
   RESTROOM. A self-contained enclosure with a door on it, containing at least
one lavatory and one commode.
   SEWAGE. The liquid waste, which may or may not contain solids, from the
plumbing facilities or sanitary conveniences of a building, dwelling unit,
business building or unit, factory or institution.
   SINGLE-PURPOSE SINK. A sink that is used for only one purpose, said purpose
being specifically designated by the facility and approved by the Department.
Types of SINGLE-PURPOSE SINKS include, but are not limited to: handwashing
lavatories at diaper changing stations, handwashing lavatories in restrooms,
wastewater disposal sinks and sinks required for food service preparation in
accordance with the rules on food service sanitation.
   TODDLER. Any child between 18 and 23 months of age.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 4, 5, passed 3-
11-2025)
§ 16-422 CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT; INSPECTION AND COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   A child-care center shall be inspected by the director or his or her
representative prior to issuance of a child-care establishment permit.
   (b)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a child-care center in
the City of Fort Worth without first obtaining a health department child-care
establishment permit issued by the director.
   (c)   The director is hereby authorized to issue a health department child-
care establishment permit in the City of Fort Worth when he or she finds that
the owner or operator of the child-care center has complied with the
requirements of this article and all other applicable sections of the city
code. If the child-care center is in compliance, the owner or operator of the
child-care
center as provided above shall be issued a child- care establishment permit.
   (d)   If at the time of inspection, a child- care center is found to not be
in compliance with this code, a child-care establishment permit will be denied
and will not be issued. After notification of the violations or deficiencies
which were detected, the owner shall be required to remedy the conditions of
violation or deficiencies within a reasonable period of time as prescribed by
the director, but not to exceed 30 days.
   (e)   If a child-care establishment permit is denied by the director, the
applicant may appeal the director’s determination by following the procedure
specified in §
16-439(4)(c).
   (f)   The director shall keep on file in the department reports of
inspections made of the child-care center as well as appropriate notices or
directives to the owner or operator of any violations or deficiencies observed
in the inspection.
   (g)   The owner or operator of the child- care center shall operate the
facility or cause it to be operated at all times in compliance with the
provisions of this article and other applicable sections of the city code. The
owner or operator of the child-care center shall correct or cause to be
corrected within the time period specified any violation or deficiency that is
identified by the department director.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-423 CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Application for a child-care establishment permit which indicates
compliance with the child-care center standards specified in this ordinance
shall be submitted to the department by the owner of a child-care center on a
form specified by the department.
   (b)   The application for a child-care establishment permit shall state the
name(s), address(es), telephone number(s), driver’s license number(s) of all
persons having an ownership interest in the child-care center, as well as any
other information requested by the department.
   (c)   The application for a child-care establishment permit of a child-care
center shall state the date that the current valid certificate of occupancy was
obtained from the City of Fort Worth building inspection division or, if not
yet obtained, the date that application for a certificate of occupancy was
made.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-424 CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT DURATION AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   A child-care establishment permit for a child-care center shall be
valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless the child-care
establishment permit is suspended or revoked for cause as provided in this
article. The possession of a child-care establishment permit shall not exempt
the child-care center from re-inspection or citation for violations occurring
during the period of time between inspections. A child-care establishment
permit shall not be transferable, and any change in use, occupancy, ownership
or operation shall require a new child-care establishment permit.
   (b)   Application for renewal of a child- care establishment permit shall be
made on a form specified by the department. The owner shall submit an
application for renewal to the department no later than four weeks prior to the
impending expiration date of the current child-care establishment permit. The
renewal procedure shall require that the owner of the child-care center to
confirm the accuracy of the records of the environmental services department.
Any incorrect information or changes to the information in the records of the
department for the child-care center shall be corrected or made by the owner
before the child-care establishment permit will be renewed.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 6, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-425 CONDITIONS OF A CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   The issuance or granting of a child- care establishment permit shall
not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation
of any of the provisions of this code. No child-care establishment permit
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code
shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is
lawful.
   (b)   Acceptance of a child-care establishment permit is an express
acknowledgment and consent to comply with the terms and conditions set by this
ordinance and the regulatory authority. The grant and usage of such child-care
establishment permit is a privilege, not a right, subject to reasonable
restrictions as set out herein or as may be promulgated by the regulatory
authority.
   (c)   As an express condition of the acceptance of a certificate hereunder,
the owner agrees to comply with any and all reasonable requests, orders or
demands of the regulatory authority.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed ; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 6, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-426 INSPECTION FEE.
   The owner of a child-care center shall pay a non-refundable fee to the
department in an amount established by city council for a new or renewal health
department child-care establishment permit at the time application is made. All
child- care centers shall comply with all other applicable city code
requirements, including inspection and fee requirements. This section shall not
prohibit inspections of a child-care center from occurring more often than once
per year.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-427 DISPLAY OF CHILD-CARE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   The current child-care establishment permit for the child-care center
designated therein shall at all times be conspicuously posted in public view on
an inside wall of the main facility and shall be subject to inspection by
representatives of the health department or other authorized persons.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-428 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   State standards adopted and applied.
      (1)   The standards of the Tex. Administrative Code, Title 26, Part 1,
Chapter 746 “Minimum Standards for Child-Care Centers”, in their current form
and as they hereafter be amended are adopted into this article as if they were
set forth at length herein.
      (2)   Each child-care center for which an application for a child-care
establishment permit is submitted shall be required to meet the minimum
standards for child-care centers, as well as the standards set forth in this
article in the following areas:
         a.   General facility design;
         b.   Interior design for activity areas;
         c.   Outdoor play areas and playground equipment;
         d.   Sanitation and hygiene for personnel;
         e.   Food service requirements; and
         f.   Animal care.
      (3)   In the event of conflict between the criteria set forth in this
article and the standards of the Tex. Administrative Code, Title 26, part 1,
Chapter 746 “Minimum Standards for Child-Care Centers,” the more restrictive
requirement shall be control.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 7, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-429 GENERAL FACILITY DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   All stairs, porches, platforms and step elevations greater than 24
inches shall provide handrails or guardrails for usage by children in
accordance with the city building code.
      (2)   All glazing (including windows and doors) shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the city building code.
      (3)   The lead level of the water from each water tap and water cooler in
the facility, which water is accessible to or consumed by children, must be at
or below the maximum levels allowed by the Texas Safe Drinking Water Act. The
department shall cause water from such water taps and water coolers to be
collected and sampled:
         a.   Prior to issuance of an original child-care establishment permit
by the department;
         b.   Upon repair or replacement of water supply lines or fixtures or
the extension of such lines in the facility; or
         c.   As needed in the determination of the regulatory authority.
   (b)   Room finishes.
      (1)   All surfaces of kitchen and restroom doors shall be smooth and
easily cleanable. All splash areas in kitchens and bathrooms and the walls
immediately adjacent thereto, shall have smooth and easily cleanable surfaces.
EASILY CLEANABLE shall mean that surfaces are readily accessible and made of
such materials and finish and so fabricated that residue may be effectively
removed by normal methods.
      (2)   All floors shall be smooth, easily cleanable and free of the
following: cracks, bare concrete, splinters, sliding rugs, telephone jacks and
electrical outlets.
      (3)   Carpets shall be closely woven, of short nap and kept clean and in
good repair. All carpets and carpeted areas shall be vacuumed daily and
shampooed as needed. Carpet use prohibited in restrooms and kitchens.
   (c)   Sanitation control measures for fixtures and facilities.
      (1)   All toilet fixtures and facilities shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the city plumbing code.
      (2)   There shall be separately designated restrooms for all gender
unless:
         a.   The restroom only has a single toilet located within; or
         b.   A restroom with multiple toilets is supervised to ensure only one
gender occupies the restroom at a time.
      (3)   All handwashing lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold
water under pressure, tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination
faucet. The facility must ensure that the temperature of hot water available to
children is no higher than 120°F. Self-closing or metering faucets shall
provide
a flow of water for at least 15 seconds without having to be reactivated. Soap
and a hand-drying device or disposable towels shall be provided for use by both
staff and children.
      (4)   Restroom facilities shall be cleaned and sanitized at least once
daily and more often if necessary. Carpet use is prohibited in restrooms.
Restrooms shall be mechanically ventilated to control odors. Installation and
maintenance of mechanical vents shall be in accordance with the city mechanical
code.
      (5)   All toilets shall be equipped with open front toilet seats in
accordance with the city plumbing code.
      (6)   Each sink shall be designated as a “single-purpose use” sink.
Combination fixtures, such as faucet/water fountains, are prohibited. Each
child-care center shall have the following sinks.
         a.   There shall be at least one handwashing lavatory in each restroom
or immediately adjacent to each restroom.
         b.   If the facility has a diaper changing station, there must be a
handwashing lavatory in every room where there is at least one diaper changing
station.
         c.   If the facility engages in food preparation, there must be a
three-compartment sink in the food preparation area.
      (7)   The source of potable water shall be from a public water supply or
a private water system which has been approved by the department or the Texas
commission on environmental quality, maintained and operated according to Texas
commission on environmental quality drinking water standards. Water under
pressure shall be provided in adequate supply to meet the provisions of the
Texas department of health drinking water standards. A copy of the Texas
commission on environmental quality water standards is on file with the city
secretary.
      (8)   All sewage shall be discharged into a public sanitary sewer system
or into a private sewage disposal system approved by the Texas commission on
environmental quality.
      (9)   All refuse shall be kept in containers constructed and maintained
of durable material with tight fitting lids or covers, and shall be
nonabsorbent and free from leaks. All containers shall be kept covered when not
in use. A sufficient number of containers shall be available to hold all
refuse. Refuse shall be stored in clean areas, away from the children and shall
be inaccessible by flies, insects, rodents and other pests.
      (10)   All outer openings of a facility shall be protected against the
entrance of flies, insects, rodents and other pests by outward opening and
self-closing doors, closed windows, screens or other effective means of
protection and control as approved by the regulatory authority.
      (11)   Toxic substances, both indoors and out, shall be inaccessible to
children at all times. All containers holding toxic substances shall be clearly
labeled to identify the toxic substance contents.
      (12)   All toxic substances shall be dispensed and used in such a manner
so as to prevent the toxic substance from constituting a hazard to the children
or staff.
      (13)   In the event that laundering is done on the premises, all clothes
dryers shall be vented to the exterior of the building in accordance with the
city mechanical code.
      (14)   In all child-care centers, all light fixtures shall either be
properly shielded or shall contain only shatterproof light bulbs. At least 50
foot candles of light shall be provided in all areas of any room to which
children have access.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 8, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-430 INTERIOR DESIGN, ACTIVITY AREAS.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   Each child shall be provided with individual storage space for
personal belongings.
      (2)   Sleeping space and play areas may be used interchangeably so long
as adequate space for orderly storage of cots, bedding and play equipment is
provided. All cots, cribs and mats shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
manner. Hand contact areas of cribs shall be sanitized daily. Each child shall
have his or her own sleeping apparatus, which shall be placed in such a manner
so as to allow at least one foot of open space on all sides of the apparatus
except where such apparatus is adjacent to a wall or partition.
   (b)   Diapering and toileting.
      (1)   Diaper changing stations shall be located adjacent to handwashing
lavatories equipped with hot and cold water through mixing faucets as required
in the city plumbing code and supplied with soap and disposable towels. Hands
of the diapered child and persons changing the diaper shall be washed before
and after each diaper change. The surface of all diapering areas shall be
sanitized after each use.
   (c)   Feeding.
      (1)   A child’s hands shall be washed immediately prior to and
immediately after consuming any food or beverage.
      (2)   Food and beverages shall be served in separate containers for each
infant or child. Food and beverages shall not be served directly to a child
from the original container, unless it is a single portion, single-use
container. Once served to a person, portions of leftover food or beverages
shall not be served again, except that packaged foods or
beverages, other than potentially hazardous food, that are still packaged and
are still in sound condition, may be reserved.
      (3)   Bottled infant formula shall be properly capped when not in use and
shall be identified with the child’s name. Formula, once prepared or opened,
shall be refrigerated. Any formula prepared but not utilized on the day it is
opened or mixed shall be discarded at the end of that day.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 9, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-431 EXTERIOR PREMISES.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   Exterior premises shall be well-drained and maintained free of high
grass, poisonous plants and pest harborages and breeding sites.
      (2)   Exterior premises shall be free from cisterns and cesspools, and
from unprotected wells, grease traps, utility equipment, nuisances and any
other object or condition which may be hazardous to children.
      (3)   Swimming pools shall be constructed, maintained, and comply with
the requirements set for under the city’s code of ordinances, the State of
Texas Regulations for Swimming Pools, and Texas Department of State Health and
Safety’s Standards for Swimming Pool and Spa.
      (4)   All pool chemicals and equipment shall be stored in a place and
manner which are at all times inaccessible to children.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 10, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-432 SANITATION AND HYGIENE STANDARDS FOR CHILD-CARE CENTER PERSONNEL.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   No owner, employee or volunteer who has a communicable disease, as
defined by the Communicable Disease Prevention and Control Act, or who is in a
contagious state, or who is afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or
acute diarrhea shall be permitted to care for children, come into contact with
children, prepare food or be allowed to work in any capacity where he or she
can transmit the communicable disease or infect other individuals in the
facility.
      (2)   Owners, employees and volunteers shall wear clean clothing and
maintain a state of personal cleanliness while at the facility.
      (3)   Owners, employees and volunteers shall thoroughly wash their hands
with soap and warm water before starting work, during work as often asnecessary
to keep them clean, after smoking, eating, drinking or using the toilet.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 11, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-433 FOOD SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   All child-care centers in which food is prepared for human
consumption shall comply with the pertinent food service regulations set forth
in Chapter 16 “Health and Sanitation”, Article IV “Food Establishments” of the
city code and the Texas food establishment rules. While child-care centers in
which food is prepared on site must comply with all applicable food service
regulations, such child-care centers need not obtain food service establishment
permits, nor temporary food service establishment permits. Further, employees
of such child care centers need not obtain food handler’s certificates, nor
must the child-care manager obtain a food manager’s certificate.
      (2)   Food service establishment permits or temporary food service
establishment permits shall not be required in child-care centers which do not
prepare food on site, which have children bring their own lunches, which serve
only prepackaged single-service snacks, or which prepare no food other than
infant formula.
      (3)   All off-site food services used by a child-care center must be
permitted as a food service facility by the environmental services department
or the appropriate regulatory authority in the jurisdiction wherein the food is
prepared. Furthermore, facilities receiving food from such food service
entities must have adequate and appropriate provisions for the holding and
serving of food and for the washing of utensils in accordance with the
requirements of the city code.
      (4)   At all child-care centers where food is prepared for human
consumption, residential type refrigerators, freezers and ranges shall not be
used for food preparation or storage in the food preparation area. Only
equipment that meets or exceeds the standards established by the National
Sanitation Foundation (NSF) will be approved for use, except that, in areas
other than food preparation areas, residential type refrigerators may be used
for storage of infant formula, juices and medications requiring refrigeration.
Child-care centers in operation upon adoption of this ordinance which were
equipped with residential type equipment may continue to use such equipment
until such time as replacement of such equipment becomes necessary due to
obsolescence or malfunction, but shall be replaced no later than October 1,
2024. All replacement equipment must meet or exceed the standards established
by the NSF.
      (5)   Child-care centers which do not prepare food on site, which serve
only prepackaged single-service snacks, or which prepare no food other than
infant formula may use a residential type refrigerator for the purpose of
storing infant formula, prepackaged snacks or medications requiring
refrigeration.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 12, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-434 ANIMAL CARE.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   Animals kept on or brought to child-care center premises shall be
in compliance with
Chapter 6 of this Code, including that each animal over four months of age has
a registered microchip or license; and that each animal over six months of age
is spayed, neutered or subject to an intact pet permit; and each animal, to the
extent required under the city code, shall be vaccinated against rabies.
Documentation of such vaccinations and microchipping or licensing shall be kept
on file at the facility.
      (2)   The child-care center and premises shall be kept free of stray
animals.
      (3)   Animals and their living spaces at a child-care center shall be
kept clean.
      (4)   Turtles and psittacine birds shall not be kept at or brought to
child-care center premises. No “prohibited animals,” as that term is defined by
Chapter 6 of the city code, shall be kept at or brought to child-care center
premises.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 3, passed 6-26-2018,
eff. 7-6-2018; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 13, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-435 CHILD CARE WORKER CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every owner, employee and volunteer who cares for, controls or
supervises children at a child-care center, except for persons whose exclusive
responsibilities do not include the care, control or supervision of children,
such as janitorial and transportation duties, and who do not in fact care for,
control or supervise children, shall obtain a child care worker certificate
issued by the department. If a child care worker applies for a certificate and
class but the worker is unable to schedule a class before starting his or her
job due to a lack of space in a class, the worker may obtain a 30-day extension
and work without a certificate for those 30 days.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to permit any person to
care for, control or supervise children at the child-care center without the
person first obtaining and holding a valid child care worker certificate issued
by the department or without obtaining a 30-day extension.
   (c)   Every applicant for a child care worker certificate is required to do
the following:
      (1)   Shall submit an application on a form specified by the department
which shall state the name, residence address, date of birth and such other
information as may specified;
      (2)   Shall attend an orientation class provided by the environmental
services department before a child care worker certificate, either original or
renewal, will be issued to the person; and
      (3)   Shall pay the child care worker certificate fee.
   (d)   A child care worker certificate shall be valid for two years from the
date of its issuance unless revoked as provided hereunder. Application by a
certificate holder for a new certificate shall be made prior to impending
expiration of the certificate in the manner described under this section.
   (e)   The director is authorized to revoke a child care worker certificate
upon a finding that the holder failed to report a communicable disease in the
holder to the Texas department of state health services. A proposed request for
revocation of a certificate shall be made to the environmental services
director by the environmental services superintendent after investigation and
an opportunity for a hearing with the certificate holder.
   (f)   A nonrefundable fee for a child care worker certificate shall be paid
to the department by an applicant in an amount established by city council.
   (g)   A copy of the current child care worker certificate shall be
maintained at the child- care center for each of its owners, employees and
volunteers who cares for, controls or supervises children at the facility, and
for whom a certificate is required by this section. Certificate records shall
be available for review upon the request of the director or his or her
designee.
   (h)   No child care worker certificate issued by the director shall be used
for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was issued, nor be
transferred or assigned to, or in any manner used by, any person other than the
person to whom it was issued by the director.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 13749, § 1, passed 3-23-1999; Ord.
27524-03-2025, § 14, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-436 APPLICABLE BUILDING CODE PERMITS.
   (a)   Prior to the construction, alteration, repair, conversion, improvement
or enlargement of any building or structure to be used as a child-care center,
the owner of the child-care center shall make application for and obtain a
building permit as required by the city building code.
   (b)   A “letter of intent” to operate a child-care center shall be submitted
to the department at the same time the plans and specifications are submitted
for review to the Fort Worth department of planning and development. The
department of planning and development shall receive a copy of the “letter of
intent.” Any change or modification to the original “letter of intent” shall
cause the owner to submit a revised “letter of intent” to the department with a
copy to the department of planning and development. The “letter of intent,”
whether original or revised, shall include the following information:
      (1)   Proposed hours and days of operation of the child-care center;
      (2)   Proposed number of children and age groups to be served by the
center;
      (3)   Identification or designation of the type of child-care center to
be operated at the site;
      (4)   If food preparation or service, as defined by the city code, will
be provided at the facility, a sample menu for one month; and
      (5)   If food preparation or service, as defined by the city code, will
not be provided at the facility, a statement from the owner that no such food
preparation or service will take place at the facility; if the owner
subsequently desires to add food preparation or service, as defined the city
code, to the facility, then the owner shall comply with all applicable
requirements of said code, excluding paying for and obtaining a food service
establishment permit for the facility.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt the owner of a
child-care center or permit applicant from complying with all other applicable
permits, inspection or review by any other city department.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
27524-03-2025, § 2, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 16-437 REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OF THE BUSINESS OF
ANY CHILD-CARE CENTER is defined as the sale, transfer or exchange of any legal
or equitable interest in the business of operating a child-care center to
another person. It shall not be considered a “change of ownership of the
business of any child-care center” for purposes of complying with the
requirements of this section if the owner of the business changes only the type
of business entity holding ownership and the owner remains a controlling
partner or officer in the new entity.
   (b)   Whenever a change in the ownership of the business of any child care
center occurs, the child-care establishment permit shall be automatically
revoked, and the new owner:
      (1)   Shall submit to the director a scale drawing of the floor plan of
the facility indicating, but not limited, to the following proposed room usage,
equipment schedule, room finish schedule, plumbing schedule and outdoor play
area and play equipment;
      (2)   Shall pay the applicable floor plan review fee as set by city
council; and
      (3)   Shall obtain a new child- care establishment permit and pay any
applicable fees set by city council.
   (c)   The requirements of this section are in addition to building permit or
any applicable inspections or reviews by any other city department.
   (d)   In the event of a change of ownership of the business of any child-
care center, it shall be unlawful for a new owner to operate or cause to be
operated a child-care center without first complying with all the requirements
of provided under this section.
   (e)   Whenever a change in the ownership of the business of any child-care
center occurs, the new owner of the business shall pay a nonrefundable fee for
change of ownership to the department in an amount established by city council.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 15, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-438 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER CITY PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a
child-care center in the City of Fort Worth without first obtaining a building
code permit, certificate of occupancy, child-care establishment permit or any
other certificate or permit which may be required by any applicable article or
chapter of the city code of the City of Fort Worth. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate or cause to be operated a food service establishment or
temporary food service establishment at a child-care center without adhering to
all rules for operation of such food service establishment. An owner of a
child-care center shall also comply with all applicable city code requirements
before a permit is issued.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 16, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-439 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Authority.
      (1)   The director or designee shall have the authority and
responsibility to enforce the provisions of this article and applicable state
statutes regarding child-care centers.
      (2)   The director or designee shall have the authority to inspect or
visit all child- care centers at all reasonable times and as he or she
determines necessary to ascertain if they are being maintained and operated in
conformity with this article or if any conditions exist at a facility which
require correction. An inspection shall be made at least once each year to
ensure that the facilities, grounds and equipment are maintained in compliance
with this article and in a safe sanitary and healthy condition for the welfare
of the occupants and patrons of the child-care center.
      (3)   The director or designee shall have the authority to give written
notice to the owner of a child-care center of any violation of this article
and/or requirement to comply with the provisions of this article.
      (4)   If a child-care center is found to be in operation without a child-
care establishment permit, the director or designee shall have the authority to
give written notice to the owner of said facility to cease child caring
activities immediately, irrespective of how the facility is maintained or
operated. The director or designee may permit the child-care center to remain
in operation with the condition that the facility obtain a child-care
establishment permit within a reasonable time, but said reasonable time may not
exceed 30 days.
      (5)   The director or his or her representative shall have the authority
after giving written notice to suspend the child-care establishment permit if
he or she ascertains any violation causing immediate danger to a child
regarding: construction of the facility and on-premises buildings, rest rooms,
sanitation of the facility, preparation, storage and handling of food, storage
of chemicals or any harmful solution, infectious diseases and hazards in
outdoor play areas. Suspension of the child-care establishment permit shall
require the operator to cease all child-caring immediately and to bring the
child- care center into compliance with the directives from the department
within a prescribed time period. Failure to rectify designated problems at the
child-care center within the prescribed time period shall lead to revocation of
the child-care establishment permit.
   (b)   Revocation.
      (1)   The director shall have the authority to revoke any child-care
establishment permit if it is determined that:
         a.   The child-care establishment permit is used or was used by a
person other than the person to whom the certificate was issued;
         b.   The child-care establishment permit is used for a location other
than that for which it was issued;
         c.   Any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the child-care
establishment permit have been violated;
         d.   There has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a
material fact in the plans, specifications or documentation on which the child-
care establishment permit was based; or
         e.   Owner or operator failed or refused to comply with the minimum
requirements set forth in this article for a child-care center.
      (2)   To revoke a child-care establishment permit, the director must
adhere to the following procedure:
         a.   The director, in writing by certified mail or by personal
service, shall notify the owner of the manner in which the owner or the child-
care center fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall
specify a reasonable time by which the owner shall remedy said failure.
         b.   If the owner fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within the time specified, the director shall give notice in writing to the
owner of the child-care center that the child-care establishment permit issued
for the operation of the child-care center is revoked. This action of
revocation is in addition to any criminal enforcement of this article.
         c.   The notice of revocation or a denial of a child-care
establishment permit shall become final after the expiration of ten days from
the date of service upon the owner or operator of the child-care center in
question, unless on or before the expiration of ten calendar days the owner or
his or her duly authorized agent shall file with the office of the city manager
a written letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A
hearing shall be held on a date no more than 15 days after receipt of the
letter of appeal unless extended by mutual agreement of the parties. The owner
appellant shall be given at least five days’ notice of the date, time and place
of the hearing. The city manager or designee shall give the appellant, and any
other affected party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show
cause why the determination of the regulatory authority should not be upheld.
In all such cases the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that
there was no substantial evidence to support the action taken by the regulatory
authority. The city manager or designee shall make his or her determination and
shall notify the appellant of his or her determination. The decision of the
city manager or designee is final.
      (3)   Any suspension or revocation of a child-care establishment permit
by the city shall be reported to the Texas department of health and human
services. The city shall also report a child-care center operating without a
valid child-care establishment permit to the Texas department of health and
human services.
      (4)   Any person aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action
taken under the provision of codes or ordinances, other than the provisions
provided under this section, shall follow the appeal process designated in the
applicable code or ordinance.
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 27524-03-2025, § 17, passed 3-11-
2025)
§ 16-440 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be fined not more
than $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c), and each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense, and
each and every day the offense occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.
   (b)   If, after revocation of a child-care establishment permit, a person
continues to operate a child-care center, he or she shall be subject to the
penalties described in §
16-440(a).
(Ord. 11209, § 3, passed 11-24-1992; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019,
eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 27524-03-2025, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-11-2025)
§§ 16-441—16-455 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XVIII: PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
§ 16-456 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is the establishment of minimum standards for
the construction, operation and maintenance of public swimming pools and their
related facilities in order to protect the health and safety of the public.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-457 STATE STANDARDS ADOPTED AND APPLIED.
   The standards of the following regulatory materials, in their current form
and as they may hereafter be amended, are adopted and applied into this article
as if they were set forth at length herein:
   (a)   Tex. Health and Safety Code Title 5, § 341.064 "Swimming Pools,
Artificial Swimming Lagoons and Bathhouses;" and
   (b)   Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter L,
"Public Swimming Pools and Spas."
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-458 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   DECK. The surface surrounding a swimming pool that is intended to be used
for walking by those using the pool.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of environmental services for the
city, or the director's authorized representative.
   EXTENSIVELY REMODELED. The replacement of or modification to a pool/spa
structure, its circulation system or its appurtenances, so that the design,
configuration or operation is different from the original design, configuration
or operation. This term does not include the normal maintenance and repair or
the replacement of equipment, which has been previously approved if the size,
type or operation of the equipment is not substantially different from the
original equipment.
   NATIONALLY ACCREDITED POOL/SPA OPERATOR.
      (1)   A person who obtains certification by completion of one of the
following courses or other nationally recognized course in pool and spa
operation, safety and management:
         a.   NRPA, "Aquatic Facility Operator" (A.F.O.);
         b.   PHTA, "Certified Pool-Spa Operator" (C.P.O);
         c.   ASPSA, "Licensed Aquatic Facility Technician" (L.A.F.T.).
      (2)   An equivalent course which requires testing and provides
certification and that is approved by the local regulatory authority.
   POOL AREA. The water surface and deck of a swimming pool.
   PUBLIC SPA.
      (1)   A body of water intended for the immersion of persons in either hot
or cold water circulated in a closed system and not intended to be drained and
refilled after each use. A spa can include a filter, heater, a pump or pumps,
blowers, and water sanitizing equipment. The term includes a swim spa or
exercise spa.
      (2)   References within the state standard to various types of pools are
defined by the following categories
         a.   CLASS A SPA. Any spa maintained or used, with or without a fee,
for accredited competitive events such as FINA, United States Swimming, United
States Diving, NCAA, and National Federation of State High School Association
events.
         b.   CLASS B SPA. Any spa maintained or used for public recreation and
open to the general public with or without a fee.
         c.   CLASS C SPA. A spa that is not a Class A or Class B spa that is
open to occupants, members, or students and their guests, but not to the
general public. It is a spa that is operated for and in conjunction with:
            1.   Lodging, such as hotels, motels, apartments, condominiums, RV
parks, or mobile home parks;
            2.   Youth camps, property owner associations, private
organizations, or clubs; or
            3.   Schools, colleges, or universities while operated for academic
or continuing education classes, or hospitals or medical centers.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL.
      (1)   Any man-made permanently installed or non-portable structure,
basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is
maintained or used expressly for public recreation, swimming, diving, aquatic
sports, or other aquatic activity. Public pools include but are not limited to
activity pools, catch pools, lazy or leisure river pools, wave action pools,
vortex pools, therapy pools, and wading pools. A public pool may be publicly or
privately owned and may be operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or
concessionaire. A fee for use may or not be charged. The term does not include
a residential pool, artificial swimming lagoon, floatation system or chamber,
or a body of water that continuously recirculates water from a spring. The term
shall include the deck and all related facilities such as dressing and locker
rooms, toilets, showers and other areas designed for use by the facility's
patrons.
      (2)   References within the state standard to various types of pools are
defined by the following categories.
         a.   CLASS A POOL. Any pool used, with or without a fee, for
accredited competitive aquatic events such as Federation Internationale de
Natation Amateur (FINA), United States Swimming, United States Diving, National
Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), National Federation of State High
School Associations (NFSHSA), events. A CLASS A POOL may also be used for
recreation.
         b.   CLASS B POOL. Any pool used for public recreation and open to the
general public with or without a fee.
         c.   CLASS C POOL. Any pool that is not a Class A or B pool that is
limited to occupants, members, or students and their guests, but not to the
general public. It is a pool operated for and in conjunction with:
            1.   Lodging, such as hotels, motels, apartments, condominiums, RV
parks, or mobile home parks;
            2.   Youth camps, property owner associations, private
organizations, or clubs; or
            3.   Schools, colleges, or universities while operated for academic
or continuing education classes.
   RESIDENTIAL POOL OR SPA. A pool or spa that is located on private property
under the control of the property owner or the owner's tenant and that is
intended for use by not more than two resident families and their guests. It
includes a pool or spa serving only a single-family home or duplex.
   SHALL. An act or omission is mandatory.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   TRAINED POOL/SPA OPERATOR. A person who has attended at least seven hours of
pool/spa operation and safety training within the past three years that is
approved by the director and who has achieved a score of 70% or more on the end
of the course examination.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-459 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for:
      (1)   Public swimming pool and spa permits, including an additional fee
for the reissuance of a permit after its expiration;
      (2)   Re-inspection;
      (3)   Plans review;
      (4)   Change of ownership; and
      (5)   Pre-permit requests for services.
   (b)   The environmental services department may not issue a permit or
conduct a plans review until all requisite fees have been paid.
   (c)   The fee schedule shall be available to the public at the environmental
services department, consumer health division.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-460 SWIMMING POOL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages a public
swimming pool without a valid permit issued by the director.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-461 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   A person required to have a permit under this article shall annually
complete a permit application on a form prescribed by the director.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of permit, the applicant shall allow the
director to inspect the public swimming pool/spa for compliance with the
requirements of the article.
      (1)   The director will inspect any public swimming pool/spa that is
newly constructed, extensively remodeled or under new ownership prior to the
issuance of a permit.
      (2)   The director may inspect all other public pools/spas, at the
director's discretion, prior to the issuance of a permit.
      (3)   The owner/operator of a public swimming pool/spa shall be
responsible at all times for the safe operation of the public swimming pool/spa
and for operating the public swimming pool/spa in compliance with this article.
   (c)   The director may require the applicant to provide evidence to the
director's satisfaction that the public swimming pool/spa meets the permit
conditions of §
16-462.
   (d)   The director may not issue a permit until the public swimming pool/spa
passes any required inspection and all applicable fees have been paid.
   (e)   A permit is valid only for the public swimming pool/spa for which it
is issued. A separate permit shall be required for each pool/spa located on the
same premises. Multiple pools sharing a common filtration system must have
separate health permits. A permit is not transferable to other persons, pools
or spas.
   (f)   A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance unless:
      (1)   It is suspended or revoked by the director;
      (2)   The pool/spa changes ownership; or
      (3)   The pool/spa is remodeled extensively.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-462 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   As a condition of obtaining and keeping a permit, a public swimming pool or
spa shall at all times be in compliance with the following permit conditions:
   (a)   The public swimming pool/spa shall meet or exceed the standards set
forth in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 341.064, "Swimming Pools, Artificial
Swimming Lagoons and Bathhouses," as currently enacted or as it may hereafter
be amended.
   (b)   The public swimming pool/spa shall meet or exceed the standards set
forth in Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, "Public
Swimming Pools and Spas," as currently enacted, or as it may hereafter be
amended.
   (c)   Fencing or other enclosures for a public swimming pool/spa shall meet
or exceed the requirements of Chapter 7, "Buildings," of the code of the City
of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), as amended, Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter
757, "Pool Yard Enclosures," as currently enacted, or as it may hereafter be
amended, and the standards set forth in Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, §
265.192, "Pool Yard and Spa Yard Enclosures."
   (d)   The pool or spa yard enclosure shall consist of one or a combination
of the following: a fence, portion of a building, wall or other durable
enclosure. Doors, openable windows, gates of living quarters or associated
private premises shall not be permitted as part of the pool/spa enclosure. The
enclosure, doors and gates shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   Minimum effective perpendicular height of at least 48 inches as
measured from the deck surface or ground on the outside of the fence;
      (2)   Be designed and constructed so that it cannot be readily climbed by
small children. If the enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least
45 inches, the openings shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter
sphere;
      (3)   If the pool/spa yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and
vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is
less than 45 inches, the openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths
inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure;
      (4)   Chain link shall not be used for any pool or spa;
      (5)   Gates and doors for the public swimming pool or spa yard enclosure
shall:
         a.   Be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices and be
latched when the pool or spa is not in use. The self-closing device shall be
designed to keep the gate or door securely closed and the self-latching device
shall latch when the gate is allowed to close from anywhere in its range of
operation, from its fully open position to a position where the gate is open
six inches from the fully closed position;
         b.   Open outward away from the pool or spa except for compliance with
applicable city ordinances;
         c.   Have hand activated door or gate opening hardware located at
least three and one-half feet above the deck or walkway;
         d.   Be capable of being locked;
         e.   Be locked when a Class A or B pool or spa at a Class A or B
facility is not opened for use; and
         f.   Be locked when a pool/spa is closed as a result of a hazard or
condition that warrants the closure and locking of the pool/spa.
      (6)   The enclosure shall be designed and constructed so that all persons
will be required to pass through common pool/spa enclosure gates or doors in
order to gain access to the pool/spa area. All gates and doors exiting the
pool/spa area shall open into a public area or walkway accessible by all
patrons of the pool/spa.
   (e)   All plumbing, electrical work, mechanical facilities and structures
for the public swimming pool/spa shall meet or exceed all applicable
requirements of Chapter 7, Buildings;"Chapter 11, "Electricity;" and Chapter
26, "Plumbing," of the code of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, as amended.
   (f)   Storage of pool/spa chemicals shall meet or exceed all applicable
requirements of Chapter 13, "Fire Prevention and Protection," of the code of
the City of Fort Worth, Texas, as amended.
   (g)   Pool/spa water shall be maintained so as to prevent the breeding or
harborage of insects.
   (h)   Pool/spa water shall not emit odors that are foul and offensive to a
person of reasonable sensibilities.
   (i)   Plumbing facilities shall be installed so that swimming pool/spa
filter backwash is filtered and recycled in a manner approved by the water
department.
   (j)   A permit holder or applicant shall give the director access at all
reasonable times to inspect the swimming pool/spa and to take water samples to
determine compliance with this article.
   (k)   A swimming pool/spa permit shall be prominently displayed on the pool/
spa premises and be available at all times for inspection by the director.
   (l)   Drainage from public swimming pools/spas shall be discharged to the
sanitary sewer system only with the prior consent of the water department or
that director's authorized representative.
   (m)   All post-October 1, 1999 pool and spa changing/bathing areas shall be
equipped with at least one diaper changing station(s) per restroom. Each
changing station will be manufactured from smooth and easily cleanable sturdy
materials and maintained in good repair at all times when the pool/spa is open.
Each diaper changing area will be equipped with hand washing sinks and supplied
with hot and cold running water and soap for hand washing and disposable towels
or air hand drying device.
   (n)   A sign visible from the pool/spa yard enclosure shall state in at
least two-inch letters: “DIAPER CHANGING IN THE POOL/SPA AREA IS PROHIBITED."
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-463 PLANS REVIEW; NEW AND REMODELED POOLS AND SPAS.
   (a)   Prior to beginning the construction of a new public swimming pool/spa
or the extensive remodeling of an existing public swimming pool/spa, the owner
shall submit plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling to
the director for review.
   (b)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout and
arrangement of mechanical, plumbing, fencing, electrical, construction
materials of work areas, the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and
facilities and all associated buildings or structures.
   (c)   A licensed professional engineer shall examine the final blueprints
for all new and extensively remodeled pools/spas (including structural,
mechanical, plumbing or electrical renovations) and certify by original
signature and engineer's seal on a pre-construction letter approved by the
director, compliance with Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, § 265, Subchapter
L, "Public Swimming Pools and Spas."
   (d)   No work shall begin until the director has received the engineer's
certificate of pre-construction, conducted a plans review and has relayed to
the planning and development department that a building permit may be issued.
Work shall commence and conclude within the time allowed by such permits.
Deviations from approved plans shall not be permitted. If no work has begun
within 180 days from the date the director has given written notice that work
may begin, the director may rescind such approval.
   (e)   The pool or spa construction shall pass a pregunite inspection,
preplaster inspection and preoperational inspection by the director prior to
issuance of a permit.
   (f)   A licensed professional engineer shall inspect the completed new or
extensively renovated pool/spa construction and certify by original signature
and engineers seal, on a post-construction letter approved by the director,
that the pool/spa is installed and constructed in accordance with the Tex.
Administrative Code Title 25, Subchapter L "Public Swimming Pools and Spas."
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-464 PRE-OPERATION INSPECTION.
   Whenever plans and specifications are required to be submitted to the
director of environmental services department by §
16-463 of this article, the director or the director's duly authorized
representative shall inspect the pool/spa prior to the start of operations, to
determine compliance of the approved plans and specifications with the
requirements of this article and regulations of the Texas Department of State
Health Services.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-465 NATIONALLY ACCREDITED OR TRAINED POOL/SPA OPERATORS.
   (a)   The owner or person in control of a public swimming pool/spa shall
designate one or more nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operators for
the pool/spa as required. A nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operator
shall be readily available on -site or by recall to be on-site within one hour
during all hours of operation to monitor the public swimming pool/spa and
maintain it in a safe and sanitary manner.
   (b)   New and existing Class A and B pools and spas, located at Class A and
B facilities shall be required to have a Nationally Accredited Pool/Spa
Operator.
   (c)   New and existing Class C pools and spas shall be required to have
trained pool/spa operators. In order to be considered trained, a pool/spa
operator shall successfully complete a course in pool/spa maintenance and
safety approved by the director.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
public swimming pool/spa that does not have a nationally accredited or trained
pool/spa operator readily available during all hours of pool/spa operation.
   (e)   A person who owns or is in control of a public swimming pool/spa shall
maintain proof by posting prominently on the premises that the pool/spa has a
designated nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operator certificate and
shall present such proof to the director upon demand.
   (f)   In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (d) above, failure to
present proof of a designated nationally accredited or trained pool/spa
operator to the director shall constitute prima facie evidence that a
nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operator is not readily available
during all hours of operation.
   (g)   Class C pools and spas.
      (1)   If a trained pool/spa operator is not employed on-site at the
public swimming pool/spa, the owner or person in control of the pool/spa shall
post a sign visible from the deck of the pool/spa stating the telephone number
or pager number of the trained pool/spa operator. The letters in such signs
shall be of a minimum height of one inch, and shall be of a color contrasting
to their background.
         a.   At a minimum, such signs shall state:
         “TO REPORT MECHANICAL, SAFETY OR WATER QUALITY PROBLEMS WITH THIS
FACILITY, CALL             DURING HOURS OF OPERATION."
         b.   Such signs shall be of weather-resistant construction, and shall
be posted where they are readily visible to a reasonably observant person.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
a public swimming pool/spa with no trained pool/spa operator employed on-site
and fails to post or maintain signs required by subsection (g)(1)(a) and (g)(1)
(b) above.
   (h)   Permit applications for new and existing Class A and B pools and spas
located at Class A and B facilities shall name the designated nationally
accredited pool/spa operator for the public swimming pool/spa for which a
permit is sought. If the designated nationally accredited pool/spa operator
changes during the term of the permit, the owner or person in control of the
pool/spa shall immediately report such change to the director.
   (i)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
public swimming pool/spa and knowingly fails to report a change of a nationally
accredited pool/spa operator as required by subsection (h) above.
   (j)   The director shall charge a fee set by the city council for any
courses or tests the director administers pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-466 MAINTENANCE OF POOL/SPA RECORDS.
   (a)   Test methods shall be capable of measuring chemical ranges as set
forth in Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265 without dilution of
pool or spa water.
   (b)   To ensure compliance with applicable codes, all pool and spa
facilities shall record the inspections and make repairs, as necessary, of the
following:
      (1)   Ground fault circuit interrupters for pool/spa equipment shall be
tested weekly;
      (2)   Condition of pool/spa yard enclosure and gates shall be inspected
weekly; and
      (3)   Emergency telephone operation shall be tested monthly.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, is in control of, or
is a nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operator of a public swimming
pool/spa and fails to maintain records as required by this section.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, is in control of, or
is a nationally accredited or trained pool/spa operator of a public swimming
pool/spa and fails to make records required by this section available to the
director immediately upon the director's request.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-467 GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL.
   (a)   The director may deny the issuance of a pool or spa permit:
      (1)   If the applicant for the permit of the pool(s)/spa(s) being
permitted has been convicted of
one or more violations of this Article, Tex. Health and Safety Code § 341.064,
Tex. Administrative Code Title 25 Chapter 265 Subchapter L, or Tex. Health and
Safety Code Chapter 757 within the 12 months preceding the date of the
application; or
      (2)   If any of the permit conditions of §
16-462 are not met.
   (b)   An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director,
in writing, within ten days of the date of the denial. The director shall set
out the grounds for the denial.
   (c)   The notice will be personally delivered to the applicant or sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed on the
application.
   (d)   An applicant whose permit is denied may request an appeals hearing
within ten days after service of the notice of denial. Such request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reasons why the permit should not be denied, and
shall be filed with the director.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-468 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   After notice and hearing, the director may suspend for up to 180 days or may
revoke a public swimming pool/spa permit if:
   (a)   The permit holder or person in control of the public swimming pool/spa
is convicted of a violation of this article or Tex. Health and Safety Code §
341.064, Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, or Tex.
Health and Safety Code Chapter 757 during the term of the permit;
   (b)   The permit holder or person in control of the pool/spa fails to comply
with any of the permit conditions set forth in §
16-462;
   (c)   The permit holder or person in control of the pool/spa fails to comply
with an inspection report order;
   (d)   The permit holder or person in control of the pool/spa disobeys a
closure order issued by the director pursuant to this article; or
   (e)   The permit holder made a materially false statement on the permit
application or there is any false statement or misrepresentation as to a
material fact in any plans and specifications submitted pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-469 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (a)   The director may enter the premises of public swimming pools/spas,
including a building, storage, equipment room, bathhouse, or office, at all
reasonable times whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this article, to collect water samples, to review records,
to question any person, or to locate, identify, and assess the condition of the
pool or spa, or whenever the director has probable cause to believe that a
violation of this article exists on such premises.
   (b)   The director shall first present appropriate credentials and demand
entry if the premises are occupied. if the premises are unoccupied, the
director shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or person in
control of the premises and demand entry.
   (c)   If entry is denied or if a person in control cannot be located, the
director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure entry. Such
recourse shall include the right to obtain an administrative warrant under the
provisions of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
   (d)   Advance notice or permission for entry is not required.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-470 INSPECTION REPORTS.
   (a)   After inspecting a public swimming pool/spa pursuant to this article,
the director may prepare a written inspection report. Such report may specify
the violations observed during the inspection and order the owner or person in
control to bring the facility into compliance with this article by a specified
time.
   (b)   The director shall furnish a copy of the inspection report to the
owner or person in control of the facility.
   (c)   The inspection report shall state:
   “FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE ORDERS OF THIS REPORT MAY RESULT IN THE ISSUANCE
OF CRIMINAL CITATIONS, THE CLOSURE OF THE FACILITY, THE SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF YOUR SWIMMING POOL/SPA PERMIT, AND THE EXERCISE OF ALL OTHER
REMEDIES ALLOWED BY LAW."
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
public swimming pool/spa and fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to
this section.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-471 CLOSURE ORDER.
   (a)   The director shall be authorized to order a public swimming pool/spa
closed if the director determines:
      (1)   That it is being operated without a valid public swimming pool/spa
permit;
      (2)   That it is being operated without a nationally accredited pool/spa
operator or trained pool/spa operator readily available during all hours of
pool/spa operation; or
   (3)   That there is a serious risk of suction entrapment or the public
swimming pool/spa is otherwise in a condition which poses an imminent risk to
the health or safety of the public or the employees of the establishment.
   (b)   The owner, operator or other person in charge of the public swimming
pool/spa will be given written notice of the reason for the closure.
   (c)   After the director closes a public swimming pool/spa, the owner, or
person in control of the pool/spa shall immediately:
      (1)   Properly post and maintain signs at all entrances to the public
swimming pool/spa that state: "CLOSED UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE;" and
      (2)   Lock all doorways and gates that form a part of the public swimming
pool/spa enclosure.
   (d)   Signs required by subsection (c) above shall be a minimum size of
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. The lettering shall be of a contrasting
color to the background. Signs shall be positioned so that they are readily
visible to a reasonably observant person.
   (e)   If the owner or person in control of the public swimming pool/spa is
absent, or fails or refuses to comply with subsections (b) and (c) above, the
director may post signs and secure the premises in accordance with this
section.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
public swimming pool/spa subject to a closure order and fails to comply with
subsections (b) or (c) of this section.
   (g)   A person other than the director commits an offense if the person
removes, defaces, alters, covers or renders unreadable a closure sign posted by
the director.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person uses for swimming, diving or
bathing a public swimming pool/spa that has been closed by the director and
which is properly posted as required by this section.
   (i)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
public swimming pool/spa subject to a closure order and knowingly allows
persons to use the pool/spa for swimming, diving or bathing.
   (j)   A public swimming pool/spa closed by the director shall not resume
operation until a reinspection by the director determines that the facility has
been brought into compliance with this article.
   (k)   A permit holder may appeal a closure order to the director within
three days after the issuance of the order. The appeal shall be in writing,
shall set forth the reasons why the closure order should be rescinded, and
shall be filed with the director. The filing of an appeal does not stay the
closure order.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-472 HEARINGS PROCEDURES.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   When notice is required to be given to a person under this section,
it shall be in writing and mailed certified mail, return receipt requested, to
that person's last known mailing address.
      (2)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a
mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
      (5)   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a
Saturday, Sunday or a city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next
regular city business day.
      (6)   The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this
section shall be deemed to be the date it is signed.
      (7)   The administrative remedies set forth in this section shall be in
addition to any criminal penalties or other remedies provided in the ordinances
of this city or the laws of this state.
      (8)   Decisions shall be made based on a preponderance of the evidence,
with the city having
the burden of proof.
   (b)   Conduct of hearings.
      (1)   Upon determining that cause exists to suspend or revoke a public
swimming pool/spa permit, the director may schedule a hearing.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an appeal by a person whose public swimming pool/
spa permit was denied or whose pool/spa was ordered closed, the director shall
schedule a hearing for a time no later than ten days following receipt of the
request.
      (3)   The director shall send notice of the hearing to the person and
shall act as the hearing officer.
      (4)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written
decision without undue delay.
      (5)   This hearing shall be deemed to exhaust the administrative remedies
of the person aggrieved.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-473 NUISANCE.
   (a)   A public swimming pool/spa is hereby declared to be a nuisance if:
      (1)   Pool/spa water clarity standards in Tex. Administrative Code Title
25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, "Public Swimming Pools and Spas," are not
maintained;
      (2)   Water at the public swimming pool/spa is not maintained so as to
prevent the breeding or harborage of insects;
      (3)   Water at the public swimming pool/spa emits an odor that is foul
and offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities;
      (4)   The owner/operator fails to maintain the pool/spa in compliance
with this article, Tex. Health and Safety Code § 341.064, Tex. Administrative
Code Title 25, Chapter 265 Subchapter L, Tex. Health and Safety Code Chapter
757; or
      (5)   The owner/operator ceases to operate the pool/spa by permanently or
indefinitely discontinuing the use or maintenance of the pool or spa.
   (b)   The director may give notice to the owner of the property on which a
nuisance under this section is located to abate, remove or otherwise remedy
such nuisance immediately.
   (c)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner' s post office
address and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested; or
      (3)   If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner' s post office
address is unknown:
         a.   By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least
twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (d)   If the public swimming pool/spa has a valid or suspended permit issued
pursuant to this article and the permit holder is not the same person as the
owner of the property, notice shall also be given to the permit holder.
   (e)   If the property owner does not comply with the notice within ten days
of service, the director may enter the property containing the nuisance and do
any work necessary to abate the nuisance.
   (f)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by the
director to protect the public health, safety or welfare of the public from an
imminent hazard, the director may, without complying with the notice provisions
of this section, enter the property containing the nuisance and do or cause to
be done any work necessary to abate the nuisance.
   (g)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance, including the cost
of giving notice as required, shall initially be paid by the city and charged
to the owner of the property. The city may assess the expenses against the real
estate on which the work was done.
   (h)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk for the county in which the
property is located. The lien shall be security for the costs incurred and
interest accruing at the rate of 10% per annum on the amount due from the date
of payment by the city.
   (i)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
   (j)   The remedy provided by this section is in addition to all other
remedies available under this article or elsewhere.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§ 16-474 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   An offense as defined under this article is a Class C misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each separate occurrence of a
violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   If an offense defined under this article does not include a culpable
mental state, then intent, knowledge, or recklessness suffices to establish
criminal responsibility.
   (c)   The director may establish enforcement procedures to ensure compliance
with this article which are consistent with the regulations adopted herein.
(Ord. 27902-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025, eff. 9-12-2025)
§§ 16-475—16-499 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XIX: PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURES AND FOUNTAINS
§ 16-500 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to protect the health and safety of the
public by establishing minimum standards for the construction, operation and
maintenance of public interactive water features and their related facilities.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-501 STATE STANDARDS ADOPTED AND APPLIED.
   The standards of the following regulatory materials, in their current form
and as they may hereafter be amended, are adopted and applied into this article
as if they were set forth at length herein: Tex. Administrative Code Title 25
Part I Chapter 265 Subchapter M, §§ 265.301- 265.308.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-502 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the
meanings herein designated unless a provision explicitly states otherwise.
   ADEQUATE. Sufficient to accomplish the purpose for which something is
intended and to such a degree that no unreasonable risk to health or safety is
presented. Complying with generally accepted standards, principles or practices
applicable to a particular trade, business, occupation or profession is
adequate with the meaning of the article.
   cm. Centimeter.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of environmental services for the
City of Fort Worth or the director's authorized representative.
   EXTENSIVELY REMODELED. The replacement of or modification to a public
interactive water feature and fountains structure, its circulation system, or
its appurtenances, so that the design, configuration or operation is different
from the original design, configuration or operation. This term does not
include the normal maintenance and repair or the replacement of equipment that
has been previously approved if the size, type or operation of the equipment is
not substantially different from the original equipment.
   FREE AVAILABLE DISINFECTANT. That portion of the total approved chemical
disinfectant remaining in water that is not combined with other compounds and
that will react chemically with pathogenic or other undesirable organisms.
   gpm. Gallons per minute.
   gpm/sf. Gallons per minute per square foot.
   mJ. Milijoule.
   mJ/cm2. Milijoules per centimeter squared.
   OPERATING DAY. A day on which the public interactive water feature and
fountain is open to patrons for any period of time.
   OPERATING WEEK. A seven-day period beginning on Sunday and concluding on
Saturday, one or more days of which the public interactive water feature and
fountain is open to patrons.
   PERSON. A natural person, corporation, organization, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, association or other legal entity. The term does not
include government or a governmental subdivision or agency.
   pH. The negative logarithm of the hydrogen -ion concentration of a water
solution; a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in
standard units.
   PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE AND FOUNTAIN(PIWF). Any indoor or outdoor
installation maintained for public recreation that includes water sprays,
dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, or shooting water cannons in
various arrays for the purpose of wetting the Persons playing in the spray
streams. PIWFs: (A) may be stand-alone PIWFs or may share a water supply,
disinfection system, filtration system, circulation system, or other treatment
system that allows water to comingle with a pool; (B) may be publicly or
privately owned; (C) may be operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee,
or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use; (D) include,
but are not limited to, interactive water features or fountains that are open
exclusively to members of an organization and their guests, residents of a
multi unit apartment building or apartment complex, residential real estate
development, or other multifamily residential area, schools, day care
facilities, youth camp, or hotel or other public accommodations facility; (E)
do not include interactive water features or fountains located on private
property under the control of the property owner or the owner's tenant serving
a single-family residence or duplex and that are intended for use by not more
than two resident families and their guests; and (F) are not fountains,
installations, amusement rides, or other attractions, whether decorative or
interactive, in which only incidental water contact occurs. The term shall
include the deck and all related buildings, appurtenances, and facilities such
as dressing and locker rooms, toilets, showers, and other areas designed for
operation of the facility or for use by the facility's patrons. The term does
not include an artificial body of water that meets the definition of pool under
Article XVIII of this Chapter.
   sf. Square foot.
   SUPPLEMENTAL WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM. Disinfection processes or systems
installed in addition to the standard systems and designed to achieve a minimum
3-log (99.9%) reduction in the number of infective Cryptosporidium.
   TAC. The Texas Administrative Code.
   WASTE WATER. All water that has been dispensed or re-circulated at a PIWF.
The term includes water generated when a PIWF tank and circulation system is
flushed, drained, or both. The term does not include rain or other
precipitation.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-503 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every facility within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth
that meets the definition of a public interactive water feature and fountain
under this article must obtain a permit from the director of the city's
environmental services department in order to operate.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates, or manages a
PIWF without a valid permit issued by the director.
   (c)   As a condition of obtaining and keeping a permit, a PIWF shall at all
times be in compliance with:
      (1)   The minimum standards set forth in Tex. Administrative Code Title
25, Chapter 265, Subchapter M, "Public Interactive Water Features and
Fountains," as currently enacted, or as it may hereafter be amended; and
      (2)   The technical standards set forth in § 16-504 of this article.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-504 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   A public interactive water feature and fountain must comply with the
technical specifications of all subsections of this section with respect to
construction, operation and maintenance.
      (1)   Water supply.
         a.   Water supply to the PIWF facility must meet the standards under
Texas law for public drinking water, which are currently found in Tex.
Administrative Code Title 30.
         b.   Cross-connection between the water supply and re circulation
systems is prohibited.
      (2)   Filtration.
         a.   Filtration must meet one of the following standards:
            1.   Sand filters.
               i.    High-rate sand filters (pressure or vacuum) shall be
properly maintained and operated according to the manufacturer's instructions
and at a filter rate not to exceed 15 gpm/sf.
               ii.   Filter air release valves shall be opened as needed to
remove air that collects in the filters.
               iii.   Sand filters shall be backwashed at a flow rate of 12 to
15 gpm/sf or at the rate recommended by the manufacturer.
            2.   Diatomaceous earth filters.
               i.    Diatomaceous earth filters shall be properly maintained
and operated according to the manufacturer's instructions and at a filter rate
not to exceed two gpm/sf with body feed or one and one-half gpm/sf without body
feed.
               ii.    Diatomaceous earth filters must be equipped with a
separation tank.
               iii.   Used diatomaceous earth filter media, including
separation tank sludge, shall be disposed of or treated as a solid waste
material in accordance with the requirements of State law.
            3.   Cartridge filters.
               i.    Cartridge filters shall be properly maintained and
operated according to the manufacturer's instructions and at a filter rate not
to exceed a maximum of 0.375 gpm/sf.
               ii.    Cleaning and replacement of cartridge filters must be in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. One complete spare set of
cartridges shall be available at all times to facilitate cleaning.
         b.   Operating instructions must be permanently attached to all
filters, regardless of type.
         c.   All filtration systems, regardless of type, must be equipped with
inlet and outlet pressure gauges and other gauges in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
         d.   Regardless of type, the filtration system must be equipped with
flow metering equipment to ensure that water flow does not exceed the
prescribed rate.
      (3)   Chemical disinfection.
         a.   A public interactive water feature and fountain must:
            1.   Employ a type of chemical disinfectant that is approved under
state law for use with a spa.
            2.   Be designed and maintained so that free available disinfectant
levels meet state requirements for chemical disinfection of a spa.
            3.   Employ a system that continually monitors and automatically
controls chlorine or bromine levels and pH balance by dispensing appropriate
disinfectant in designated intervals.
            4.   Be equipped with chemical metering equipment that monitors and
records data regarding free available disinfectant levels to ensure that such
levels are maintained at the prescribed level.
            5.   Be manually tested for free available disinfectant levels and
recorded at least once during each operating day.
         b.   Test methods shall be capable of measuring chemical ranges as set
forth in Tex. Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265 Subchapter M without
the dilution of PIWF water.
         c.   Chemical dispensing and metering equipment shall be cleaned,
maintained and repaired in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
      (4)   Supplemental water treatment systems:
         a.   Each pump providing water to the PIWF must be equipped with a
supplemental water treatment system.
         b.   The supplemental water treatment system shall be located so that
all water entering the PIWF is treated immediately before such water is
dispensed through a spray feature.
      (5)   Ultraviolet light sanitization.
         a.   If utilizing UV sanitation as a Supplemental Water Treatment
System, in addition to the standards set forth in Tex. Administrative Code
Title 25, Chapter 265 Subchapter M, § 265.306, the following standards apply:
            1.   A spare UV lamp and other necessary equipment shall be
provided on-site to allow for prompt repair by qualified personnel who are
properly instructed in the operation and maintenance of the equipment.
            2.   The UV light units and light intensity meters shall be
cleaned, maintained and repaired in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
            3.   The UV lamp(s) shall be replaced when decreased ultraviolet
light intensity is due to lamp failure.
      (6)   Precipitation, waste water and drainage system. Waste Water from
the PIWF, including filter backwash, shall be introduced to the sanitary sewer
system through an air gap equal to at least twice the diameter of the drain
pipe or by another method that will prevent backflow and back-siphonage.
      (7)   Fencing. The PIWF perimeter must be enclosed or fenced in order to
minimize the risk of contamination of the spray pad surface by animals and
animal waste. Acceptable fencing types include chain link; wood or wood-like
composites with slats spaced no more than four inches apart; and iron bars
spaced no more than four inches apart. If a PIWF is located in the same
enclosure as a public swimming pool/spa, the pool enclosure rules apply.
      (8)   Signage. Each PIWF entry point must be posted with a sign
prohibiting hanging diapers inside the PIWF enclosure.
      (9)   Building codes. Every newly constructed or extensively remodeled
PIWF must be constructed and maintained so as to comply with all applicable
federal, state and local building codes in effect for PIWF at the time the
construction or remodeling occurs.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-505 FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Prior to beginning the construction or extensive remodeling of a facility
that meets the definition of a public interactive water feature and fountain
under this article, the person who owns, operates or manages the facility must
submit a completed application for a PIWF permit on the form promulgated by the
director. In accordance with the requirements of this article, the application
must be accompanied by plans and specifications for the construction or
remodeling as well as all required fees.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-506 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for:
      (1)   Public interactive water feature and fountain permits, including an
additional fee for the reissuance of a permit after its expiration;
      (2)   Re-inspection;
      (3)   Plans review;
      (4)   Change of owner or operator; and
      (5)   Pre-permit requests for services.
   (b)   Fees charged for PIWF services shall be the same as those charged for
services related to pools and spas.
   (c)   The environmental services department may not issue a permit or
conduct a plans review until all applicable fees have been paid.
   (d)   The fee schedule shall be available to the public at the environmental
services department.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-507 EXAMINATION, WATER TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (a)   The owner, operator or manager of a PIWF shall examine the facility at
least once during each operating day to ensure that:
      (1)   The spray pad surface is undamaged, clean and free of debris;
      (2)   The deck and all associated buildings, appurtenances and
facilities, (including but not limited to, dressing and locker rooms, toilets
and showers) are in good repair and do not pose a threat to public health or
safety;
      (3)   Pumps and filters are functioning properly and water is flowing at
the prescribed rate;
      (4)   Water pH level is within the required range;
      (5)   Chemical disinfectant levels are within prescribed range and
metering equipment is operating properly; and
      (6)   The supplemental water treatment system is functioning properly and
within prescribed range.
   (b)   The owner, operator or manager of a public interactive water feature
and fountain shall examine the facility at least once during each operating
week to ensure that:
      (1)   Any required ground fault circuit interrupters are functioning
properly; and
      (2)   Fencing around the PIWF is in good repair.
   (c)   The owner, operator or manager of a public interactive water feature
and fountain shall have the water from each circulation system tested and
analyzed in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Water testing must be performed by an agency or entity that is not
affiliated with the PIWF. Testing by a government entity, including but not
limited to the city, shall satisfy this requirement;
      (2)   Initial testing shall be conducted at the conclusion of the first
operating day of each year;
      (3)   Periodic testing shall be conducted at least once every 90 days
following the first operating day of each year;
      (4)   The testing must include analysis to determine whether fecal
coliforms are present;
      (5)   The testing process must include analysis for any additional
physical, chemical or microbiological parameters required by the director; and
      (6)   Results of all water testing shall be filed with the director.
   (d)   If any analysis required under subsection (c) above indicates the
presence of fecal coliforms or any other contaminant that poses a threat to
human health, a person with knowledge of such analysis is under a duty to
notify the director within 24 hours.
   (e)   Notations shall be made regarding the results of all examinations,
inspections, and tests required under subsections (a), (b) and (c) above. These
records shall be maintained on the premises of the PIWF for a minimum of 24
months from the date of the examination or test and shall be provided to the
director on request.
   (f)   The owner, operator or manager of a PIWF shall promptly correct or
repair any defect or problem discovered in the course of an examination under
subsection (a) or (b) above. The owner, operator or manager must record all
repairs and maintain on the premises of the PIWF such records for a minimum of
24 months from the date of the examination. These records shall be provided to
the director on request.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person knows of the presence in
PIWF water of any organism or contaminant that poses a threat to human health
and fails to notify the director within 24 hours.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages a
PIWF and fails to conduct the examinations or testing or fails to maintain the
records required by this section.
   (i)   A person who owns, operates or manages a PIWF commits an offense if
the person fails to make required records available to the director immediately
upon request.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-508 PLANS REVIEW.
   (a)   Prior to beginning the construction or extensive remodeling of a
facility that meets the definition of public interactive water feature and
fountain under this article, the owner, operator or manager shall submit
detailed plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling to the
director for review.
   (b)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout and
arrangement of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems; construction
materials of work areas; the location, composition and dimensions of fencing;
the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities; and the
location, dimensions and composition of all associated buildings or structures.
   (c)   A licensed professional engineer shall examine the plans and
specifications for all new or extensively remodeled public interactive water
feature and fountain and certify by original signature and engineer's seal
compliance with this article.
   (d)   No work shall begin until the director has received the engineer' s
certificate of pre- construction, conducted a plans review, and relayed in
writing to the planning and development department that a building permit may
be issued. Work shall commence and conclude within the time allowed by building
permits.
   (e)   If no work has begun within 180 days from the date the director has
given written notice that work may begin, the director may rescind such
approval.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-509 PRE-OPERATION INSPECTION.
   (a)   Every new or extensively remodeled public interactive water feature
and fountain shall be subject to inspection by the director prior to the
commencement or resumption of operations to determine compliance of the
approved plans and specifications with the requirements of this article.
   (b)   Following completion of the construction or extensive remodeling of a
PIWF, a licensed professional engineer shall inspect the new or renovated
facility and certify by original signature and engineer' s seal, on a form
approved by the director, that the PIWF is installed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued until the PIWF construction has passed the
required inspections.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-510 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (a)   The director has the authority to enter the premises of a public
interactive water feature and fountain, including but not limited to the PIWF
facility, building, storage area, equipment room, or office area, at all
reasonable times to make an inspection, to enforce any of the provisions of
this article, to collect water samples, to review records, to question any
person, or to locate, to identify, and to assess the condition of the PIWF
facility, or whenever the director has probable cause to believe that a
violation of this article exists on such premises.
   (b)   The director shall first present appropriate credentials and demand
entry if the premises are occupied. If the premises are unoccupied, the
director shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner, operator or
manager of the premises and demand entry.
   (c)   If entry is denied or if an owner, operator or manager cannot be
located, the director shall have every recourse provided by law to secure
entry. Such recourse shall include the right to obtain an administrative
warrant under the provisions of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-511 INSPECTION REPORTS.
   (a)   If the director observes one or more violations of this article during
an inspection, the director shall prepare a written inspection report
specifying the violation(s) observed and ordering the owner, operator or
manager to bring the facility into compliance with this article by a specified
time. If the director does not observe any violations of this article during an
inspection, the director may, but is not required to, prepare a written
inspection report detailing the results of the inspection.
   (b)   The director shall furnish a copy of the inspection report to the
owner, operator or manager of the PIWF.
   (c)   The inspection report shall state:
   “FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE ORDERS OF THIS REPORT MAY RESULT IN ANY OR ALL
OF THE FOLLOWING: THE ISSUANCE OF CRIMINAL CITATIONS, THE CLOSURE OF THE
FACILITY, THE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF YOUR PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE
AND FOUNTAIN PERMIT, AND THE EXERCISE OF ALL OTHER REMEDIES ALLOWED BY LAW.”
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages a
public interactive water feature and fountain and fails to comply with an order
issued pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-512 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may issue an initial public interactive water feature
permit only if all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   A completed application has been filed;
      (2)   All required fees have been paid in full;
      (3)   Detailed plans and specifications demonstrating compliance with all
requirements of this article have been submitted and reviewed by the director
or detailed plans and specifications demonstrating compliance with some
requirements of this article have been submitted and reviewed by the director
and the director has granted a written variance or waiver from compliance with
any remaining requirements of this article;
      (4)   A licensed professional engineer has examined the plans and
specifications and certified by original signature and engineer's seal that the
plans and specifications comply with all requirements of this article;
      (5)   A pre-operation inspection by the director has been completed and
the PIWF is found to be in compliance with all requirements of this article;
and
      (6)   A licensed professional engineer has inspected the PIWF and
certified by original signature and engineer's seal that the PIWF is installed
and constructed in accordance with all requirements of this article.
   (b)   A permit is valid only for the PIWF for which it is issued. A separate
permit shall be required for each PIWF located on the same premises. Multiple
PIWFs sharing a common circulation and filtration system must have separate
health permits. A permit is not transferable to other persons or PIWFs.
   (c)   A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance unless:
      (1)   It is suspended or revoked by the director;
      (2)   The PIWF changes ownership; or
      (3)   The PIWF is remodeled extensively.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-513 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The director may deny the issuance of a PIWF permit if:
      (1)   Any of the technical requirements of §
16-504 are not met;
      (2)   All required fees have not been paid in full;
      (3)   A permit application is incomplete or contains one or more
materially false statements;
      (4)   Plans and specifications submitted for review contain one or more
false statements or misrepresentations as to a material fact; or
      (5)   The director determines that specific conditions exist that would
pose a threat to public health or safety.
   (b)   If a permit is denied, the director shall provide the applicant with
written notification within ten days of the date the application is denied.
Such notice shall set out the grounds for the denial.
   (c)   The notice of denial must be served on the applicant by personal
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed
on the application.
   (d)   An applicant whose permit is denied may request an appeal hearing
within ten days after receipt of the notice of denial. The appeal must be in
writing, specify the reasons why the permit should not be denied, and fled with
the director. An appeal from a denial of an application shall be conducted in
accordance with §
16-516 of this article.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-514 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   After notice and hearing, the director may suspend for up to 180 days
or may revoke a PIWF permit if:
      (1)   An owner, operator or manager of the PIWF fails to comply with any
of the technical requirements set forth in §
16-504;
      (2)   An owner, operator or manager of the PIWF fails to comply with an
inspection report order;
      (3)   An owner, operator or manager of the PIWF disobeys a closure order
issued by the director pursuant to this article; or
      (4)   An owner, operator or manager of the PIWF made a materially false
statement on the permit application or there is any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in any plans and specifications
submitted pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-515 CLOSURE ORDER.
   (a)   The director may order a public interactive water feature and fountain
closed if the director determines that:
      (1)   The PIWF is being operated without a valid PIWF permit; or
      (2)   The continued operation of the PIWF will constitute an imminent
hazard to the health or safety of persons using the facility, or those in close
proximity to the facility.
   (b)   After the director closes a PIWF the owner, operator or manager of the
PIWF shall immediately:
      (1)   Properly post and maintain signs at all entrances to the PIWF that
state "CLOSED UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE;" and
      (2)   Lock all doorways and gates that form a part of the PIWF enclosure.
   (c)   Signs required by subsection (b) above shall be a minimum size of
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. The lettering shall be of a contrasting
color to the background. Signs shall be positioned so that they are readily
visible to a reasonably observant person.
   (d)   If the owner, operator or manager of the PIWF is absent or fails or
refuses to comply with subsections (b) and (c) above, the director may post
signs and secure the premises in accordance with this section.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person is an owner, operator or
manager of a PIWF subject to a closure order and fails to comply with
subsection (b) or (c) of this section.
   (f)   A person (other than the director) commits an offense if the person
removes, defaces, alters, covers or renders unreadable a closure sign posted by
the director.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person uses a PIWF that has been
closed by the director and the PIWF bears the signage as required by subsection
(b)(1).
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person is an owner, operator or
manager of a PIWF subject to a closure order and knowingly allows a person to
use the PIWF.
   (i)   A PIWF closed by the director shall not resume operation until a re
inspection by the director determines that the facility has been brought into
compliance with this article.
   (j)   A permit holder may appeal a closure order to the director within
three days after the issuance of the order.
      (1)   The appeal must:
         a.   Be in writing;
         b.   Set forth the reasons why the closure order should be rescinded;
and
         c.   Be filed with the director.
   (k)   The filing of an appeal does not stay the closure order.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-516 HEARINGS PROCEDURES.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   When notice is required to be given to a person under this section,
it shall be in writing and served either by personal delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the person's last known mailing address.
      (2)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a
mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
      (5)   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be extended to
the next regular city business day.
      (6)   The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this
section shall be deemed to be the date it is signed.
      (7)   The administrative remedies set forth in this section shall be in
addition to any criminal penalties or other remedies provided in the ordinances
of this city or the laws of this state.
      (8)   Decisions shall be made based on a preponderance of the evidence,
with the city having the burden of proof.
   (b)   Conduct of hearings.
      (1)   Upon determining that cause exists to suspend, deny or revoke a
PIWF's permit, the Director may schedule a hearing.
      (2)   On receipt of an appeal from a person whose PIWF permit was denied
or whose PIWF was ordered closed, the director shall schedule a hearing for a
time no later than ten business days following date the request for appeal is
received.
      (3)   The director shall send notice of the hearing to the person and
shall act as the hearing officer.
      (4)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written
decision without undue delay.
      (5)   This hearing shall be deemed to exhaust the administrative remedies
of the person whose PIWF permit was denied, suspended, or revoked or whose PIWF
was closed by the director.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-517 NUISANCE.
   (a)   A public interactive water feature and fountain is hereby declared to
be a nuisance if:
      (1)   The technical standards mandated by §
16-504 are not met;
      (2)   Water at the PIWF is not maintained so as to prevent the breeding
or harborage of insects;
      (3)   Water at the PIWF emits an odor that is foul and offensive to a
person of reasonable sensibilities;
      (4)   The PIWF is not maintained so as to prevent the breeding or
harborage of vermin; or
      (5)   The PIWF is not maintained in compliance with this article.
   (b)   The director may give notice to immediately abate, remove or otherwise
remedy a nuisance under this section to the owner of the property on which the
nuisance is located.
   (c)   The notice must be in writing and served:
      (1)   By personal delivery to the owner, operator or manager;
      (2)   By certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
mailing address for the owner, operator or manager; or
      (3)   If neither personal nor certified mail service is possible:
         a.   By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least
twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (d)   If the public interactive water feature and fountain has a valid or
suspended permit issued pursuant to this article, and the permit holder is not
the same person as the owner of the property, notice shall also be given to the
permit holder.
   (e)   If the property owner does not comply with the notice within ten days
of service, the director may enter the property containing the nuisance and do
any work necessary to abate the nuisance.
   (f)   If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by the
director to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public from an
imminent hazard, the director may, without complying with the notice provisions
of this section, enter the property containing the nuisance and do or cause to
be done any work necessary to abate the nuisance.
   (g)   All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance, including the cost
of giving notice as required, shall initially be paid by the city and charged
to the owner of the property. The city may assess the expenses against the real
estate on which the work was done.
   (h)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk for the county in which the
property is located. The lien shall be security for the costs incurred and
interest accruing at the rate of 10% per annum on the amount due from the date
of payment by the city.
   (i)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
   (j)   The remedy provided by this section is in addition to all other
remedies available under this article or elsewhere.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 16-518 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   If an offense defined under this article does not include a culpable
mental state, then intent, knowledge, or recklessness suffices to establish
criminal responsibility.
   (c)   The director may establish enforcement procedures that are consistent
with the regulations adopted herein in order to ensure compliance with this
article.
(Ord. 27903-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
CHAPTER 17: HUMAN RELATIONS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
      
III.   DISCRIMINATION
Editor’s note:
Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1(Exh. A), adopted September 28, 2010, amended Ch. 17, in
its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance,
Ch. 17 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative
Table.
Statutory reference:
Human rights, see V.A.C.S. Article 5221k
Local ordinances authorized, see V.A.C.S. Article 5221k, § 4.01
Section
Article I: In General
   
17-1   Public policy declared
   
17-2—17-15   Reserved
Article II: Human Relations Commission
   
17-16   Created; compensation of members
   
17-17   Terms of members; filling vacancies
   
17-18   Powers and duties
   
17-19   Organization
   
17-20   Employees
   
17-21   Funding
   
17-22   Subpoenas; discovery
   
17-23—17-35   Reserved
Article III: Discrimination
Division 1: Generally
   
17-36—17-45   Reserved
Division 2: Places of Public Accommodation
   
17-46   Definitions
   
17-47   Exemptions
   
17-48   Unlawful acts
   
17-49   Investigation of alleged violations; filing complaint
   
17-50   Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information
   
17-51   Dismissal and appeal
   
17-52   Effect of provisions on civil remedies
   
17-53   Penalty
   
17-54—17-64   Reserved
Division 3: Employment Practices
   
17-65   Declaration of policy
   
17-66   Definitions
   
17-67   Discrimination prohibited
   
17-68   Maintenance of independent contractor relationship
   
17-70   Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information
   
17-71   Certain practices not unlawful
   
17-72   Violations; penalty
   
17-73—17-85   Reserved
Division 4: Fair Housing
   
17-86   Declaration of policy
   
17-87   Definitions
   
17-88   Discrimination prohibited
   
17-89   Exemptions; exclusions
   
17-90   Enforcement
   
17-91   Complaint and answer
   
17-92   Investigation
   
17-93   Temporary or preliminary relief
   
17-94   Conciliation
   
17-95   Violation of conciliation agreement
   
17-96   Referral of complaint to hearing; election of court proceeding;
reasonable cause determination and charge
   
17-97   Dismissal and appeal of complaint
   
17-98   Civil action in state district court in complaints alleging
discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, disability
or familial status
   
17-99   Enforcement by private persons in complaints alleging discrimination
based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, disability or familial
status
   
17-100   Effect of civil action on certain contracts
   
17-101   Service of notice and computation of time
   
17-102   Additional remedies
   
17-103   Education and public information
   
17-104   Effect on other law
   
17-105   Interference with exercise of rights unlawful
   
17-106   Criminal penalties for violation
Division 5: Reasonable Accommodation or Modification for Residential Uses
   
17-107   Purpose
   
17-108   Applicability
   
17-109   Definitions
   
17-110   Effect
   
17-111   Requests for accommodation; application
   
17-112   Review authority
   
17-113   Required findings
   
17-114   Written decision
   
17-115   Appeals
Division 6: Source of Income
   
17-120   Definitions
   
17-121   The rental of housing accommodations to military veterans
   
17-122   The rental of housing accommodations with city incentives
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 17-1 PUBLIC POLICY DECLARED.
   It is hereby declared to be public policy of the city that all of its
residents and persons subject to its jurisdiction should enjoy equal freedom to
pursue their aspirations and that discrimination against any individual or
group because of race, creed, color, sex, religion, disability, age, national
origin, familial status, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or
gender expression is detrimental to the peace, progress and welfare of the
city.
(1964 Code, § 2-53) (Ord. 5802, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 6447, § 1, passed 3-1-
1971; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000;
Ord. 14832, § 1, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009;
Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-
01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§§ 17-2—17-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 17-16 CREATED; COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The city council shall appoint citizens to a commission on human relations,
which shall be known as the Fort Worth human relations commission. The
commission shall be composed of 11 members, who shall be appointed by the city
council on an at-large basis and who shall serve in places numbered one through
11. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the city. As nearly as
is reasonably possible, the membership shall be fairly representative of the
population of the city. The members of the human relations commission shall
serve without compensation.
(1964 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. 5802, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 5815, § 1, passed - -;
Ord. 5879, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 9254, § 1, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 11598, § 1,
passed 6-21-1994; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed
9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-17 TERMS OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES.
   Each member of the human relations commission shall be appointed to serve a
term of two years. No member shall serve more than three consecutive two-year
terms. If any member of the commission resigns or terminates his or her service
for any reason before his or her term has expired, the city council shall
appoint a qualified successor to fill any vacancy which may result, to serve
for the remainder of the term.
(1964 Code, § 2-55) (Ord. 5802, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 5815, § 1, passed - -;
Ord. 5879, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 9254, § 2, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 13981, § 1,
passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-18 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The human relations commission shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To advise and consult with the city council and the city manager on
matters involving discrimination based on age, race, color, sex, religion,
disability, national origin, familial status, sexual orientation, transgender,
gender identity or gender expression.
   (b)   To recommend to the city council and the city manager measures
designed to eliminate prejudice and discrimination; and
   (c)   To promote and encourage communications between and cooperation of all
groups interested in bettering community relations.
(1964 Code, § 2-56) (Ord. 5802, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-
1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-209 § 1, passed 11-10-
2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord.
24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-19 ORGANIZATION.
   Members of the human relations commission shall be sworn to uphold the
Constitution and the laws of the United States and the state and the Charter of
the city. Immediately following their appointment and annually thereafter, the
members of the commission shall meet to elect a chair and vice-chair.
(1964 Code, § 2-57) (Ord. 5802, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-
1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-
2020)
§ 17-20 EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Director.
      (1)   The director of the diversity and inclusion department shall
receive administrative supervision and support from the city manager or his or
her designee. The director shall carry out the policy directives of the human
relations commission and support the human relations commission in the
performance of their duties.
      (2)   The performance of the director shall be evaluated, in consultation
with the human relations commission, the city manager or his or her designee.
   (b)   Staff.
      (1)   The director shall supervise all other staff, who shall be governed
by the personnel rules of the city and the classification and compensation plan
for the city.
      (2)   The number of staff members shall be determined by the approved
budget.
(1964 Code, § 2-58) (Ord. 5960, § 1, passed 6-10-1968; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed
10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-
2004; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord.
24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-21 FUNDING.
   (a)   The director, in accordance with budget and city manager directives,
will prepare and present the annual budget to the human relations commission
for input. The annual budget shall be reviewed by the city manager and approved
by the city council.
   (b)   The human relations commission shall not make any expenditure of any
money nor incur any liability during any current year beyond the amount of
money appropriated or set apart in the annual budget to the human relations
commission as authorized and approved by the city council.
(1964 Code, § 2-59) (Ord. 5960, § 1, passed 6-10-1968; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed
10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-
2004; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord.
24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-22 SUBPOENAS; DISCOVERY.
   The director, or his or her designee, may issue subpoenas and order
discovery (e.g., requests for productions, requests for admissions,
interrogatories, and depositions) in aid of investigations and hearings under
this chapter to the same extent and are subject to the same limitations as
subpoenas and discovery in a civil action in District Court.
(Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§§ 17-23—17-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: DISCRIMINATION
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§§ 17-36—17-45 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION
§ 17-46 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   AGE. In the context of unlawful discrimination on the basis of age, the
prohibitions in this division shall be limited to individuals who are at least
40 years of age.
   AGENCY. The diversity and inclusion department’s staff supervised by its
director.
   BAR AND LOUNGE. Every bar, lounge or tavern licensed by the state to serve
alcoholic beverages of any content, including wines and beer, for consumption
on the premises, other than restaurants and nightclubs as defined in this
section.
   DIRECTOR. The individual designated by the city manager as the director of
the diversity and inclusion department, or the director’s designee.
   DISABILITY. Has the same definition as it has in §
17-66 of this chapter.
   DISCRIMINATION. Disparate treatment or treatment resulting in disparate
effect, which shall include, but not be limited to, withholding or denying of
entry, services or facilities, or any other advantage offered to the general
public by a place of public accommodation.
   GENDER EXPRESSION. A person’s external characteristics and behaviors
including, but not limited to, dress, grooming, mannerisms, speech patterns and
social interactions that are socially identified with a particular gender.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s innate, deeply felt sense of gender, which may
or may not correspond to the person’s body or sex listed on their original
birth certificate.
   HOTEL AND MOTEL. Every establishment offering lodging to transient guests
for compensation, but such terms shall not apply to any such establishment if
the majority of occupants are permanent residents and have their fixed place of
domicile therein.
   NIGHTCLUB. Nightclubs, cabarets or coffeehouses offering facilities for
public entertainment, social recreation or group amusement or relaxation, and
also offering for sale any beverage, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Every business within the city, whether
wholesale or retail, which is open to the general public and offers for
compensation any product, service or facility. The term PLACE OF PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION shall include all hotels, motels, restaurants, bars, lounges,
nightclubs or cabarets where food or beverages are sold or offered for sale,
theaters, retail houses, washeterias, bowling alleys, skating rinks, golf
courses, all public conveyances, as well as the stations or terminals thereof,
kindergartens, day care centers and nursery schools.
   RESTAURANT. Every café, cafeteria, coffeeshop, sandwich shop, parlor or
luncheonette which offers food or beverages for purchase and consumption on the
premises, but shall not include places at which alcoholic beverages are sold
other than as an accompaniment to meals.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality or being
identified with such orientation.
   THEATER. Every place, whether indoors or out-of-doors, at which any
theatrical performance, moving picture show, musical concert, circus or
carnival is offered for consumption.
   TRANSGENDER. A person who experiences and/or expresses their gender
differently from conventional or cultural expectations including, but not
limited to those who express a gender that does not match the sex listed on
their original birth certificate or who physically alter their sex.
(1964 Code, §§ 13A-11, 13A-13) (Ord. 6205, §§ 2, 3, passed 11-24-1968; Ord.
6505, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 7906, §§ 1, 3, passed 5-1-1979; Ord.
13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, §
2, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19374-
09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, §
1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
Cross-reference:
Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 17-47 EXEMPTIONS.
   This division shall not apply to any hotel, motel, restaurant, bar, lounge,
nightclub, cabaret or theater operated by a bona fide private club when the
accommodations, advantages, facilities and services are restricted to the
members of such club and their guests; nor to any bona fide social, fraternal,
educational, civic, political or religious organization, or to any private
kindergarten, day care center or nursery school, when the profits of such
accommodations, advantages, facilities and services, above reasonable and
necessary expenses, are solely for the benefit of such organization.
(1964 Code, § 13A-11) (Ord. 6205, § 3, passed 11-24-1968; Ord. 6505, § 2,
passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 7906, § 1, passed 5-1-1979; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-
26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, § 2, passed 10-15-2001;
Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A) passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-
01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-48 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or any employee or agent thereof:
      (1)   To discriminate against, withhold from or deny any person, because
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, age, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression any of the
advantages, facilities or services offered to the general public by a place of
public accommodation; or
      (2)   To refuse admission to or to expel from any place of public
accommodation any person for alleged noncompliance with a dress code, personal
conduct restriction or identification requirement unless such place of public
accommodation has previously posted a notice specifying the details of such
code, restriction or requirement in a conspicuous, clearly visible location at
each public entrance to the place of public accommodation; provided, however,
it shall be an exception to this requirement that such refusal or expulsion was
required by law.
   (b)   It shall not be unlawful for any person or any employee or agent
thereof to deny any person entry to any restroom, shower room, bathhouse or
similar facility which has been designated for use by persons of the opposite
sex.
   (c)   It shall be a defense to prosecution for discrimination on the basis
of disability under this division that the alleged discrimination resulted from
a condition or structural feature for which a variance had been received from
the City of Fort Worth.
(1964 Code, § 13A-12) (Ord. 6205, § 1, passed 11-24-1968; Ord. 7906, § 2,
passed 5-1-1979; Ord. 7962, § 1, passed 8-28-1979; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-
26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, § 2, passed 10-15-2001;
Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-
2020)
§ 17-49 INVESTIGATION OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS; FILING COMPLAINT.
   (a)   It is the intention of the city council that the diversity and
inclusion department’s staff, supervised by its director, shall be the agency
(the “agency”) to receive and investigate all complaints of alleged violations
of this division.
   (b)   A complaint under this division must be brought within 90 calendar
days of the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory act. Any such complaint
shall be in wiring, under oath or affirmation, and shall contain such
information and be in such form as the agency requires.
   (c)   Upon filing of said complaint the director or his or her designee, not
later than the 10th day after the complaint is received, will notify parties to
the complaint that a complaint has been filed.
   (d)   The agency shall attempt to resolve such complaints by informal
methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. An investigation shall
remain open until as provided in this division, a conciliation agreement is
executed and approved, a determination as to reasonable cause is made or the
complaint is dismissed.
   (e)   If, upon finding of reasonable cause to believe that a violation of
this division has occurred, and the agency cannot resolve the alleged violation
through informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion, the
director of the agency shall be authorized to refer the complaint to the city
attorney requesting that a complaint be filed thereon in municipal court.
   (f)   If, following the execution of a written conciliation agreement
between the agency and a party charged with a violation under this division,
the director of the agency receives sufficient evidence that gives him or her
probable cause to believe that the party who has executed a conciliation
agreement has violated the terms of this division after the conciliation
agreement had been executed, the director of the agency shall be authorized to
request that a complaint be filed thereon in municipal court.
(1964 Code, § 13A-14) (Ord. 6205, § 4, passed 11-24-1968; Ord. 7962, § 2,
passed 8-28-1979; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed
9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, § 2, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-
2004; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord.
24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-50 PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO DISCLOSURE OF
INFORMATION.
   (a)   Nothing said or done, or documents produced, in the course of
conciliation efforts under this division may be made public or used as evidence
in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons involved.
   (b)   Notwithstanding paragraph (a), the director shall make available to
the aggrieved person and the respondent, at any time, upon request following
the completion of the investigation, information derived from an investigation
and any final investigative report relating to that investigation.
(Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-51 DISMISSAL AND APPEAL.
   (a)   If after investigation there is a determination that there is no
reasonable cause to believe that an unfair practice under this division has
been, is being or is about to be committed, the complaint shall be dismissed
and parties to the complaint shall be notified of this action. If a complainant
expresses a desire to file an appeal, the director must allow the complainant
reasonable access to review, but not copy, non-confidential materials in the
case file. The determination of what is considered confidential shall be made
by the director or director’s designee.
   (b)   The complainant may appeal a no reasonable cause determination to the
Commission within 20 days of the date the determination is signed by the
director by filing a written statement of appeal with the director.
      (1)   The director must receive the written statement within 20 days of
the date that the decision was issued. If the director does not receive the
written appeal within 20 days the case will be dismissed and the same shall be
entered on the records of the department.
      (2)   The only grounds for appeal of a no reasonable cause determination
is that the evidence in the case file does not support the no reasonable cause
decision. The appeal letter must contain a written statement describing the
reasons for the appeal, a description of the evidence in the case file that the
complainant believes the commission should consider, and why consideration of
that evidence should have resulted in a reasonable cause determination.
   (c)   The director shall promptly notify the commission and respondent of
the appeal. Within ten days after being notified of the appeal, the respondent
can file a statement of why the no reasonable cause determination should be
upheld. The respondent will not be granted access to review the materials in
the case file.
   (d)   The commission can only consider whether the evidence in the case file
supports the director’s finding. The commission does not re-investigate the
complaint or look at new information.
   (e)   The commission shall promptly consider and act upon such appeal by (1)
affirming the director’s determination; (2) reversing the decision and
directing the director to enter a cause determination; or (3) if the commission
believes the director should investigate further, remand the complaint to the
director with a request for specific further investigation.
   (f)   In the event no appeal is taken, or such appeal results in affirmance
or if the Commission has not decided the appeal within 60 days from the date
the appeal statement is filed, the determination of the director shall be final
and the complaint deemed dismissed and the same shall be entered on the records
of the Department. Any party aggrieved by the final dismissal may appeal the
order to an appropriate court.
(Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-52 EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON CIVIL REMEDIES.
   This division shall neither add to, nor detract from, any civil remedies now
available to persons complaining of discrimination under this division.
(1964 Code, § 13A-15) (Ord. 6205, § 5, passed 11-24-1968; Ord. 13981, § 1,
passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, § 2, passed
10-15-2001; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-53 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in § 1-6 of
this code.
(1964 Code, § 13A-16) (Ord. 6205, § 7, passed 11-24-1968; Ord. 13981, § 1,
passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14832, § 2, passed
10-15-2001; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§§ 17-54—17-64 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
§ 17-65 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (a)   Pursuant to the authority stated in Texas Labor Code § 21.151, these
ordinances related to fair employment are hereby adopted.
   (b)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about,
through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to
obtain employment without regard to his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity
or gender expression.
   (c)   It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition
of the right of individual to work to earn wages and obtain a share of the
wealth of this city through gainful employment of his or her own choice without
regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, age, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression; and further,
that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation,
transgender, gender identity or gender expression is detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust
denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and
the proper responsibility of government to prevent.
(Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-66 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever the following terms are used in this division, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   AGE. In the context of unlawful discrimination, the prohibitions in this
division shall be limited to individuals who are at least 40 years of age.
   AGENCY. The diversity and inclusion department’s staff supervised by its
director.
   AUXILIARY AIDS AND SERVICES.
      (1)   Qualified interpreters or other effective methods of making aurally
delivered materials available to individuals with hearing impairments;
      (2)   Qualified readers, taped texts or other effective methods of making
visually delivered materials available to individuals with visual impairments;
      (3)   Acquisition or modification of equipment or devices; and
      (4)   Other similar services and actions.
   COMMISSION. The Fort Worth human relations commission.
   COVERED ENTITY. An employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint
labor-management committee.
   DIRECTOR. The individual designated by the city manager as the director of
the diversity and inclusion department, or the director’s designee.
   DIRECT THREAT. A significant risk to the health or safety of others that
cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation.
   DISABILITY. With respect to an individual:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of the major life activities of such individual;
      (2)   A record of such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual employed by an employer.
   EMPLOYER.
      (1)   Generally. In general, the term EMPLOYER means a person engaged in
an industry affecting commerce who has 15 or more employees for each working
day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar
year, and any agent of such person.
      (2)   Exceptions. The term EMPLOYER does not include:
         a.   The United States, a corporation wholly owned by the government
of the United States or an Indian tribe; or
         b.   A bona fide private membership club (other than a labor
organization) that is exempt from taxation under § 501(c) of Title 26.
   GENDER EXPRESSION. A person’s external characteristics and behaviors
including, but not limited to, dress, grooming, mannerisms, speech patterns and
social interactions that are socially identified with a particular gender.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s innate, deeply felt sense of gender, which may
or may not correspond to the person’s body or sex listed on their original
birth certificate.
   ILLEGAL USE OF DRUGS.
      (1)   Generally. In general, the term ILLEGAL USE OF DRUGS means the use
of drugs, the possession or distribution of which is unlawful under the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 812). Such term does not include the use
of a drug taken under supervision by a licensed health care professional, or
other uses authorized by the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.A. §§ 801 et
seq.) or other provisions of federal law.
      (2)   Drugs. The term DRUG means a controlled substance, as defined in
schedules I through V of § 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.A. §
812).
   PERSON, ETC. The terms PERSON, LABOR ORGANIZATION, EMPLOYMENT AGENCY,
COMMERCE and INDUSTRY AFFECTING COMMERCE shall have the same meaning given such
terms in 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, or its successor statute.
   QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL WITH A DISABILITY. An individual with a disability who,
with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions
of the employment position that such individual holds or desires. For the
purposes of this division, consideration shall be given to the employer’s
judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has
prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants
for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential
functions of the job.
   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. May include:
      (1)   Making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to
and usable by individuals with disabilities; and
      (2)   Job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules,
reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or
devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training
materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and
other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality or being
identified with such orientation.
   TRANSGENDER. A person who experiences and/or expresses their gender
differently from conventional or cultural expectations including, but not
limited to, those who express a gender that does not match the sex listed on
their original birth certificate or who physically alter their sex.
   UNDUE HARDSHIP.
      (1)   In general the term UNDUE HARDSHIP means an action requiring
significant difficulty or expense, when considered in light of the factors set
forth in subsection (2) of this definition.
      (2)   Factors to be considered in determining whether an accommodation
would impose an undue hardship on a covered entity include:
         a.   The nature and cost of the accommodation needed under this
chapter;
         b.   The overall financial resources of the facility or facilities
involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation; the number of
persons employed at such facility; the effect on expenses and resources, or the
impact otherwise of such accommodation upon the operation of the facility;
         c.   The overall financial resources of the covered entity; the
overall size of the business of a covered entity with respect to the number of
its employees; the number, type and location of its facilities; and
         d.   The type of operation or operations of the covered entity,
including the composition, structure and functions of the workforce of such
entity; the geographic separateness, administrative or fiscal relationship of
the facility or facilities in question to the covered entity.
(1964 Code, § 13A-21) (Ord. 7278, § 1, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 7400, § 1,
passed 8-9-1976; Ord. 12570, § 1, passed 7-9-1996; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-
26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-2004;
Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-
2020)
§ 17-67 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any covered entity to discriminate against
any individual because of age, race, color, religion, sex, disability, national
origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression
in any manner involving employment, including the recruitment of applicants for
employment, advertising, hiring, layoff, recall, termination of employment,
promotion, demotion, transfer, compensation, employment classification,
training and selection for training or any other terms, conditions or
privileges of employment.
   (b)   No covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual
with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job
application procedures, the hiring, advancement or discharge of employees,
employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions and privileges
of employment.
   (c)   As used in this section, the term DISCRIMINATE includes:
      (1)   Limiting, segregating or classifying a job applicant or employee in
a way that adversely affects the opportunities or status of such applicant or
employee because of the disability of such applicant or employee;
      (2)   Participating in a contractual or other arrangement or relationship
that has the effect of subjecting a covered entity’s qualified applicant or
employee with a disability to the discrimination prohibited by this division
(such relationship includes a relationship with an employment or referral
agency, labor union, an organization providing fringe benefits to an employee
of the covered entity, or an organization providing training and apprenticeship
programs);
      (3)   Utilizing standards, criteria or methods of administration:
         a.   That have the effect of discrimination on the basis of
disability; or
         b.   That perpetuate the discrimination of others who are subject to
common administrative control.
      (4)   Excluding, or otherwise denying, equal jobs or benefits to a
qualified individual because of the known disability of an individual with whom
the qualified individual is known to have a relationship or association;
      (5)   a.   Not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or
mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who
is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that
the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the
business of such covered entity; or
         b.   Denying employment opportunities to a job applicant or employee
who is an otherwise qualified individual with a disability, if such denial is
based on the need of such covered entity to make reasonable accommodation to
the physical or mental impairments of the employee or applicant.
      (6)   Using qualification standards, employment tests or other selection
criteria that screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a disability
or a class of individuals with disabilities unless the standard, test or other
selection criteria, as used by the covered entity, is shown to be job-related
for the position in question and is consistent with business necessity; and
      (7)   Failing to select and administer tests concerning employment in the
most effective manner to ensure that, when such test is administered to a job
applicant or employee who has a disability that impairs sensory, manual or
speaking skills, such test results accurately reflect the skills, aptitude or
whatever other factor of such applicant or employee that such test purports to
measure, rather than reflecting the impaired sensory, manual or speaking skills
of such employee or applicant (except where such skills are the factors that
the test purports to measure).
   (d)   The prohibition against discrimination as referred to in subsection
(a) of this section shall include medical examinations and inquiries.
   (e)   PROHIBITED EXAMINATION OR INQUIRY means except as provided in
subsection (h)(2) below, a covered entity shall not conduct a medical
examination or make inquiries of a job applicant as to whether such applicant
is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of such
disability.
   (f)   Acceptable inquiry. A covered entity may make preemployment inquiries
into the ability of an applicant to perform job-related functions.
   (g)   Employment entrance examination. A covered entity may require a
medical examination after an offer of employment has been made to a job
applicant and prior to the commencement of the employment duties of such
applicant, and may condition an offer of employment on the results of such
examination, if:
      (1)   All entering employees are subjected to such an examination
regardless of disability;
      (2)   Information obtained regarding the medical condition or history of
the applicant is collected and maintained on separate forms and in separate
medical files and is treated as a confidential medical record, except that:
         a.   Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary
restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and necessary
accommodations;
         b.   First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate,
if the disability might require emergency treatment; and
         c.   Government officials investigating compliance with this chapter
shall be provided relevant information on request.
      (3)   The results of such examination are used only in accordance with
this subchapter.
   (h)   Examination and inquiry.
      (1)   Prohibited examinations and inquiries. A covered entity shall not
require a medical examination and shall not make inquiries of an employee as to
whether such employee is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or
severity of the disability, unless such examination or inquiry is shown to be
job-related and consistent with business necessity.
      (2)   Acceptable examinations and inquiries. A covered entity may conduct
voluntary medical examinations, including voluntary medical histories, which
are part of an employee health program available to employees at that worksite.
A covered entity may make inquiries into the ability of an employee to perform
job-related functions.
      (3)   Requirement. Information obtained under subsection (h)(2) above
regarding the medical condition or history of any employee are subject to the
requirements of subsections (g)(2) and (g)(3) above.
   (i)   Defenses.
      (1)   In general. It may be a defense to a charge of discrimination under
this chapter that an alleged application of qualification standards, tests or
selection criteria that screen out or tend to screen out or otherwise deny a
job or benefit to an individual with a disability has been shown to be job-
related and consistent with business necessity, and such performance cannot be
accomplished by reasonable accommodation, as required under this subchapter.
      (2)   Qualification standards. The term QUALIFICATION STANDARDS may
include a requirement that an individual shall not pose a direct threat to the
health or safety of other individuals in the workplace.
      (3)   Religious entities.
         a.   In general. This subchapter shall not prohibit a religious
corporation, association, educational institution or society from giving
preference in employment to individuals of a particular religion to perform
work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association,
educational institution or society of its activities.
         b.   Religious tenets requirement. Under this division, a religious
organization may require that all applicants and employees conform to the
religious tenets of such organization.
      (4)   List of infectious and communicable diseases.
         a.   In general. The list of infectious diseases shall be that
published by the Secretary of Health and Human Services of the United States or
any successor official, as provided by federal law.
         b.   Applications. In any case in which an individual has an
infectious or communicable disease that is transmitted to others through the
handling of food, that is included on the list developed by the secretary of
health and human services under subsection (i)(3)a. above, and which cannot be
eliminated by reasonable accommodation, a covered entity may refuse to assign
or continue to assign such individual to a job involving food handling.
         c.   Construction. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
preempt, modify or amend any state, county or local law, ordinance, or
regulation applicable to food handling which is designed to protect the public
health from individuals who pose a significant risk to the health or safety of
others, which cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation, pursuant to the
list of infectious or communicable diseases and the modes of transmissibility
published by the secretary of health and human services.
   (j)   Illegal use of drugs and alcohol.
      (1)   Qualified individual with a disability. For purposes of this
division, the term QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL WITH A DISABILITY shall not include any
employee or applicant who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs,
when the covered entity acts on the basis of such use.
      (2)   Rules of construction. Nothing in subsection (j)(1) of this section
shall be construed to exclude as a qualified individual with a disability an
individual who:
         a.   Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation
program and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs, or has otherwise
been rehabilitated successfully and is no longer engaging in such use;
         b.   Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program and is no
longer engaging in such use; or
         c.   Is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use, but is not
engaging in such use, except that it shall not be a violation of this chapter
for a covered entity to adopt or administer reasonable policies or procedures,
including but not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure that an
individual described in subsection (j)(2)a. or (j)(2)b. above is no longer
engaging in the illegal use of drugs.
      (3)   Authority of covered entity. A covered entity:
         a.   May prohibit the illegal use of drugs and the use of alcohol at
the workplace by an employee;
         b.   May require that employees shall not be under the influence of
alcohol or be engaging in the illegal use of drugs at the workplace;
         c.   May require that employees behave in conformance with the
requirements established under the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C.
§§ 701 et seq.);
         d.   May hold an employee who engages in the illegal use of drugs or
who is an alcoholic to the same qualification standards for employment or job
performance and behavior that such entity holds other employees, even if any
unsatisfactory performance or behavior is related to the drug use or alcoholism
of such employee; and
         e.   May, with respect to federal regulations regarding alcohol and
the illegal use of drugs, require that:
            1.   Employees comply with the standards established in such
regulations of the department of defense, if the employees of the covered
entity are employed in an industry subject to such regulations, including
complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in sensitive
positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the covered entity
who are employed in such positions (as defined in the regulations of the
department of defense);
            2.   Employees comply with the standards established in such
regulations of the nuclear regulatory commission, if the employees of the
covered entity are employed in an industry subject to such regulations,
including complying with regulations (if any) that apply to employment in
sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees of the
covered entity who are employed in such positions (as defined in the
regulations of the nuclear regulatory commission); and
            3.   Employees comply with the standards established in such
regulations of the department of transportation, if the employees of the
covered entity are employed in a transportation industry subject to such
regulations, including complying with such regulations (if any) that apply to
employment in sensitive positions in such an industry, in the case of employees
of the covered entity who are employed in such positions (as defined in the
regulations of the department of transportation).
      (4)   Drug testing.
         a.   In general. For purposes of this subchapter, a test to determine
the illegal use of drugs shall not be considered a medical examination.
         b.   Construction. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
encourage, prohibit or authorize the conducting of drug testing for the illegal
use of drugs by job applicants or employees or making employment decisions
based on such test results.
   (k)   Bidding on contracts with the city; covenant required.
      (1)   No bid submitted to the city by an employer or general contractor
shall be considered, nor shall any purchase order be issued nor contract
awarded by the city to such employer or general contractor, unless such
employer or general contractor has executed as a provision contained in such
purchase order, contract or agreement a covenant assuring that its employees
are not discriminated against, as prohibited by the terms of this division.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility, obligation and duty of any such
employer or general contractor to ascertain and furnish covenants to the city
that no labor organization, subcontractor or employment agency either
furnishing or referring employee applicants to such employer is discriminating
against its employees, as prohibited by the terms of this division.
   (l)   Notice requirement. Any employer, general contractor, labor
organization or employment agency subject to the provisions of this division
shall post, in a conspicuous place available to all employees and applicants
for employment, notices apprising employees and applicants of this division.
(1964 Code, § 13A-22) (Ord. 7278, § 2, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 7400, § 1,
passed 8-9-1976; Ord. 12570, § 1, passed 7-9-1996; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-
26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-
10-2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-68 MAINTENANCE OF INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR RELATIONSHIP.
   Neither this division nor any section or provision of this division shall be
interpreted or applied so as to interfere with, impair or destroy the
independent contractor relationship between the city and any person bidding on
or engaged in the performance of any existing contract for public work as an
independent contractor of the city.
(1964 Code, § 13A-23) (Ord. 7278, § 3, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 12570, § 1,
passed 7-9-1996; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-
26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-69 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   It is the intention of the city council that the diversity and
inclusion department’s staff supervised by its director shall be the agency
(the “agency”) authorized to enforce the provisions of this division.
   (b)   Following a complaint and provided that there is justifiable reason to
believe there is a violation of any provision of this division, the agency is
authorized to investigate and resolve any such complaint involving any
employer, general contractor, labor organization or employment agency subject
to the provisions of this division. If such complaint cannot be resolved in a
manner satisfactory to such agency, it may refer same to the city attorney and/
or to the appropriate federal office. Nothing said or done, or documents
produced during, and as a part of any such investigation, or attempt at
resolution shall be made public without the written consent of the persons
concerned.
   (c)   Whenever a charge is filed by or on behalf of a person claiming to be
aggrieved which alleges that an employer, general contractor, employment agency
or labor organization has engaged in an unlawful employment practice, the
agency may cause a notice of the charge (including the date, place and
circumstances of the alleged unlawful employment practice) to be served upon
such employer, general contractor, employment agency or labor organization
(hereinafter referred to as “respondent”) within ten days and may make an
investigation thereof.
      (1)   Any such charge shall be in writing, under oath or affirmation, and
shall contain such information and be in such form as the agency requires. Such
charge shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged unlawful employment
practice occurred. Such charges shall not be made public.
      (2)   Should the agency determine, after such investigation, that there
is not reasonable cause to believe that the charge is true, such agency shall
dismiss the charge and promptly notify the person claiming to be aggrieved and
the respondent of such action.
      (3)   If the aforesaid investigation determines that there is reasonable
cause to believe that the charge is true, the agency may endeavor to eliminate
any such alleged unlawful employment practice by informal methods of
conference, conciliation and persuasion.
(1964 Code, § 13A-24) (Ord. 7278, § 4, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 12570, § 1,
passed 7-9-1996; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-
26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-2004; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-
2020)
§ 17-70 PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO DISCLOSURE OF
INFORMATION.
   (a)   Nothing said or done, or documents produced, in the course of
conciliation efforts under this division may be made public or used as evidence
in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons involved.
   (b)   Notwithstanding paragraph (a), the director shall make available to
the aggrieved person and the respondent, at any time, upon request following
the completion of the investigation, information derived from an investigation
and any final investigative report relating to that investigation.
(Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-71 CERTAIN PRACTICES NOT UNLAWFUL.
   (a)   This division shall not apply to any employer with respect to the
employment of aliens outside the city, or to a religious corporation,
association, educational institution or society with respect to the employment
of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the
carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution or
society of its activities.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division:
      (1)   It shall not be unlawful for an employer to hire and employ
employees, for an employment agency to classify or refer for employment agency
to classify or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to
classify its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual,
or for an employer, labor organization or joint labor- management committee
controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or
employ any individual in any such program, on the basis of his or her religion,
sex or national origin in those certain instances where religion, sex or
national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary
to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise; and
      (2)   It shall not be unlawful for a school, college, university or other
educational institution or institution of learning to hire and employ employees
of a particular religion if such school, college, university or other
educational institution or institution of learning is, in whole or in
substantial part, owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular
religion or by a particular religious corporation, association or society, or
if the curriculum of such school, college, university or other educational
institution or institution of learning is directed toward the propagation of a
particular religion.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, it shall not be
unlawful for an employer to fail or refuse to hire and employ an individual for
any position, for an employer to discharge any individual from any position, or
for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer any individual for
employment in any position, or for a labor organization to fail or refuse to
refer any individual for employment in any position, if:
      (1)   The occupancy of such position, or access to the premises in or
upon which any part of the duties of such position is performed or is to be
performed, is subject to any requirement imposed in the interest of the
national security of the United States under any security program in effect
pursuant to or administered under any statute of the United States or any order
of the President; and
      (2)   Such individual has not fulfilled or has ceased to fulfill that
requirement.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, it shall not be
unlawful for an employer to apply different standards of compensation, or
different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide
seniority or merit system, or a system which measures earnings by quantity or
quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided
that such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate
because of age, race, color, religion, sex, disability, national origin, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression nor shall it be
unlawful for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any
professionally developed ability test provided that such test, its
administration or action upon the results is not designed, intended or used to
discriminate because of age, race, color, religion, sex, disability, national
origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression.
It shall not be unlawful under this division for any employer to differentiate
upon the basis of sex in determining the amount of the wages or compensation
paid or to be paid to employees of such employer if such differentiation is
authorized by the provisions of § 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938,
as amended (29 U.S.C. § 206(d)).
   (e)   Nothing contained in this division shall be interpreted to require any
employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor-management
committee subject to this division to grant preferential treatment to any
individual or to any group because of the age, race, color, religion, sex,
disability, national origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity
or gender expression of such individual or group on account of an imbalance
which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons with
disabilities or of any age group, race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression employed
by any employer, referred or classified for employment by any employment agency
or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by any labor
organization, or admitted to, or employed in, any apprenticeship or other
training program, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons
of with disabilities or of such age group, race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression
in any community, state, section or other area, or in the available work force
in any community, state, section or other area.
   (f)   Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to repeal or
modify any federal, state, territorial or local law creating special rights or
preference for veterans or Indians.
   (g)   Nothing in this division shall be construed to make unlawful
discrimination based upon the ages of persons who are less than 40 years old.
   (h)   Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to make unlawful
discrimination with respect to aliens who entered and reside in the United
States illegally.
(1964 Code, § 13A-25) (Ord. 7278, § 5, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 7400, § 1,
passed 8-9-1976; Ord. 8957, § 1, passed 10-25-1983; Ord. 10093, § 1, passed 4-
22-1988; Ord. 12570, § 1, passed 7-9-1996; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999;
Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009;
Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-
01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-72 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, association of persons, company or corporation, or their
agents, servants or employees, who violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to
comply with any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500, and each day that a violation exists is hereby declared to be a
distinct and separate offense and punishable as such, all as provided for in §
1-6 of this code.
(1964 Code, § 13A-29) (Ord. 7278, § 9, passed 12-22-1975; Ord. 13981, § 1,
passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§§ 17-73—17-85 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: FAIR HOUSING
§ 17-86 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (a)   Pursuant to the authority stated in Texas Local Government Code §
214.903, these ordinances related to fair housing are hereby adopted.
   (b)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about,
through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to
obtain housing without regard to his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, transgender,
gender identity or gender expression.
   (c)   It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition
of the right of every person to have access to adequate housing of his or her
own choice without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
disability, familial status, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity
or gender expression; and further, that the denial of such rights through
considerations based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
disability, familial status, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity
or gender expression is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such
inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of
government to prevent.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord.
19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-
2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-87 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The diversity and inclusion department and its staff supervised by
its director.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing
practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The Fort Worth human relations commission.
   COMMITTEE. The housing committee of the Fort Worth human relations
commission.
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the director or the commission, who files a
complaint under §
17-90 of this division.
   CONCILIATION. The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complainant or
by the investigation of the complaint, through informal negotiations involving
the aggrieved person, the respondent and the director.
   CONCILIATION AGREEMENT. A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
the issues in conciliation.
   DIRECTOR. The individual designated by the city manger as director of the
diversity and inclusion department, or the director’s designee.
   DISABILITY.
      (1)   DISABILITY means, with respect to a person:
         a.   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person’s major life activities;
         b.   A record of having such an impairment; or
         c.   Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as
defined under state or federal law.
      (2)   DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY means:
         a.   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
            1.   That buyer or renter;
            2.   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is sold, rented or made available; or
            3.   Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
         b.   For purposes of this definition, DISCRIMINATION includes:
            1.   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a
disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such
person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the
landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to
the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear
excepted;
            2.   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
            3.   In connection with the design and construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 12, 1991, a failure to
design and construct those dwellings in a manner that:
               i.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings
are readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities;
               ii.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within
all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
persons in wheelchairs; and
               iii.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
                  A.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
                  B.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls in accessible locations;
                  C.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
                  D.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in
a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
         c.   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for people with physical disabilities (commonly cited as “ANSI-
A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (2)(b)(3) above.
         d.   COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING means:
            1.   Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings
have one or more elevators; and
            2.   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or
more units.
         e.   Nothing in this division shall be construed to invalidate or
limit any law of a state or political subdivision of a state, or other
jurisdiction in which this division shall be effective that requires dwellings
to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords persons with
disabilities greater access than is required by this division.
         f.   Nothing in this subsection (2)f. of this definition requires that
a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act prohibited by §
17-88 of this division.
   DWELLING.
      (1)   Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more
families; or
      (2)   Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure described by subsection (1) immediately above.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. In this division, a discriminatory act is committed because
of FAMILIAL STATUS if the act is committed because the person who is the
subject of discrimination is:
      (1)   Pregnant;
      (2)   Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard
to whom the person:
         a.   Is the parent or legal custodian;
         b.   Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for
domicile with that person; or
         c.   Is in the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual
younger than 18 years of age.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual or group of individuals living together
under one common roof.
   GENDER EXPRESSION. A person’s external characteristics and behaviors
including, but not limited to, dress, grooming, mannerisms, speech patterns and
social interactions that are socially identified with a particular gender.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s innate, deeply felt sense of gender, which may
or may not correspond to the person’s body or sex listed on their original
birth certificate.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, organization, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership,
association and any other legal entity.
   RESPONDENT.
      (1)   The person accused in a complaint of discriminatory housing
practice; or
      (2)   Any person identified as an addition or substitute respondent under
§
17-90 of this division.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let or to otherwise grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
   TRANSGENDER. A person who experiences and/or expresses their gender
differently from conventional or cultural expectations including, but not
limited to those who express a gender that does not match the sex listed on
their original birth certificate or who physically alter their sex.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-2004; Ord. 18909-11-
2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-88 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Sale or rental.
      (1)   A person may not refuse to sell or to rent after the making of a
bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status, national origin, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression.
      (2)   A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in providing
services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental, because of race,
color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, national origin, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression.
   (b)   Publication. A person may not make, print or publish or cause to be
made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect
to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial
status, national origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or
gender expression, or an intention to make such a preference, limitation or
discrimination.
   (c)   Inspection. A person may not represent to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, national origin, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression that a dwelling
is not available for inspection for sale or rental when the dwelling is
available for inspection, sale or rental.
   (d)   Entry into neighborhood. A person may not, for profit, induce or
attempt to induce, a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a
particular race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, national
origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression.
   (e)   Residential real estate related transaction.
      (1)   A person whose business includes engaging in residential real
estate related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a
real estate related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a
real estate related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, national origin, sexual orientation, transgender,
gender identity or gender expression.
      (2)   In this section, RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION means
any of the following:
         a.   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
            1.   For purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
            2.   Secured by residential real estate.
         b.   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.
   (f)   Brokerage services. A person may not deny any person access to, or
membership or participation in, a multiple-listing service, real estate
brokers’ organization or other service, organization or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person
in the terms or conditions of access, membership or participation in such an
organization, service or facility because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status, national origin, sexual orientation, transgender,
gender identity or gender expression.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord.
19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-
2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-89 EXEMPTIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (a)   Housing for older persons exempted.
      (1)   The provisions of this division relating to familial status do not
apply to housing for older persons.
      (2)   In this section HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
         a.   That the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons under a federal or state program;
         b.   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
         c.   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit as determined by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development. To the extent that such a
determination falls within the jurisdiction of the commission, the following
factors at minimum must be present for the dwelling(s) to qualify for the
exemption:
            1.   The existence of significant facilities and services
specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or
if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such
housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older
persons; and
            2.   That at least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit; and
            3.   The publication of, and adherence to policies and procedures
which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for
persons 55 years of age or older.
   (b)   Certain sales and rentals exempted.
      (1)   Subject to subsection (b)(2) below, §
17-88 does not apply to:
         a.   The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an
owner if:
            1.   The owner does not:
               i.   Own more than three single-family houses at any one time;
or
               ii.   Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his
or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right
to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-
family houses at any one time.
            2.   The house was sold or rented without:
               i.   The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a
real estate broker, agent or salesman licensed under state law, or of an
employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent or salesman, or the facilities or
services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five
or more families; or
               ii.   The publication, posting or mailing of a notice, statement
or advertisement prohibited by §
17-88.
         b.   The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four
families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies
one of the living quarters as the owner’s residence.
      (2)   The exemption of subsection (b)(1)(a)1. of this section applies to
only one sale or rental in a 24-month period if the owner was not the most
recent resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental.
   (c)   Religious organization, nonprofit organization and private club
exemption.
      (1)   This division does not prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with, a religious organization,
association or society, from:
         a.   Limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion; or
         b.   Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless
membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national
origin.
      (2)   This division does not prohibit a private club not open to the
public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental
or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.
   (d)   Appraisal exemption. This division does not prohibit a person engaged
in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, disability,
familial status, national origin, sexual orientation, transgender, gender
identity or gender expression.
   (e)   Effect on other law.
      (1)   This division does not affect reasonable maximum safe occupancy
regulations for dwellings.
      (2)   This division does not affect any requirement of nondiscrimination
in any other local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 11384, § 1(A), passed 8-17-1993; Ord.
13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord. 14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-
11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-90 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   It is the intention of the city council that the diversity and
inclusion department and its staff supervised by its director shall be the
agency (the “agency”) authorized to enforce the provisions of this division
under the supervision of the city manager or his or her designee as provided
under §
2 of Chapter V of the Charter, as further provided hereinafter, and as further
provided under state and federal law.
   (b)   The director is encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development and the Attorney General of the United States in the
enforcement of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., as
amended, and may assist the secretary or attorney general in any way consistent
with the policy of this division. The director is encouraged to cooperate with
the Civil Rights Division of the Texas Workforce Commission in the enforcement
of the Texas Fair Housing Act, and may assist the civil Rights Division of the
Texas Workforce Commission in any way consistent with the policy of this
division.
   (c)   The director may order discovery in aid of investigations under this
division. Such discovery may be ordered to the same extent and is subject to
the same limitations as would apply if the discovery were ordered in aid of a
civil action in a Texas State District Court.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-2004; Ord. 19374-09-
2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-91 COMPLAINT AND ANSWER.
   (a)   An aggrieved person, or any authorized representative of an aggrieved
person, may file a complaint with the director not later than one year after an
alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated. A complaint
may also be filed by the director, not later than one year after an alleged
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated, if the director has
reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a discriminatory
housing practice.
   (b)   The director shall treat a complaint referred by the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development or the Attorney General of the United States
under the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., as amended, or
by the Civil Rights Division of the Texas Workforce Commission under the Texas
Fair Housing Act, Texas Property Code, Chapter 301, as amended, as a complaint
filed under subsection (a) above. No action will be taken under this division
against a person for a discriminatory housing practice if the referred
complaint was filed with the governmental entity later than one year after an
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred or terminated.
   (c)   A complaint must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation and
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the respondent;
      (2)   Name, address and signature of the complainant;
      (3)   Name and address of the aggrieved person, if different from the
complainant;
      (4)   Date of the occurrence or termination of the discriminatory housing
practice and date of the filing of the complaint;
      (5)   Description and address of the housing accommodation involved in
the discriminatory housing practice, if appropriate; and
      (6)   Concise statement of the facts of the discriminatory housing
practice, including the basis of the discrimination (race, color, sex,
religion, disability, familial status, national origin, sexual orientation,
transgender, gender identity or gender expression).
   (d)   Upon the filing of a complaint, the director shall, in writing:
      (1)   Notify the complainant, and the aggrieved person if different from
the complainant, that a complaint has been filed; and
      (2)   Advise the complainant, and the aggrieved person if different from
the complainant, of time limits applicable to the complaint and of any rights,
obligations and remedies of the aggrieved person under this division.
   (e)   Not more than ten days after the filing of a complaint, the director
shall, in writing:
      (1)   Notify the respondent named in the complaint that a complaint
alleging the commission of a discriminatory housing practice, has been filed
against the respondent;
      (2)   Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent;
      (3)   Advise the respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of
the respondent, including the right to file a written, signed and verified
informal answer to the complaint within ten days after service of notice of the
complaint; and
      (4)   Advise the respondent of other rights and remedies available to the
aggrieved person under this division.
   (f)   Not later than the tenth day after service of the notice and copy of
the complaint, unless an extension is granted by the director, respondent may
file an answer to the complaint. The answer must be in writing, made under oath
or affirmation, and contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number and signature of the respondent or
the respondent’s attorney, if any; and
      (2)   Concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint and facts of any defense or exemption.
      (3)   Advise that retaliation against any person who files a complaint or
assists or otherwise participates in the investigation of a complaint is a
discriminatory housing practice.
   (g)   A complaint or answer may be amended at any reasonable time prior to a
determination as to reasonable cause as hereinafter provided. The director
shall furnish a copy of each amended complaint, to the respondent and
complainant, and any aggrieved person if different from the complainant, as
promptly as is practicable.
   (h)   The director may not disclose or permit to be disclosed to the public
the identity of a respondent while the complaint is in the process of being
investigated and prior to completion of all negotiations relative to a
conciliation agreement.
   (i)   A complaint, except a referred complaint described in subsection (b)
of this section, shall be finally disposed of either through dismissal,
execution of a conciliation agreement, or issuance of a charge within one year
after the date on which the complaint was filed unless it is impracticable to
do so, in which case, the director shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved
person if different from the complainant, and the respondent, in writing, of
the reasons for the delay.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 18909-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-10-2009; Ord.
19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-
2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-92 INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   Not more than 30 days after the filing of a complaint by an aggrieved
person or by the director, the director shall commence an investigation of the
complaint to determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe a
discriminatory housing practice was committed and the facts of the
discriminatory housing practice.
   (b)   The director shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person to:
      (1)   Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals and any
other possible source of information;
      (2)   Examine, record and copy necessary materials; and
      (3)   Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   (c)   The director may, at the director’s discretion or at the request of
the respondent, the complainant, or the aggrieved person if different from the
complainant, issue a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to compel attendance of a
witness or the production of relevant materials or documents, pursuant to the
authority of the city under
Chapter V, § 7 of the City Charter. Failure to comply with a subpoena issued
under this subsection (c) is a criminal offense and is punishable as provided
by ordinance.
   (d)   An investigation shall remain open until as provided in this division,
a determination as to reasonable cause is made, a conciliation agreement is
executed and approved or the complaint is dismissed. Unless impracticable to do
so, the director shall complete the investigation within 100 days after the
date of filing of the complaint. If the director is unable to complete the
investigation within the 100-day period, the director shall notify the
complainant, the aggrieved party if different from the complainant, and
respondent, in writing, of the reasons for the delay.
   (e)   This section does not limit the authority of the director to conduct
such other investigations or to use such other enforcement procedures,
otherwise lawful, as the director considers necessary to enforce this chapter.
   (f)   The director shall prepare a final investigative report showing:
      (1)   The names of and dates of contact with witnesses;
      (2)   A summary, including dates, of correspondence and other contacts
with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
      (3)   A summary description of other pertinent records;
      (4)   A summary of witness statements; and
      (5)   Answers to interrogatories.
   (g)   Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of
information.
      (1)   Nothing said or done, or documents produced, in the course of
conciliation efforts under this division may be made public or used as evidence
in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the persons involved.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph (a), the director shall make available to
the aggrieved person and the respondent, at any time, upon request following
the completion of the investigation, information derived from an investigation
and any final investigative report relating to that investigation.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-93 TEMPORARY OR PRELIMINARY RELIEF.
   (a)   If at any time following the filing of a complaint the director
concludes that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of
this division, the director may request the city attorney to initiate a civil
action in the state district court of Tarrant County, Texas for appropriate
temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint.
   (b)   On receipt of the director’s request, the city attorney shall promptly
file the action in the state district court. Venue is in Tarrant County, Texas.
   (c)   A temporary restraining order or other order granting preliminary or
temporary relief under this section is governed by the applicable Texas Rules
of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-94 CONCILIATION.
   (a)   During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending
with the issuance of a charge, the dismissal of the complaint, or the dismissal
of the criminal action in municipal court, the director shall try to conciliate
the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the director shall try to achieve a
just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily
remedy any violation of the aggrieved person’s rights and take action to assure
the elimination of both present and future discriminatory housing practices.
   (b)   If a conciliation agreement is executed under this section, a party to
the agreement may not be prosecuted in municipal court, nor may the director
issue a charge against a party, for the discriminatory housing practice
specified in the agreement under subsection (d)(1) below unless the director
determines that the agreement has been violated and notifies the city attorney
in writing of the violation.
   (c)   A conciliation agreement must be in writing and must be signed and
verified by the respondent, the complainant, and the aggrieved person if
different from the complainant, subject to approval of the director who shall
indicate approval by signing the agreement. A conciliation agreement is
executed upon its signing and verification by all parties to the agreement.
   (d)   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must contain:
      (1)   An identification of the discriminatory housing practice and
corresponding respondent that gives rise to the conciliation agreement under
subsection (a) above and the identification of any other discriminatory housing
practice and the respondent that the parties agree to make subject to the
limitation on prosecution of subsection (b) above;
      (2)   An identification of the housing accommodation subject to the
conciliation agreement; and
      (3)   A statement that each party entering into conciliation agreement
agrees:
         a.   Not to violate this chapter or the conciliation agreement; and
         b.   That the respondent shall file with the director a periodic
activity report, if required by the terms of the conciliation agreement and/or
any applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
            1.   The party who prepares the activity report must sign and
verify the report.
            2.   An activity report must be filed each month on the date
specified in the conciliation agreement for the period specified by the
conciliation agreement, or by applicable law or regulations if different.
   (e)   In addition to the requirements of subsection (d) above, a
conciliation agreement may include any other term or condition agreed to by the
parties, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Monetary relief in the form of damages, including humiliation and
embarrassment and attorney fees; and
      (2)   Equitable relief such as access to the housing accommodation at
issue, or to a comparable housing accommodation, and provision of services and
facilities in connection with a housing accommodation.
   (f)   Nothing said or done, or documents produced, during the course of
conciliation efforts may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of any person
concerned.
   (g)   A conciliation agreement shall be made public, unless the aggrieved
person or the respondent requests nondisclosure and the director determines
that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this division.
Notwithstanding a determination that disclosure of a conciliation agreement is
not required, the director may publish tabulated descriptions of the results of
all conciliation efforts.
   (h)   If the aggrieved person brings a civil action under a local, state or
federal law seeking relief for the alleged discriminatory housing practice and
the trial in the action begins, the director shall terminate efforts to
conciliate the complaint unless the court specifically requests assistance from
the director. The director may also terminate efforts to conciliate the
complaint if:
      (1)   The respondent fails or refuses to confer with the director;
      (2)   The aggrieved person or the respondent fails to make a good faith
effort to resolve any dispute; or
      (3)   The director finds, for any reason, that voluntary agreement is not
likely to result.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-95 VIOLATION OF CONCILIATION AGREEMENT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, after the person executes a
conciliation agreement under §
17-94, he or she materially violates any term or condition contained in the
agreement.
   (b)   It is no defense to criminal prosecution in municipal court or to
civil action in state district court under this section that, with respect to a
discriminatory housing practice that gave rise to the conciliation agreement
under §
17-94:
      (1)   The respondent did not commit the discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   The director did not have probable cause to believe the
discriminatory housing practice was committed.
   (c)   If the director determines that a conciliation agreement has been
materially violated, the director shall give written notice to all parties
subject to the agreement.
   (d)   When the director has reasonable cause to believe that respondent has
materially breached a conciliation agreement, the director shall refer the
matter to the city attorney’s office with a recommendation that a civil action
be filed for the enforcement of the agreement. The director shall also file a
criminal action in municipal court for a violation of the agreement.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-96 REFERRAL OF COMPLAINT TO HEARING; ELECTION OF COURT PROCEEDING;
REASONABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION AND CHARGE.
   (a)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the director, but within 100 days of the filing of the
complaint with the director and if conciliation has not been effected, the
director may refer the matter complained of to the committee, together with the
answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his or her investigation
and activities in the matter.
   (b)   In lieu of a hearing before the committee as set out in §
17-96(c) below, a complainant, respondent or an aggrieved person on whose
behalf a charge is filed, may elect in writing to have the claims asserted in
the complaint decided in state district court provided in §
17-98 of this code or as provided for under Article II, §§ 2.06 and 2.08 of the
Texas Fair Housing Act Texas Property Code, Chapter 301, as amended or any
successor statute and Chapter 819 of the Texas Workforce Commission Civil
Rights Division adopted rules. This election may be made at any reasonable time
under the foregoing laws but must be made not later than 20 days after the
receipt by the electing person of notice that a hearing under subsection (c)
has been requested.
   (c)   The committee shall order a hearing if respondent or complainant
requests same. If respondent or complainant does not request a hearing, same
shall be deemed to have been waived and the committee shall direct the director
to issue a determination of reasonable cause and a charge, if it finds the
preponderance of the credible evidence so warrants.
   (d)   The commission shall adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of
hearings. The hearing panel shall be appointed by the commission chair and
include members of the human relations commission in whole or in part.
Reasonable notice and opportunity for discovery shall be given to all parties.
The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be
public as required by Tex. Government Code Chapter 551. Witnesses appearing at
such hearing may be required to present testimony under oath or by solemn
affirmation. Evidence of the matter alleged within the complaint may be
presented by the city attorney or his or her assistant. The complainant, and
the person or persons alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the
discriminatory housing practice, may appear personally or by representative and
with or without counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross-
examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent
related matters. If a person or persons alleged to have committed or to be
about to commit a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the
committee hearing either personally or by representative after notice as
provided above, then such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person or
persons.
   (e)   The hearing panel shall make such findings as a majority of its
members deem are supported by the preponderance of the credible evidence. Such
findings shall be in writing and shall be forwarded to the director together
with the hearing panel’s determination that reasonable cause or no reasonable
cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has been
committed.
   (f)   A charge shall be issued by the director upon a panel finding of
reasonable cause and:
      (1)   Shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts
upon which the committee has found reasonable cause to believe that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred;
      (2)   Shall be based on the final investigative report, the evidence
adduced at the hearing, if any; and
      (3)   Need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the
complaint filed with the commission under this division.
   (g)   Any charge issued by the director will be forwarded within ten days to
the city attorney for action as hereinafter provided. Copies of the charge will
be served on the complainant, the aggrieved person, if different from the
complainant, and any respondents.
   (h)   The director may not issue a charge and the city attorney may not
bring or maintain a civil action in state district court for an alleged
discriminatory housing practice after the aggrieved person has brought a civil
action under local, state or federal law seeking relief for the alleged
discriminatory housing practice and the trial in the action has begun. If a
charge may not be issued by the director or a civil action may not be brought
or maintained by the city attorney because of the trial of a civil action
brought by the aggrieved party, the director shall notify the complainant, the
aggrieved person if different from the complainant, and any respondents, in
writing.
   (i)   Any final action, together with the findings or orders thereon, of the
hearing panel, commission and/or the director are subject to judicial review as
provided by state law.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 11167, § 1(A), passed 9-8-1992; Ord.
11384, § 1(B), passed 8-17-1993; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 16032, § 1, passed 7-13-2004; Ord. 19374-09-
2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-97 DISMISSAL AND APPEAL OF COMPLAINT.
   (a)   A complaint may be dismissed by the director during the investigation
and prior to referral to the committee when the director determines that:
      (1)   The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
      (2)   The location of the alleged discriminatory housing practice is not
within the city’s jurisdiction;
      (3)   The alleged discriminatory housing practice is not a violation of
this division;
      (4)   The complainant or aggrieved person refuses to cooperate with the
director in the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of the executed
conciliation agreement;
      (5)   The complainant, or the aggrieved person if different from the
complainant, cannot be located after the director has performed a reasonable
search; or
      (6)   A conciliation agreement has been executed by the respondent,
complainant and aggrieved person if different from the complainant.
   (b)   A criminal action may be dismissed by a municipal judge upon motion of
the city attorney, if after the city attorney files the action charging a
respondent with a discriminatory housing practice, a conciliation agreement is
executed before the trial begins in municipal court.
   (c)   The director shall notify the complainant, the aggrieved person if
different from the complainant, and the respondent of the dismissal of the
complaint, including a written statement of facts, and make public disclosure
of the dismissal by issuing a press release, unless the respondent requests
that no public disclosure be made.
   (d)   The complainant may appeal a no reasonable cause determination to the
commission within 20 days of the date the determination is signed by the
director by filing a written statement of appeal with the director. If a
complainant expresses a desire to file an appeal, the director must allow the
complainant reasonable access to review, but not copy, non-confidential
materials in the case file. The determination of what is considered
confidential shall be made by the director or director’s designee.
      (1)   The director must receive the written statement within 20 days of
the date that the decision was issued. If the director does not receive the
written appeal within 20 days the case will be dismissed and the same shall be
entered on the records of the department.
      (2)   The only grounds for appeal of a no reasonable cause decision is
that the evidence in the case file does not support the no reasonable cause
decision. The appeal letter must contain a written statement describing the
reasons for the appeal, a description of the evidence in the case file that the
complainant believes the commission should consider, and why consideration of
that evidence should have resulted in a reasonable cause determination.
   (e)   The director shall promptly notify the commission and respondent of
the appeal. Within 10 days after being notified of the appeal, the respondent
can file a statement of why the no reasonable cause decision should be upheld.
The respondent will not be granted access to review the materials in the case
file.
   (f)   The commission can only consider whether the evidence in the case file
supports the director’s finding. The commission does not re-investigate the
complaint or look at new information.
   (g)   The commission shall promptly consider and act upon such appeal by (1)
affirming the director’s determination; (2) reversing the decision and
directing the director to enter a cause determination; or (3) if the commission
believes the director should investigate further, remand the complaint to the
director with a request for specific further investigation.
   (h)   In the event no appeal is taken, or such appeal results in affirmance
or if the commission has not decided the appeal within 60 days from the date
the appeal statement is filed, the determination of the director shall be final
and the complaint deemed dismissed and the same shall be entered on the records
of the department. Any party aggrieved by the final dismissal may appeal the
order to an appropriate court.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-98 CIVIL ACTION IN STATE DISTRICT COURT IN COMPLAINTS ALLEGING
DISCRIMINATION BASED ON RACE, COLOR, SEX, RELIGION, NATIONAL ORIGIN, DISABILITY
OR FAMILIAL STATUS.
   (a)   If the director has issued a charge, or if a party has elected under §
17-96(b) to have the claims raised by the complaint resolved in court, the city
attorney, upon the request of the director, after receiving from the director a
copy of the charge, and after consulting with the City Manager, will initiate
and maintain a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved person in the Texas
State District Court seeking relief under this chapter. Venue is Tarrant
County, Texas.
   (b)   If a respondent has been found by the director and the city attorney
to have materially breached an executed conciliation agreement the city
attorney, upon the request of the director, after consulting with the City
Manager, will initiate and maintain a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved
person in the Texas State District Court seeking relief under this chapter.
Venue is in Tarrant County, Texas.
   (c)   An aggrieved person may intervene in the action.
   (d)   If the court finds in the civil action that the conciliation agreement
has been violated or a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the court
may award:
      (1)   Actual and punitive damages to the aggrieved person;
      (2)   Civil penalties to the city for vindication of the public interest
in an amount that does not exceed:
         a.   Nineteen thousand seven hundred eighty-seven dollars ($19,787) if
the respondent has not been adjudged by a court to have committed a prior
discriminatory housing practice;
         b.   Except as provided by subsection (d)(2)d. below, $49,467 if the
respondent has been adjudged by a court to have committed one other
discriminatory housing practice during the five-year period ending on the date
of the filing of the charge;
         c.   Except as provided by subsection (d)(2)d. below, $98,935 if the
respondent has been adjudged by a court to have committed two or more
discriminatory housing practices during the seven-year period ending on the
date of the filing of the charge; and
         d.   If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice that
is the subject of the charge are committed by the same individual who has been
previously adjudged to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory
housing practice, the civil penalties in subsections (b) and (c) above may be
imposed without regard to the period of time within which any other
discriminatory housing practice occurred.
      (3)   Reasonable attorney’s fees to the city and the aggrieved person;
      (4)   Costs of court, including witness and expert witness fees; and
      (5)   Any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order
or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in the
discriminatory housing practice or ordering appropriate affirmative action.
   (e)   If actual damages are sought for the benefit of an aggrieved person
who does not intervene in the civil action, the court may not award the actual
damages if the aggrieved person has not complied with discovery orders entered
by the court.
   (f)   The city shall not be subject to orders for sanctions for the failure
of the complainant, if other than the director, or aggrieved person to comply
with discovery requests of the defendant or discovery orders of the court.
   (g)   Any resolution of a charge before a final order is signed by the state
district court under this section requires the consent of the aggrieved person
on whose behalf the charge is issued.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 11167, § 1(B), passed 9-8-1992; Ord.
11384, § 1(C), passed 8-17-1993; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), passed 9-
28-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-99 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS IN COMPLAINTS ALLEGING DISCRIMINATION
BASED ON RACE, COLOR, SEX, RELIGION, NATIONAL ORIGIN, DISABILITY OR FAMILIAL
STATUS.
   (a)   An aggrieved person may file a civil action in state district court
not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice or after the breach of a conciliation agreement
entered into under this chapter, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate
relief with respect to the discriminatory housing practice or the material
breach of the conciliation agreement.
   (b)   An aggrieved person may file an action under this section whether or
not a complaint has been filed under this division and without regard to the
status of any complaint filed under this division, except as provided in
subsection (c) below.
   (c)   An aggrieved person may not file an action under this section for an
alleged discriminatory housing practice that forms the basis of a charge issued
by the director if:
      (1)   The director has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent
of the aggrieved person; or
      (2)   The city attorney has filed a civil action on the charge in state
district court on behalf of the aggrieved person.
   (d)   In an action under this section, if the court finds that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred, the court may award to the
plaintiff:
      (1)   Actual and punitive damages;
      (2)   Reasonable attorney’s fees;
      (3)   Court costs; and
      (4)   Subject to §
17-100 of this division, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary
restraining order or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant
from engaging in the discriminatory housing practice or ordering appropriate
affirmative action.
   (e)   A court in a civil action brought under this section may award
reasonable attorney’s fees to the prevailing party and assess court costs
against the non-prevailing party.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-100 EFFECT OF CIVIL ACTION ON CERTAIN CONTRACTS.
   Relief granted under §
17-98 or §
17-99 does not affect a contract, sale, encumbrance or lease that:
   (a)   Was consummated before the granting of the relief; and
   (b)   Involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant who did not
have actual notice of the filing of a complaint under this chapter or a civil
action under §
17-101.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-101 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, any notice, paper or document required
to be served on any person under this chapter may be served in person or by
United States mail to the person’s last known address.
   (b)   When service is by mail, three days will be added to the prescribed
time period allowed under this chapter for timely filing.
   (c)   Service is complete and time periods begin to run at the time the
required notice, paper or document is delivered in person or deposited in a
United States postal receptacle.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-102 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The procedures prescribed by this division do not constitute an
administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available to the city
or to an aggrieved person under federal or state law.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-103 EDUCATION AND PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   The director may conduct educational and public information activities that
are designed to promote the policy of this division.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-104 EFFECT ON OTHER LAW.
   This division does not affect any local, state or federal restriction:
   (a)   On the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling
unit; or
   (b)   Relating to health or safety standards.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-105 INTERFERENCE WITH EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected
by this division, including the giving of testimony or provision of information
in aid of investigation or discovery under this division.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-106 CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of §
17-88,
17-95 or
17-105 of this chapter commits a misdemeanor criminal offense. A person is
guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a
violation is committed, continued or permitted.
   (b)   A criminal offense under this division is punishable in municipal
court as provided by §
1-6 of this code.
(Ord. 11075, § 1, passed 4-21-1992; Ord. 13981, § 1, passed 10-26-1999; Ord.
14344, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 19374-09-2010, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 9-28-
2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 2-2-2020)
DIVISION 5: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION OR MODIFICATION FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
§ 17-107 PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is the policy of the City of Fort Worth, pursuant to the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988, the Americans with Disabilities Act and
applicable state laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable
accommodations (including modifications or exceptions) in the city's zoning,
land use and other regulations, rules, policies and practices, to ensure equal
access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for individuals
with disabilities, or developers of housing for people with disabilities,
flexibility in the application of land use, zoning, building and other
regulations, policies, practices and procedures, including waiving certain
requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing
opportunities to ensure a person with a disability has an equal opportunity to
use and enjoy a dwelling.
   (b)   This division provides a procedure for making requests for
accommodations in land use, zoning, building regulations and other regulations,
policies, practices, and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with
the intent and purpose of applicable laws, including federal laws, in making a
reasonable accommodation.
   (c)   Nothing in this division shall require persons with disabilities or
operators of homes for persons with disabilities acting or operating in
accordance with applicable zoning or land use laws or practices to seek a
reasonable accommodation under this division. Nothing in this division shall
require the City of Fort Worth to agree to requested accommodations that are
unreasonable.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-108 APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   The provisions of this division apply to residential uses that will be
used by persons with disabilities.
   (b)   The accommodation granted shall be considered personal to the
individual(s) and shall not run with the land. If the structure is sold, or
otherwise changes ownership, an accommodation granted to the previous owner is
not transferable to the new owner. Notwithstanding, the accommodation shall be
in force and effect as long as the person(s) or group of persons with
disabilities for whom the accommodation was sought resides on the property that
is the subject of the accommodation. It is the duty of the owner to notify the
director of this event. The city shall allow the new owner an opportunity to
renew and/or modify a granted reasonable accommodation in accordance with this
division. In the event that the reasonable accommodation is not renewed or
modified within 60 days from the date of change in ownership, the accommodation
will lapse and the structure will have to comply with all requirements of this
division.
   (c)   Nothing in this division will require the city to expend any funds to
achieve a reasonable accommodation except and to the extent required by state
or federal law.
   (d)   Nothing in this division will alter a person with disabilities'
obligation to comply with other applicable federal, state and city regulations.
   (e)   The city shall prominently display a notice at the counter in the
planning and development department advising those with disabilities or their
representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance
with the procedures established in this division. A copy of the notice shall be
available upon request.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-109 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The planning and development department head or city official with
authority to administer, implement, or enforce a requirement that is the basis
of the request for reasonable accommodation.
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. For the purposes of this division, has the meaning
set forth in the federal Fair Housing Act and the American with Disabilities
Act and is an individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits
one or more of the major life activities of such individual, is regarded as
having such impairment, or has a record of such impairment. While a person
recovering from substance abuse is considered a person with a disability under
42 U.S.C. § 3602(h), a person who is currently engaged in illegal use of
controlled substances is not.
   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION (INCLUSIVE OF MODIFICATION). The act of making a
dwelling unit or housing facility(ies) readily accessible to and usable by a
person with disabilities, through the removal of constraints in the city's land
use, zoning, permit and processing procedures. All accommodations may be not
reasonable, and the reasonableness of a request will be determined by the
director or city manager's designee upon appeal.
   REQUIREMENT. A provision of the City Code or an administrative policy,
program or procedure.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-110 EFFECT.
   A reasonable accommodation controls over a conflicting city regulation or
requirement.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-111 REQUESTS FOR ACCOMMODATION; APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application for an accommodation may be made by any person(s) with
a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing
for persons with disabilities.
   (b)   A request for accommodation may be submitted at any time the
accommodation may be necessary to afford the person with a disability equal
opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling. A written acknowledgment of the
request shall be sent to the applicant within ten days of receipt by the
director.
   (c)   Requests for an accommodation may include a modification or exception
to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development, and use of
housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers
and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to a dwelling of his
or her choice.
   (d)   An individual requesting an accommodation shall direct the request to
the director of the planning and development department, orally, which shall be
transcribed by the city into writing if requested by the applicant or if it is
apparent to a city employee or staff that assistance is needed in filling out
the application form (e.g., if the individual is unable to write), or in
writing. The individual shall submit an application for a reasonable
accommodation using the appropriate city form, to be provided by the director.
The city shall assist the applicant with furnishing all information maintained
by the city with respect to an accommodation. The applicant shall provide the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of the person or entity requesting accommodation.
If the applicant is applying on behalf of a person with a disability, the name
and address of the person with a disability shall also be provided.
      (2)   Address of the property for which the accommodation is requested.
      (3)   Indication of whether that the applicant is:
         a.   Person with a disability;
         b.   Applying on behalf of a person with a disability; or
         c.   A developer or provider of housing for one or more person(s) with
a disability.
      (4)   Description of the disability at issue, the requested
accommodation, and the specific regulation(s), policy, practice or procedure
for which the accommodation is sought. In the event that the specific
individuals who are expected to reside at the property are not known to a
provider in advance of making the application, the provider shall not be
precluded from filing the application, but shall submit details describing the
range of disabilities that prospective residents are expected to have to
qualify for the housing.
      (5)   Description of whether the specific accommodation requested by the
applicant is necessary for the person(s) with the disability to use and enjoy
the dwelling, or is necessary to make the provision of housing for persons with
disabilities financially or practically feasible.
      (6)   Any other information the Director concludes is necessary in order
to make the findings required by §
17-113 to the extent permissible under applicable local, state and federal
laws. In most cases, an individual's medical records or detailed information
about the nature of a person's disability is not necessary for this inquiry.
(See Joint Statement of The Department of Housing and Urban Development and The
Department of Justice: Reasonable Accommodations Under the Fair Housing Act
#18.)
   (e)   Any personal information regarding disability status identified by an
applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the
privacy rights of the applicant and/or person with a disability and shall not
be made available for public inspection unless required by the Texas Public
Information Act. Any information received regarding the disability status
identified, including but not limited to medical records, will be returned to
the applicant within ten days of the decision of the city manager's designee.
The applicant need provide only the information necessary for the city to
evaluate the reasonable accommodation request.
   (f)   If the person with the disability needs assistance to make a request
for accommodation, the director will provide assistance, including transcribing
a verbal request into a written request.
   (g)   A fee shall not be required for an application for an accommodation.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-112 REVIEW AUTHORITY.
   (a)   A request for accommodation shall be reviewed, and a determination
made, by the director, using the criteria set forth in §
17-113.
   (b)   The director shall issue a written decision on a request for
accommodation within 30 calendar days of the date of the application, and may
either grant, grant with alterations or conditions, or deny a request for an
accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in §
17-113.
   (c)   If necessary to reach a determination on the request for
accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant
consistent with applicable laws, specifying in detail the additional
information that is required. Any personal information related to the
disability status identified by the applicant as confidential shall be retained
in a manner so as to protect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not
be made available for public inspection unless required by the Texas Public
Information Act. Any information received regarding the disability status
identified, including but not limited to medical records, will be returned to
the applicant within ten days of the decision of the city manager's designee.
If a request for additional information is made, the running of the 30 calendar
day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the
request.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-113 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (a)   The written decision to grant, grant with alterations or conditions,
or deny a request for accommodation shall be based on the following factors to
the extent they are consistent with applicable laws:
      (1)   Whether the housing that is the subject of the request for
accommodation will be used by a person with a disability protected under the
applicable laws.
      (2)   Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make a dwelling
available to a person with disabilities protected under the applicable laws.
      (3)   Whether the requested accommodation would pose an undue financial
or administrative burden on the city. The determination of undue financial and
administrative burden will be done on a case-by-case basis.
      (4)   Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to
zoning and land use.
   (b)   In making findings, the director may grant with alterations or
conditions, reasonable accommodations, if the director determines that the
applicant's initial request would impose an undue financial or administrative
burden on the city, or fundamentally alter a city program or law. The
alterations or conditions shall provide an equivalent level of benefit to the
applicant with respect to:
      (1)   Enabling the person(s) with a disability to use and enjoy the
dwelling; and
      (2)   Making the provision of housing for person(s) with a disability
financially or practically feasible.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-114 WRITTEN DECISION.
   (a)   The written decision of the director on an application for an
accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the
director's findings on the criteria set forth in §
17-113. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to
appeal and to request assistance in the appeal process as set forth in §
17-115. The notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified
mail and electronic mail, if the applicant's electronic mail address is known
to the city.
   (b)   The written decision of the director shall be final unless the
applicant files an appeal to the city manager's designee in accordance with §
17-115. Nothing herein shall prohibit the applicant, or persons on whose behalf
a specific application was filed, from reapplying for an accommodation based on
additional grounds or changed circumstances. Nor shall this provision be
construed to affect in any way the rights of a person to challenge the denial
of a request for reasonable accommodation as violating the Fair Housing Act,
the ADA or any other applicable state, federal or local law.
   (c)   If the director fails to render a written decision on the request for
accommodation within the 30 calendar day period established in §
17-112, the accommodation request shall be deemed granted.
   (d)   A request for accommodation stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the enforcement of any requirement that is the subject of the request. An
accommodation request does not affect an applicant's obligation to comply with
other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
   (e)   The director shall retain, for the duration of the accommodation and
at least five years thereafter, written records of each request and all related
records, including the city's responses and decisions.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
§ 17-115 APPEALS.
   (a)   An applicant, or a person on whose behalf an application was filed,
may appeal the written decision to deny or grant an accommodation with
alterations or conditions or a denial of the accommodation no later than 30
calendar days from the date the decision is mailed.
   (b)   An appeal must be in writing (or reduced to writing as provided by
subsection (c), below) and include grounds for appeal. Any personal information
related to the disability status identified by the applicant as confidential
shall be retained in a manner so as to protect the privacy rights of the
applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection unless required
by the Texas Public Information Act. Any information received regarding the
disability status identified, including but not limited to medical records,
will be returned to the applicant within ten days of the decision of the city
manager's designee.
   (c)   If an applicant needs assistance appealing a written decision, the
city will provide assistance transcribing a verbal request into a written
appeal to ensure that the appeals process is accessible.
   (d)   An applicant shall not be required to pay a fee to appeal a written
decision.
   (e)   An appeal will be decided by the city manager's designee. In
considering an appeal of a decision of the director, the city manager's
designee shall consider:
      (1)   The application requesting the accommodation;
      (2)   The director's decision;
      (3)   The applicant's written statement of the grounds of the appeal; and
      (4)   The provisions of this division, in order to determine whether the
director's decision was consistent with applicable fair housing laws and the
required findings in §
17-113.
   (f)   If a written decision on the appeal is not rendered within 30 calendar
days from the date the appeal is received, the requested accommodation shall be
deemed granted.
   (g)   The decision of the city manager's designee is final.
(Ord. 22098-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 24023-01-2020, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 2-2-2020)
DIVISION 6: SOURCE OF INCOME
§ 17-120 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CITY INCENTIVE. Any loan, grant, tax abatement, monies, or other direct or
indirect financial benefit provided by the city, a component unit of the city,
or the Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied, or designed or intended for, occupancy as a
residence for one or more families.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. Lawful, regular, and verifiable income from whatever
source derived (including housing vouchers and other subsidies provided by
government or non-government entities, child support, or spousal maintenance),
except as prohibited by Texas Local Government Code § 250.007, as amended.
   RENTING. Includes leasing, subleasing, letting, or otherwise granting for
consideration the right to occupy a housing accommodation not owned by the
occupant.
   VETERAN. A person who served in the active military, naval, air, or space
service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other
than dishonorable.
(Ord. 26782-03-2024, § 1, passed 3-19-2024, eff. 4-4-2024)
§ 17-121 THE RENTAL OF HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS TO MILITARY VETERANS.
   (a)   In renting a housing accommodation, a person may not discriminate
against a veteran because of the veteran’s source of income to pay rent.
   (b)   A person who violates a provision of this section commits a
misdemeanor criminal offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each
day or part of a day during which a violation is committed, continued, or
permitted.
   (c)   A criminal offense under this section is punishable in municipal court
as provided by §
1-6 of this code.
(Ord. 26782-03-2024, § 1, passed 3-19-2024, eff. 4-4-2024)
§ 17-122 THE RENTAL OF HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS WITH CITY INCENTIVES.
   (a)   In accordance with Texas Local Government Code § 250.007, as amended,
the city hereby establishes and implements the following voluntary program to
encourage the acceptance of housing vouchers, including vouchers directly or
indirectly funded by the federal government.
   (b)   In renting a housing accommodation that benefits from a city incentive
approved on or after the effective date of this division, the owner or manager
of the housing accommodation may not discriminate against a person because of
the person’s source of income to pay rent.
(Ord. 26782-03-2024, § 1, passed 3-19-2024, eff. 4-4-2024)
CHAPTER 18: LAKE WORTH
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   RESERVED
      
III.   WATER SAFETY
      
IV.   MARINAS AND MARINE FUEL FACILITIES
Cross-reference:
   Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
Section
Article I: In General
   
18-1   Swimming—Permit required for certain area
   
18-2   Same—Issuance of permits
   
18-3   Boats for sale, hire or rent
   
18-4   Boat ramp use fee
   
18-5   Reserved
   
18-6   Boat toilet facility inspection required
   
18-7—18-15   Reserved
Article II: Reserved
   
18-16—18-35   Reserved
Article III: Water Safety
   
18-36   Definitions
   
18-37   Prohibited conduct
   
18-38   Classifications; required equipment
   
18-39   Boat liveries
   
18-40   Boat operation rules
   
18-41   Abandoned boats
   
18-42   Enforcement
   
18-43—18-49   Reserved
Article IV: Marinas and Marine Fuel Facilities
   
18-50   Definitions
   
18-51   Marina and marine fuel facility—Location and configuration
   
18-52   Same—Electrical and lighting requirements
   
18-53   Same—Safety
   
18-54   Same—Structural requirements
   
18-55   Same—Sanitation and pollution control
   
18-56   Same—License required
   
18-57   Same—License application
   
18-58   Same—Issuance of license
   
18-59   Same—Duration of license; no refund of license fee
   
18-60   Same—Suspension or revocation of license
   
18-61   Same—Display and nontransferability of license
   
18-62   Same—Inspections
   
18-63   Same—Insurance
   
18-64   Same—Aboveground storage tanks
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to construct lakes, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6080
§ 18-1 SWIMMING—PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN AREA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe or swim in the waters of the
reservoir known as Lake Worth at any point or place on the shores or in the
waters between the Nine Mile Bridge and what is known as the municipal bathing
beach, located in the west end of the Nine Mile Bridge, upstream to a point
running with and parallel to the north line of the J. Wilcox Survey No. 34, in
Tarrant County, Texas, and extending from the west to the east shoreline of
such reservoir or Lake Worth, without a special written permit as hereinafter
provided.
(1964 Code, § 23-1)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 18-2 SAME—ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The mayor is empowered to grant special written permits for bathing or
swimming in the waters of Lake Worth above, and upstream, from what is known as
the municipal bathing beach and Nine Mile Bridge. Any person to whom such
permit is issued shall make the necessary provisions to safeguard the lives of
persons enjoying the benefits of such permit and to prevent the pollution of
the waters of Lake Worth or the reservoir as may be designated in such permit.
(1964 Code, § 23-2)
§ 18-3 BOATS FOR SALE, HIRE OR RENT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, sell or hire any boat or
skiff of any kind or character at any place on the waters, banks or shores of
Lake Worth for use on Lake Worth, or to keep the same for sale, rent or hire,
except at the places, docks or piers designated by the city council for such
use.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to anchor, dock or tie, or keep
any boat or skiff of any kind or character anchored, docked, tied or otherwise
held at any place on the banks, shores or waters of Lake Worth for hire, rent
or sale to others, or for the use of any person other than the owner, except at
the places, docks or piers designated by the city council for such use.
(1964 Code, §§ 23-3, 23-4)
§ 18-4 BOAT RAMP USE FEE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to use the boat ramps at Arrow S and Casino Beach
Parks without a valid boat ramp use sticker affixed to the trailer of the boat,
as directed by the city. A person shall pay the required fee to acquire a boat
ramp use sticker from the city or the city’s designee. The boat ramp use fee(s)
shall be as follows:
 
Nonresidents of the City of Fort Worth $20
Residents of the City of Fort Worth    $15
Water craft dealer                     $90
Weekly boat ramp use fee               $5
 
   (b)   The boat ramp use fee for residents and nonresidents shall be valid
from the date of issuance until December 31 of the same year.
   (c)   The weekly boat ramp use fee shall be valid for seven days from the
date of purchase and expire on the date shown on the sticker.
   (d)   An offense under this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to
$500. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 10770, § 1, passed 1-22-1991; Ord. 11148, § 1, passed 8-11-1992; Ord.
19597-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 18-5 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19597-03-2011, § 2, adopted March 22, 2011, repealed §
18-5, which pertained to Lake Worth use fee permit. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 18-6 BOAT TOILET FACILITY INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to operate on Lake Worth without an inspection
sticker issued by the city, a boat with a toilet facility or a boat with an
enclosed area capable of containing a toilet facility. The inspection sticker
shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of the year issued. The boat
must be available for inspection when the inspection sticker application is
filed.
   (b)   Toilet facilities located on boats shall be either a self-contained or
a securely affixed discharge holding tank located on the boat. The holding tank
shall meet the following specifications.
      (1)   The holding tanks shall be emptied into on-shore facilities
approved and licensed by the city.
      (2)   The holding tanks shall be constructed of material that will
withstand the corrosive effects of sewage and any disinfecting chemicals.
      (3)   The holding tanks shall be firmly anchored and located to eliminate
the possibility of rupture.
      (4)   The holding tanks must be properly vented to the outside of the
boat so as not to defile the interior of the boat.
(Ord. 10770, § 3, passed 1-22-1991)
§§ 18-7—18-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 18-16
through 18-35. Formerly, said sections pertained to pollution and derived from
§§ 23-5 through 23-9 of the 1964 Code.
§§ 18-16—18-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: WATER SAFETY
§ 18-36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BOAT. Any vessel or other watercraft floating on the waters of Lake Worth.
   BOAT LIVERY. Any business establishment engaged in renting or hiring out
boats for profit.
   DIVER DOWN FLAG. A square or rectangular red flag that has a diagonal white
stripe and is at least 24 inches by 24 inches in size.
   OPERATE. To navigate or otherwise use a boat on the waters of Lake Worth.
   OWNER. Any person who claims lawful possession of a boat by virtue of a
legal title or equitable interest therein which entitles him or her to such
possession.
   TOILET FACILITY. An apparatus that is temporarily or permanently affixed to
a boat and used for receipt and disposal of body waste.
(1964 Code, § 23-10) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 10770, § 4, passed
1-22-1991)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 18-37 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful:
   (a)   For any person under 13 years of age to operate a boat powered by a
motor greater than 15 horsepower, unless such operator is either accompanied by
a person 16 years of age or older that is supervising the actions of such
operator or unless such operator has successfully completed a boater education
course conducted by the parks and wildlife department of the state;
   (b)   For any person to operate any boat or manipulate any water ski,
paraski, windsurfer, aquaplane or similar device as to endanger any person or
the property of another person;
   (c)   For any person to operate any boat at a rate of speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards,
actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic,
or greater than will permit him or her, in the exercise of ordinary care, to
bring such boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead;
   (d)   For any person to operate a boat so as to create a hazardous wake or
wash;
   (e)   For any person to operate a boat in a circular course around any other
boat, any occupant of which is engaged in fishing, or in a circular course
around any person swimming;
   (f)   For any person to swim or dive within 200 yards of any sightseeing or
excursion boat except for maintenance purpose or unless such person is swimming
within an enclosed area;
   (g)   For any person to operate a boat within a water area that the city or
a political subdivision or the state has clearly marked by buoys or some other
distinguishing device as a bathing, fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted
area, or around any buoy or vessel that displays a “diver down” flag where
persons may be scuba diving or snorkeling;
   (h)   For any person to operate a boat or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device while such person is intoxicated, or under the
influence of intoxicating liquor, or while under the influence of any
controlled substance as defined in the Texas Controlled Substances Act, Tex.
Revised Civil Statutes Article 4476-15;
   (i)   For any person to manipulate any water skis, paraskis, aquaplane or
similar device without wearing a life preserver or life belt. A person over the
age of 14 who is operating a wind surfer is exempted from this requirement;
   (j)   For any person to operate a boat towing a person or persons on water
skis, aquaplane, paraskis, windsurfer or similar device at any time between the
hours of one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to boats or persons engaged in water skiing
competitions, exhibitions or tournaments, if adequate lighting is provided for
such activity;
   (k)   For any person to engage in water skiing, aquaplaning, paraskiing,
windsurfing or similar activity at any time between the hours of one hour after
sunset and one hour before sunrise; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to boats or persons engaged in water skiing competitions, exhibitions
or tournaments, if adequate lighting is provided for such activity;
   (l)   For any person to operate a boat towing a person or persons on water
skis, aquaplane, paraskis, windsurfer or similar device unless the boat is
equipped with a rearview mirror of a size no less than four inches in
measurement from bottom to top and across from one side to the other. The
mirror shall be mounted firmly so as to give the boat operator a full and
complete view beyond the rear of the boat at all times. Provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to boats used in water skiing competitions,
exhibitions or tournaments, or to boats that, in addition to the operators,
have on board a person 13 years of age or older observing the progress of the
person being towed;
   (m)   For any person to engage in water skiing, aquaplaning, paraskiing,
windsurfing or similar activity when being towed by boat not equipped with a
rearview mirror of a size no less than four inches in measurement from bottom
to top and across from one side to the other. The mirror shall be mounted
firmly to give the boat operator a full and complete view beyond the rear of
the boat at all times. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
boats used in water skiing competitions, exhibitions or tournaments, or to
boats that, in addition to the operator, have on board a person 13 years of age
or older observing the progress of the person being towed;
   (n)   For any person to erect, build, construct, create or maintain, or
cause to be erected, built, constructed, created or maintained a water ski
ramp, floating platform or other similar structure on Lake Worth, without
approval of the city;
   (o)   For any person to engage in water skiing, aquaplaning, paraskiing or
similar activity by use of a water ski ramp on Lake Worth without approval of
the city;
   (p)   For any person, firm, association of persons, corporation and every
other organization operating a boat on the waters of Lake Worth to dispose into
the waters of Lake Worth trash, body waste and excreta;
   (q)   For any person operating a boat to willfully fail or refuse to bring
his or her boat to a no-wake speed, and subsequent stop, or to otherwise flee
or attempt to elude a pursuing peace officer’s or lake officer’s boat, after
being given a visual or audible signal to bring his or her boat to a stop. The
signal given by the peace or lake officer may be by hand, voice, emergency red
beacon light or siren. The officer giving such signal shall be in uniform,
prominently displaying his or her badge of office, and his or her boat shall be
appropriately marked showing it to be an official city boat;
   (r)   For any person operating a boat on the waters of Lake Worth to refuse
to obey the directions of a peace or lake officer when such officer is acting
pursuant to this article;
   (s)   For any person to operate a boat on Lake Worth that is unseaworthy;
   (t)   For any person to use a boat on Lake Worth as a place of abode;
   (u)   For any person to moor or attach a boat to a buoy, beacon, light
marker, stake, flag or other aid to safe navigation placed upon the public
water. No person may install, move, remove, displace, tamper with, damage or
destroy markers or aids to safe navigation; and
   (v)   For an operator of a boat involved in an accident, collision or
casualty:
      (1)   To fail to render to other affected persons such assistance as may
be practicable and necessary to save them from or minimize any danger if the
operator can do so without serious damage to his or her own boat, crew and
passengers;
      (2)   To fail to give his or her name, address and identification of his
or her boat in writing to any person injured and to the owner of any property
damaged in the accident, collision or casualty; and
      (3)   To fail to file a full description of the accident, collision or
casualty as required by state law.
(1964 Code, § 23-11) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 10770, § 5, passed
1-22-1991)
§ 18-38 CLASSIFICATIONS; REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Boats operating on Lake Worth shall be classified and equipped in
accord with the regulations of the United States Coast Guard.
   (b)   In addition, a boat towing a person or persons on water skis, paraski,
windsurfer, aquaplane or similar device must have a rearview mirror of a size
no less than four inches from bottom to top and across from one side to the
other. The mirror must be mounted firmly so as to give the boat operator a full
and complete view beyond the rear of the boat at all times. The rearview mirror
is not required on a boat used in water ski competitions, exhibitions or
tournaments, or on a boat that, in addition to the operator, has on board a
person 13 years of age or older observing the progress of the person being
towed.
   (c)   Moreover, a motor- or power-driven boat must have an exhaust water
manifold or a factory-type muffler installed on the engine.
(1964 Code, § 23-12) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 10770, § 6, passed
1-22-1991)
§ 18-39 BOAT LIVERIES.
   (a)   The owner of a boat livery shall obtain a license for all boats used
to rent or let for hire that are capable of being used as a boat. The owner of
a boat livery shall keep a record of the name and address of the persons hiring
any boat which is designed or permitted by him or her to be operated as a boat;
the license number thereof; the time and date of departure and the expected
time of return. The records shall be kept for six months.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any boat livery owner or agent to rent or let
for hire any boat without having such boat equipped with one United States
Coast Guard approved lifesaving device aboard for each person aboard the boat.
(1964 Code, § 23-13) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976)
§ 18-40 BOAT OPERATION RULES.
   The United States Coast Guard Inland Rules are hereby adopted and shall
apply to all waters of Lake Worth insofar as they are applicable.
(1964 Code, § 23-14) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976)
§ 18-41 ABANDONED BOATS.
   Any boat found abandoned or adrift on the waters of Lake Worth may be
impounded by the city. The owner of any such abandoned or adrift boat shall be
liable for all costs incurred in impoundment, including costs for storage of
such boat.
(1964 Code, § 23-15) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976)
§ 18-42 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   All city peace officers and lake officers shall have and are hereby
given authority as enforcement officers for the purposes enumerated in this
article, and they and each of them shall have the power and authority to
enforce the provisions of this article by arrest and the taking into custody
any person who may commit any act or offense prohibited by this article or any
person who may violate any provision of this article.
   (b)   Any such officer in order to enforce the provisions of this article is
hereby given the power and the authority to stop and board any boat subject to
this article and to inspect same for compliance with this article. Officers so
boarding any boat shall first identify themselves by presenting proper
credentials; provided, however, that the safety of the boat shall always be the
paramount consideration of any arresting officer. If any boat or associated
equipment is used in violation of this article so as to create in the judgment
of such officer an especially hazardous condition, he or she may direct the
operator to return to mooring and that the boat may not be subsequently used
until the condition creating the violation is corrected.
   (c)   Any such officer arresting a person for a violation of this article
may deliver to such alleged violator a written notice to appear within 15 days
from and after the date of such alleged violation, before the judge of the
municipal court of the city. Such person so arrested shall sign the written
notice to appear and thereby promise to make his or her appearance in
accordance with the requirements therein set forth, whereupon he or she may be
released. It shall be unlawful for any person who has made such written promise
to appear before the court to fail to appear, and such failure to appear at the
time specified shall constitute a misdemeanor and warrant for his or her arrest
may be issued.
(1964 Code, § 23-16) (Ord. 7339, § 1, passed 4-26-1976)
§ 18-43—18-49 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: MARINAS AND MARINE FUEL FACILITIES
§ 18-50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BREAKWATER. A structure used to protect a marina, dock, harbor or beach from
the force of waves and includes a navigable passage through or around a
structure.
   CONFIGURATION. The relative arrangement of the separate parts of a marina.
   CONSTRUCTION. To erect or install any mechanical, structural, electrical or
plumbing portion of a marina, including preliminary dredging and clearing.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the city after an application for
such permit has been received, reviewed and approved.
   EXPANSION. To increase the area of water surface occupied by a marina.
   FLOTATION MATERIAL. Any material used to support floating structures on the
surface of the waters of Lake Worth.
   IMPROVEMENT. All structures, devices, contrivances or artificially created
objects placed, constructed or erected on the waters of Lake Worth or land
owned, controlled or under the jurisdiction of the city.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a marina and
accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory
thereto, together with such open spaces as may be present. A LOT may or may not
be specifically designated as such on public records.
   MARINA. Any water-based facility for the mooring, fueling or servicing of
two or more boats, including all structures and associated anchoring
facilities. A MARINA shall include anything constructed or erected as part of a
MARINA, the use of which requires location on the waters of Lake Worth or
attachment to something having location on ground that is covered by the waters
of Lake Worth.
   MARINE FUEL FACILITY. A facility that provides fueling services for boats,
the use of which facility requires location on the waters of Lake Worth or
attachment to something having location on ground that is covered by the waters
of Lake Worth.
   MODIFICATION. Any change, addition or alteration in the construction,
substructure, flotation, anchorage, mechanical, plumbing or electrical services
of a structure other than routine maintenance.
   PUMP-OUT FACILITY. Any pump and hose combination used for the transfer from
boats of any liquid or solid waste.
   REMODEL. Any repair, renovation or addition that requires a building permit.
   SHORELINE. The point at which the surface of the waters of Lake Worth
touches land at the spillway level elevation.
   SPILL. Any amount of petroleum product or distillate, hazardous material,
chemical product or sewage, that is unaccounted for in a holding system.
   SPILLWAY LEVEL ELEVATION. The level of the spillway at Lake Worth, which
level is 595 feet above sea level.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-51 MARINA AND MARINE FUEL FACILITY—LOCATION AND CONFIGURATION.
   (a)   No marina or marine fuel facility shall extend into the waters of Lake
Worth without the prior written approval of the city. No marina or marine fuel
facility shall be constructed to constitute a hazard to navigation, hinder
flood control and to be higher than 35 feet above the spillway level elevation.
   (b)   A marina or a marine fuel facility shall be located over property that
is owned or leased by the marina owner or operator. No marina or marine fuel
facility shall be nearer than 20 feet to any property line of the lot or parcel
of land on which the marina or marine fuel facility is located.
   (c)   Relocation or alteration of the configuration of a marina or marine
fuel facility shall not be permitted without the prior written approval of the
city.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-52 SAME—ELECTRICAL AND LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   All electrical service to a marina and a marine fuel facility shall conform
to the electrical code of the city. No beam of light with an intensity that
constitutes a hazard to safe boating or a nuisance to the general boating
public shall be directed outward from a marina or a marine fuel facility.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-53 SAME—SAFETY.
   (a)   A marina or a marine fuel facility shall comply with federal, state
and local laws, rules and regulations and shall be approved by the city. A
marina or marine fuel facility that has fuel storage areas shall clearly mark
such areas.
   (b)   A marine fuel facility shall be equipped with:
      (1)   A leak detector installed on any pump;
      (2)   A shear valve or similar device installed at the shoreline end of
the fuel line; and
      (3)   A shear-impact valve installed under any fuel dispenser.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-54 SAME—STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   A marina or a marine fuel facility shall be built and maintained according
to federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. All marine fuel
facilities shall be isolated from mooring docks and protected by adequate
breakwater facilities.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-55 SAME—SANITATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL.
   (a)   A marina capable of accommodating boats equipped with toilet
facilities must have an approved, certified and functional holding tank and
pump-out facility. Disposal of boat sewage at a marina shall be by discharge
into a pump-out facility that has been approved and certified according to
regulations of the Texas water commission. The certification shall be displayed
according to regulations of the Texas water commission. Disposal of sewage from
pump-out facilities shall be:
      (1)   By discharge into a private sewage facility approved by the city
and the State of Texas;
      (2)   By discharge into a liquid-tight vacuum truck that is licensed
according to the Texas Water Code and constructed according to the regulations
of the Texas department of health; or
      (3)   By disposal at a sewage treatment plant operated under a valid
permit issued by the Texas water commission.
   (b)   A marina and a marine fuel facility shall be designed, maintained and
operated to prevent spillage or leakage of fuel and petroleum products into the
waters of Lake Worth. All maintenance and repair of boats shall be performed to
prevent the discharge of fuel, oil, sewage or other pollutants into the waters
of Lake Worth. If a spill occurs, the city shall be notified immediately by the
marina or marine fuel facility operator, its agents or employees. The
notification shall include information about: the location of the spill, time
of the spill, the substance spilled, the probable cause of the spill, the
amount of the spill and the efforts undertaken to clean up the spill.
   (c)   No boat of a size capable of containing toilet facilities may be
accepted for storage at a marina if it does not have affixed a toilet facility
inspection sticker. The marina owner or operator that enters into an agreement
for the storage of a boat without the required toilet facility inspection
sticker must:
      (1)   Notify the boat owner that such boat is subject to inspection and
approval by the city; and
      (2)   Notify the city that an agreement for the storage of a non-
inspected boat has been made.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-56 SAME—LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a marina or marine fuel
facility without first obtaining a license from the city. A separate license
shall be required for every marina and marine fuel facility, whether situated
in the same or at a separate location, and the fee shall be computed separately
for each license.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-57 SAME—LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   In addition to documents that may be required by other city
departments, the application for a license for a marina or marine fuel facility
shall be made upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Lake Worth management
group and shall set forth, among other things:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether the applicant is an individual or business entity (and if a
business entity, what kind, the name and address of the owner or principal
officer of the business, and identification of other officers or partners);
      (3)   A full description of the proposed marina or marine fuel facility,
including services to be offered;
      (4)   Proof that the applicant has control by ownership or lease of the
property contiguous to the location of the marina or marine fuel facility;
      (5)   A copy of the recorded plat of the property contiguous to the
marina or marine fuel facility;
      (6)   Drawings to approximate scale, indicating the location and
configuration of the marina or marine fuel facility at the design elevation;
      (7)   Specifications of the proposed marina or marine fuel facility;
      (8)   Complete plans fully describing all sanitation and waste control
facilities and apparatus; and
      (9)   Requested information or documentation directly related to the
proposed marina or marine fuel facility.
   (b)   Incomplete, incorrect or false information provided by the applicant
in the application for a license shall constitute grounds for denial or
revocation of a license.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-58 SAME—ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The Lake Worth management group shall issue a marina or marine fuel
facility license in writing to the applicant when:
      (1)   The applicant has completed and submitted the required application
and the application has been reviewed by the Lake Worth management group and
has been found to meet the requirements of §
18-57;
      (2)   All fees have been paid; and
      (3)   The marina or marine fuel facility, after inspection by the city,
has been found to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
rules and regulations, and the applicant has furnished satisfactory proof of
such compliance.
   (b)   The fee for a license for a marina or a marine fuel facility shall be
in an amount established by the city council.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-59 SAME—DURATION OF LICENSE; NO REFUND OF LICENSE FEE.
   Licenses for marinas and marine fuel facilities shall be valid from January
1 through December 31 of each calendar year unless sooner suspended or revoked
for cause; a new license shall be applied for annually. No license fees shall
be refunded, transferred or prorated.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-60 SAME—SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The Lake Worth management group, or its authorized agent, may, without
warning, notice or hearing, suspend or revoke any marina or marine fuel
facility license if the licensee does not comply with the requirements of this
article or if the operation of the marina or marine fuel facility constitutes
or is reasonably believed to constitute a hazard to public health or safety.
When a license is so suspended or revoked, operation of the marina or marine
fuel facility shall immediately cease. The licensee shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for a
hearing.
   (b)   Failure to comply with any provision of this code or repeated
violations of the requirements of this article or any other federal, state or
local laws, rules or regulations as may be applicable to the marina or marine
fuel facility shall be deemed cause for revocation of license. Upon such
revocation, the Lake Worth management group, or its authorized agent, shall
notify the licensee in writing of the reason the license has been revoked and
that the license is void. A written request for a hearing on the revocation may
be filed with the Lake Worth management group by the licensee within ten days.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-61 SAME—DISPLAY AND NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.
   Marina and marine fuel facility licenses are not transferable. Upon issuance
of a valid license, the licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous place
upon the premises for which the license is issued.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-62 SAME—INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Each year prior to the issuance of a marina or marine fuel facility
license, the Lake Worth management group, or its duly authorized
representative, shall inspect the marina or marine fuel facility prior to the
start of operations to determine compliance of the approved plans and
specifications with the requirements of this article and compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.
   (b)   In addition to the inspections provided for above, the city shall have
the authority to inspect or visit all marinas or marine fuel facilities
embraced within the provisions of this article at all reasonable times, and as
the city determines necessary, to ascertain if they are being conducted in
conformity with this article and federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations or if any conditions exist which require correction.
   (c)   Failure to obtain or refusal to allow at reasonable times any of the
above required inspections shall constitute grounds for denial or revocation of
a marina or marine fuel facility license.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-63 SAME—INSURANCE.
   Each marina or marine fuel facility shall maintain general public liability
insurance in the amounts and on such terms as shall be required by the city
from time to time. A certificate of insurance shall be furnished to the city
annually, showing the city as an additional insured, and providing that such
insurance may not be cancelled without 30 days’ written notice to the city.
Failure to maintain general public liability insurance at all times as required
by this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of a marina or marine
fuel facility license.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
§ 18-64 SAME—ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANKS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the term STORAGE TANK shall mean all
underground storage tanks and aboveground storage tanks as defined by federal
law and state law. It shall be unlawful for a marina or marine fuel facility to
install, repair, renovate, operate or permit to exist on the premises an
underground storage tank.
   (b)   The applicant or licensee of a marina or marine fuel facility shall
not install, repair, renovate, operate or permit to exist on the premises any
aboveground storage tank unless it complies with all the requirements of this
section and with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations. A copy of all papers, reports, forms and other information about
aboveground storage tanks at a marina or marine fuel facility that are required
to be filed with the United States or the State of Texas, including the
registration and the proof of financial responsibility, also must be filed
simultaneously with the city.
   (c)   Failure to comply with all federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations relating to storage tanks constitutes a substantial hazard to
public health and safety for the purposes of §
18-60.
   (d)   Before an applicant or licensee of a marina or a marine fuel facility
places in operation an aboveground storage tank, that is installed or is to be
installed on city property, the applicant or licensee shall:
      (1)   Submit to the city a properly executed written statement
containing:
         a.   An acknowledgment that the applicant or licensee is the owner of
the above ground storage tank, that the storage tank is not a fixture and shall
at all times, as between the city and applicant or licensee, remain the
property of the applicant or licensee, and that the city is not and shall not
be considered, for any purpose, the owner or operator of the storage tank; and
         b.   A covenant and agreement to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
the city from and against any and all claims or suits of whatsoever kind or
character, whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the
installation, operation, renovation, removal or existence on the property of
any and all storage tanks.
      (2)   Provide the city, as named insured, with a corporate surety bond in
the principal amount of $50,000 for:
         a.   The purpose of paying all damages to persons or property that
arise from, or are caused by, the existence or use of any and all storage tanks
on the property; and
         b.   Insuring the proper removal from service of any and all storage
tanks either when not in use or at the termination of the license, whichever
occurs first.
(Ord. 10773, § 1, passed 1-22-1991)
CHAPTER 19: LIBRARIES
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Cross-reference:
   Administration generally, see
Ch. 2
Section
Article I: In General
   
19-1—19-14   Reserved
Article II: Department of Public Libraries
   
19-15   Definitions and policies
   
19-16—19-18   Reserved
   
19-19   Limitation of expenditures
   
19-20   Budgeting, accounting procedures
   
19-21   Gifts, bequests
   
19-22   Advisory board
   
19-23   Illegal removal of materials; fine
   
19-24   Overdue borrowed materials; fines
   
19-25   Defacing library materials; fine
   
19-26   Use of library by nonresidents
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§§ 19-1—19-14   RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Charter reference:
   Council to provide by ordinance for establishment and regulation of
department, see
Ch. XVII, § 1
Cross-reference:
   City departments generally, see §§
2-96 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city relative to libraries, see Tex. Government Code Ch. 441
§ 19-15 DEFINITIONS AND POLICIES.
   For purposes of this section, the following definitions and policies shall
apply:
   LIBRARY MATERIALS. Any book, pamphlet, periodical, picture or written or
engraved or printed paper, video or sound recording or other property that is
subject to removal from the library through the customary check out procedure
of such library or to in-library only use.
   LIBRARY SERVICES. Shall include, but not be limited to, access to available
information and recreational materials, access to computer technology services,
use of conference rooms, meeting rooms, auditorium facilities and tours and
programs sponsored by the library.
   NONRESIDENT CITY EMPLOYEE. A current employee of the City of Fort Worth
living outside the corporate limits of the city.
   NONRESIDENT DONOR. A nonresident individual, as defined herein, who donates
$100 or more to the Fort Worth Public Library, the Fort Worth Public Library
Foundation or the Friends of the Fort Worth Public Library. A NONRESIDENT DONOR
shall receive a maximum of one library card entitling the donor to borrow
library materials or use library services free of charge during the time that
the card is valid. Such card shall be valid for one year following receipt of
the donation for every $100 donated; provided, however, that such card shall
not be valid for more than five consecutive years regardless of the amount
donated.
   NONRESIDENT INDIVIDUAL. An individual who does not reside or own property
located within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth.
   NONRESIDENT INSTITUTION. A corporation, partnership, organization or other
form of business entity that does not have its offices or own property located
within the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth.
   NONRESIDENT STUDENT. A nonresident individual, who is currently enrolled in
grades Pre-K through 12, inclusive, of any formally recognized educational
institution.
   NONRESIDENT USER FEE. The fee charged to nonresident individuals and
nonresident institutions for the privilege of borrowing library materials and
accessing library services from the department of public libraries.
   NONRESIDENT VOLUNTEER. A nonresident individual, who has completed 100 hours
of volunteer service to the Fort Worth Public Library as a participant in the
volunteer program. A NONRESIDENT VOLUNTEER shall receive a maximum of one
library card entitling the volunteer to borrow library materials or use library
services free of charge during the time that the card is valid. Such card shall
be valid for one year following completion of the above 100 hours of volunteer
service and may be renewed upon completion of an additional 100 hours of such
volunteer service.
(Ord. 20993-10-2013, § 1, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 19-16—19-18 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 19-16
through 19-18, which pertained to Established, Supervision, Duties of
Librarian, and Appointment of Employees. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 19-19 LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES.
   The department of public libraries shall not make any expenditure of money
or incur any liability during any fiscal year beyond the amount appropriated or
set apart in the annual budget of the department of public libraries as
approved by the city council for such purpose.
(1964 Code, § 40-4) (Ord. 7207, § 1, passed 8-11-1975)
§ 19-20 BUDGETING, ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES.
   The department of public libraries shall conform to such rules and
regulations regarding financial affairs as are promulgated by the financial
management services director, including rules and procedures governing
preparation and review of the annual budget and control of budgeted
expenditures.
(1964 Code, § 40-5) (Ord. 7207, § 1, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 5,
passed 9-30-2008)
§ 19-21 GIFTS, BEQUESTS.
   If gifts, bequests or endowments are made for the benefit of the department
of public libraries, such gifts, bequests or endowments shall be administered
by the librarian for the benefit of the department of public libraries of the
city.
(1964 Code, § 40-6) (Ord. 7207, § 1, passed 8-11-1975)
§ 19-22 ADVISORY BOARD.
   (a)   Appointment; members. The library advisory board shall have such
members and be appointed as outlined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
   (b)   Responsibilities. The advisory board will be responsible for providing
policy recommendations and information to the city manager and the city council
about citizen needs and requests that will improve the services of the
department.
   (c)   Duties. The advisory board will recommend to the city manager and the
city council plans for development of facilities and services to meet the needs
of the city. The board will review and comment on the annual operating budget
and capital improvement requests. Recommendations made by the board will be
presented to the city manager and the city council for consideration.
(1964 Code, § 40-7) (Ord. 7207, § 1, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 8908, § 1, passed
8-30-1983; Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 11, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 19-23 ILLEGAL REMOVAL OF MATERIALS; FINE.
   Every person who shall take or borrow from a branch of the Fort Worth public
library any library materials except through the customary check-out procedure
of such library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in §
1-6 of this code. Any fines under such section shall not preclude the library
assessing and collecting all fines normally assessed by it for each day’s
violation of its rules, including the replacement cost of the unreturned
property and associated fees as set forth in the library’s circulation policy.
(1964 Code, § 40-8) (Ord. 9035, § 1, passed 2-21-1984; Ord. 20993-10-2013, § 4,
passed 10-15-2013)
§ 19-24 OVERDUE BORROWED MATERIALS; FINES.
   Every person taking or borrowing from a branch of the Fort Worth public
library any library materials according to the customary check-out procedure of
such library, who has not returned the same by the due date thereof, and who
shall neglect, refuse or fail to return the same within two weeks after the
date of the mailing of a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the address noted on the current library card of the person taking or borrowing
the same, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
1-6 of this code for each offense. Such fine shall not preclude the library
assessing and collecting all fines normally assessed by it for each day’s
violation of its rules, including the replacement cost of the unreturned
property and associated fees as set forth in the library’s circulation policy.
For purposes of such notification, it shall be the responsibility of each
person so taking or borrowing property to immediately notify the library of any
change of address, and in case of the library notifying such person pursuant to
this section, he or she shall be presumed to have received such notice if the
library has not been advised of a change of address.
(1964 Code, § 40-9) (Ord. 9035, § 2, passed 2-21-1984; Ord. 20993-10-2013, § 5,
passed 10-15-2013)
§ 19-25 DEFACING LIBRARY MATERIALS; FINE.
   Every person who shall intentionally or knowingly cut, mutilate, mark, tear,
write upon, deface or otherwise injure, in whole or in part, any library
materials belonging to the city department of public libraries, or shall
intentionally or knowingly permit any such injury to be inflicted while such
property is in his or her custody, or shall intentionally or knowingly injure
any of the furniture or property in any building or branch of the Fort Worth
Public Library, or shall intentionally or knowingly mark or deface or in any
way injure the Fort Worth Public Library or any branch thereof, or any fixtures
therein or appertaining thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in §
1-6 of this code. A fine under such section shall not preclude the library
assessing and collecting all fines normally assessed by it for each day’s
violation of its rules, including the replacement cost of the injured or
destroyed property and associated fees as set forth in the library’s
circulation policy.
(1964 Code, § 40-10) (Ord. 9035, § 3, passed 2-21-1984; Ord. 20993-10-2013, §
6, passed 10-15-2013)
§ 19-26 USE OF LIBRARY BY NONRESIDENTS.
   (a)   Nonresidents individuals and nonresident institutions shall pay a
nonresident user fee in order to borrow library materials or use library
services of the Fort Worth Public Library. This fee shall not apply to
nonresident city employees, nonresident donors, nonresident students and
nonresident volunteers.
   (b)   Payment of nonresident individual and nonresident institution user
fees shall not preclude payment of any regularly assessed fees which may be
required for the use of library materials or library services.
   (c)   The library director shall establish a schedule of user fees for
nonresident individuals and nonresident institutions.
   (d)   Nonresident status, and other policies relating to this section, shall
be determined according to procedures established by the Fort Worth public
library.
(Ord. 9317, § 1, passed 2-12-1985; Ord. 9529, § 1, passed 12-12-1985; Ord.
12059, § 1, passed 8-3-1995; Ord. 20993-10-2013, § 7, passed 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 20: LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   AMUSEMENTS
      
III.   RESERVED
      
IV.   VENDORS
      
V.   RESERVED
      
VI.   RAILROADS
      
VII.   SECONDHAND DEALERS AND RELATED BUSINESSES
      
VIII.   RESERVED
      
IX.   SIDEWALK CAFÉS
      
X.   MINORITY AND WOMEN BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
      
XI.   METAL RECYCLING ENTITIES
      
XII.   OUTDOOR EVENTS
Cross-reference:
   Alarm permit required, see §
12-2
   Alcoholic beverage license fees, see §
4-2
   Alcoholic beverage permit fees, see §
4-1
   Dog and cat licenses, see §§
6-21 et seq.
   Escort drivers permit, see §§
34-86 et seq.
   Food handler’s certificate required, see §
16-111
   Food manager’s certificate required, see §
16-113
   Franchise required for cable television system, see §
8-1
   License and certification required for ambulance drivers, attendants and EMS
dispatchers, see §
5-31
   License and permit required for parkway contractors, see §§
30-32 et seq.
   License required for house number painters, see §§
30-14 et seq.
   License required for motor vehicle escort businesses, see §§
34-56 et seq.
   License required for moving and demolition contractors, see §
7-224
   License required to operate aircraft landing field within the city, see §
3-47
   Licenses and permits for street and storm drain contractors, see §§
30-52 et seq.
   Permit required for erection of wire-bearing poles, etc., see §§
30-73 et seq.
   Permit required for moving and demolition of buildings, see §
7-216
   Permit required for street excavations and obstructions, see §
30-66
   Permit required for swimming in certain areas of Lake Worth, see §
18-1
   Permit required for temporary obstruction of public ways with building
materials or rubbish, see §
30-75
   Permit required to attach wires, etc., to trees, see §
33-5
   Permit required to park vehicle for sale on street, see §
22-18
   Permit required to plant, prune, etc., trees located on public property, see
§
33-6
   Permit required to turn water on or off at street, see §
35-11
   Permits required for certain businesses, occupations and vocations, see §§
16-346 et seq.
Section
Article I: In General
   
20-1   Occupation tax
   
20-2   Conducting or soliciting sales, etc., on city property without permit
   
20-3—20-15   Reserved
Article II: Amusements
Division 1: Generally
   
20-16—20-25   Reserved
Division 2: Bingo Tax
   
20-26   Levied
   
20-27—20-40   Reserved
Division 3: Carnivals, Circuses and Tent Shows
   
20-41   Permit—Required; fee
   
20-42   Same—Application
   
20-43   Same—Revocation; forfeiture of fees
   
20-44   Scope of permit and fee
   
20-45   Operation near residences, schools, churches
   
20-46   Operation after expiration or revocation of permit
   
20-47   Exemptions
   
20-48   Aiding or abetting violation
   
20-49—20-60   Reserved
Division 4: Dance Halls
   
20-61   Definitions
   
20-62   Applicability
   
20-63   Classification and fees
   
20-64   License—Required
   
20-65   Same—Application
   
20-66   Same—Contents; display
   
20-67   Same—Duration; refund policy
   
20-68   Same—Nonassignable; transfer
   
20-69   Fingerprinting of license applicant
   
20-70   Rejected license applications; appeal
   
20-71   License revocation hearing; appeal
   
20-72   Misrepresentation in license application
   
20-73   Investigation of premises
   
20-74   Hours of operation
   
20-75   Dancing in unlicensed halls
   
20-76   Age restriction
   
20-77   Sleeping rooms prohibited; exception
   
20-78   Toilet facilities
   
20-79   Right of entry of police
   
20-80   “Taxi dance halls” prohibited
   
20-81—20-90   Reserved
Division 5: Pool Halls
   
20-91   Definitions
   
20-92   Applicability
   
20-93   License—Required
   
20-94   Same—Application
   
20-95   Same—Fees
   
20-96   Same—Duration; refund policy
   
20-97   Same—Contents; display
   
20-98   Rejected license applications; appeal
   
20-99   License cancellation hearing; appeal
   
20-100   Misrepresentation in license application
   
20-101   Investigation of premises
   
20-102   Hours of operation
   
20-103   Age restrictions
   
20-104   Gambling
Division 6: Reserved
   
20-105—20-121   Reserved
Article III: Reserved
   
20-122—20-140   Reserved
Article IV: Vendors
Division 1: Door-to-Door Vendors
   
20-141   Purpose
   
20-142   Definition
   
20-143   Registration certificate
   
20-144   Registration information
   
20-145   Regulations
   
20-146—20-160   Reserved
Division 2: Reserved
   
20-161—20-185   Reserved
Article V: Reserved
   
20-186—20-205   Reserved
Article VI: Railroads
   
20-206   Reserved
   
20-207   Obstructing street crossings
   
20-208   Jumping on or off trains
   
20-209   Crossings, culverts, bridges—Construction required upon notice
   
20-210   Same—Service of notice to construct
   
20-211   Same—Repair, maintenance
   
20-212   Same—Notice to repair
   
20-213   Lights at crossings—Notice to provide
   
20-214   Same—Time and manner
   
20-215   Crew member to flag certain crossing
   
20-216   Duty of crew members
   
20-217   Failure to use crew member
   
20-218   Lights on locomotives
   
20-219   Companies to file map with city
   
20-220   Changes in tracks, switches, etc
   
20-221   Grades of new lines
   
20-222   Raising street between tracks
   
20-223   Maintenance of track, roadbed at curves, crossings, intersections
   
20-224   Maintenance of tracks in streets
   
20-225   Filling of tracks on trestles
   
20-226   Forming intersections with other railways
   
20-227   Digging from sides of tracks
   
20-228   New grant or concession
   
20-229   Existing rights not affected
   
20-230   Restoration of excavated streets
   
20-231   Reserved
   
20-232   Switchman required; duty
   
20-233   Switchmen on five cars or more
   
20-234   Connecting air couplings
   
20-235—20-250   Reserved
Article VII: Secondhand Dealers and Related Businesses
Division 1: Generally
   
20-251   Definitions
   
20-252   Required records and reports
   
20-253   Identification of articles purchased
   
20-254   Holding period prior to resale
   
20-255   Removal, obliteration of manufacturer’s brand name or serial number
   
20-256   Inspection of purchased items
   
20-257   Purchases from minors
   
20-258   Exemptions
   
20-259—20-270   Reserved
Division 2: Secondhand Dealer Licenses
   
20-271   Application; fee; duration
   
20-272   Grounds for denial
   
20-273   Exhibiting for inspection
   
20-274   Transfer
   
20-275   Revocation
   
20-276   Appeal
   
20-277—20-290   Reserved
Division 3: Motor Vehicle Junkyards
   
20-291   Definition
   
20-292   Prerequisites for establishment, operation and maintenance
   
20-293   Application for proper zoning, board of adjustment approval
   
20-294   Certificate of occupancy
   
20-295   Inspections
   
20-296   License
   
20-297   License denial; appeal
   
20-298—20-310   Reserved
Division 4: Reserved
   
20-311—20-335   Reserved
Article VIII: Reserved
   
20-336—20-351   Reserved
Article IX: Sidewalk Cafés
   
20-352   Definitions
   
20-353   Requirements
   
20-354   Permits
   
20-355   Permit applications
   
20-356   Locations
   
20-357   Hours of operation
   
20-358   Permit fees
   
20-359   Permit renewal
   
20-360   Permit suspension
   
20-361   Bond requirement
   
20-362   Notice
   
20-363   Appeal
   
20-364, 20-365   Reserved
Article X: Minority and Women Business Enterprises
   
20-366   Definitions
   
20-367   Purpose and application
   
20-368   Business equity goal setting
   
20-369   Joint ventures and mentor-protégé
   
20-370   Contract award compliance procedures
   
20-371   Contract administration procedures
   
20-372   Contract exceptions and waivers
   
20-373   Violations and sanctions
   
20-374   Appeal
   
20-375   Sunset date
   
20-376—20-382   Reserved
Article XI: Metal Recycling Entities
   
20-383   Purpose
   
20-384   Definitions
   
20-385   Records required
   
20-386   Notice to sellers
   
20-387   Facsimile, electronic mail or similar equipment required
   
20-388   Restrictions on the purchase of regulated material
   
20-389   Penalties
   
20-390   License required
   
20-391   Application for issuance of license; fees; posting
   
20-392   Expiration of license; renewal
   
20-393   Suspension
   
20-394   Revocation or denial
   
20-395   Appeal
   
20-396   Transfer of license
Article XII: Outdoor Events
Division 1: General Provisions
   
20-401   Scope
   
20-402   Purpose and intent
   
20-403   Responsible city department
   
20-404   Definitions
   
20-405   Permit required
   
20-406   Exceptions
   
20-407   Rules and regulations
   
20-408   Fees
   
20-409   Timeframes
Division 2: Special Events and Parades
   
20-410   Events calendar
   
20-411   Events calendar committee
   
20-412   Pre-event meeting
   
20-413   Notification requirements
   
20-414   Special event permit process
   
20-415   Parade permit process
   
20-416   Parades in the central business district
Division 3: First Amendment Events and First Amendment Parades
   
20-417   Permit process
Division 4: Public Park Events
   
20-418   Permit process
Division 5: Outdoor Event Districts
   
20-419   Downtown Outdoor Events District (DOED)
   
20-420   Near Southside Outdoor Events District (NSOED)
   
20-421   Stockyards Outdoor Events District (SOED)
Division 6: General Provisions for Special Events and Parades
   
20-422   Additional permits required
   
20-423   Projected attendance estimates
   
20-424   Emergency services and fire safety, traffic control and parking plans
   
20-425   Gating and fencing of events
   
20-426   Prohibited conduct during events
   
20-427   Retention of permit
   
20-428   Security deposit
   
20-429   Supplemental service fees
   
20-430   Tent requirements
   
20-431   Use of city logo or name
   
20-432   User agreement
Division 7: Approval, Issuance, Modification, Denial or Revocation of a Special
Event or Parade Permit
   
20-433   Approval
   
20-434   Issuance of a permit
   
20-435   Modification or denial of an events permit
   
20-436   Revocation of a permit
Division 8: Appeal of Denial or Revocation of a Special Event or Parade Permit
   
20-437   Appeal
Division 9: Neighborhood Events and Neighborhood Parades
   
20-438   Permit process
   
20-439   Neighborhood event and neighborhood parade regulations
   
20-440   Approval, issuance, modification, denial or revocation of a
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit
   
20-441   Appeal
Division 10: Offenses
   
20-442   Offenses
Division 11: Penalties
   
20-443   Penalties
Article XIII: Credit Access Businesses
   
20-450   Short title and purpose
   
20-451   Definitions
   
20-452   Violations; penalty
   
20-453   Defenses
   
20-454   Registration required
   
20-455   Registration application
   
20-456   Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon
request
   
20-457   Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration
   
20-458   Non-transferability
   
20-459   Maintenance of records
   
20-460   Restriction on extension of consumer credit
   
20-461   Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement
   
20-462   Referral to consumer credit counseling
Article XIV: Boarding Homes
Division 1: General
   
20-470   Purpose
   
20-471   Definitions
   
20-472   Authority of the director
Division 2: Administrative
   
20-473   Permit required
   
20-474   Exemptions
   
20-475   Permit application
   
20-476   Notification of change of information
   
20-477   Fees
   
20-478   Issuance and denial of permit
   
20-479   Suspension of permit; prohibition of new residents
   
20-480   Revocation of permit
   
20-481   Appeals
   
20-482   Expiration and renewal of permit
   
20-483   Nontransferability
   
20-484   Posting requirements
   
20-485   Inspections; fees
   
20-486   Reports to the Texas Health and Human Services Commission
Division 3: Structure and Maintenance
   
20-487   Construction, remodeling, and maintenance
   
20-488   Sleeping rooms
   
20-489   Telephone
   
20-490   Kitchen
Division 4: Resident Health and Safety
   
20-491   Emergency precautions
   
20-492   Poisonous, toxic, and flammable materials
   
20-493   Food and drink; meals
   
20-494   Reporting and investigation of injuries, incidents and unusual
accidents and the establishment of policies and procedures to ensure resident
health and safety
   
20-495   Assistance with self-administration of medication
   
20-496   Requirements for in-service education of boarding home facility staff
   
20-497   Criminal background history checks
   
20-498   Assessment and periodic monitoring of residents
Division 5: Enforcement
   
20-499   Violations; penalty
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 20-1 OCCUPATION TAX.
   The city may levy an occupation tax on any occupation for which it has
specific state statutory authority to do so, and the amount of the tax shall
conform to state statutory and constitutional provisions regarding the
collection of occupation taxes by municipalities.
(1964 Code, § 24-1)
Statutory reference:
   Occupation taxes levied by local governments, see V.T.C.A., Tax Code, §
101.008
   Occupation taxes, see Texas Constit. Art. VIII, § 2
§ 20-2 CONDUCTING OR SOLICITING SALES, ETC., ON CITY PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct any business, to sell or offer for sale any
goods or services, and/or to solicit any business or trade in, on or under any
building, grounds or place owned by the city or used or occupied by or/on
behalf of the city without a lawful permit, franchise, concession or consent
agreement issued pursuant to authority granted by the city council or a duly
authorized administrative agency or board of the city.
(1964 Code, § 27-48) (Ord. 7117, § 1, passed 1-20-1975)
Editor’s note:
   Pursuant to the city’s request, provisions formerly codified §
30-17 have been redesignated as §
20-2
§§ 20-3—20-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: AMUSEMENTS
Cross-reference:
   Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§§ 20-16—20-25 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: BINGO TAX
Cross-reference:
   Taxation generally, see
Ch. 32
§ 20-26 LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed a tax of 1% on the taxable gross
receipts of bingo games conducted within the city. The tax shall be levied,
assessed, collected and paid in accordance with the regulations and definitions
of the Bingo Enabling Act, Tex. Revised Civil Statutes, Article 179d.
(1964 Code, § 13-40) (Ord. 8951, § 1, passed 10-18-1983)
§§ 20-27—20-40 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TENT SHOWS
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city under Home Rule Act to regulate location and control
conduct of vaudeville shows and all places of public amusements, see V.A.C.S.,
Art. 1175(22)
§ 20-41 PERMIT—REQUIRED; FEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to set up or operate any
carnival, circus or tent show within the city unless and until such person or
business has first obtained a permit and paid to the assessor-collector of
taxes a permit fee in the amount of $30. Any permit issued by the city for the
setting up or operating of any carnival, circus or tent show shall expire 90
days after the date of its issuance.
(1964 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 8818, § 1, passed 5-10-1983)
§ 20-42 SAME—APPLICATION.
   A permit shall be issued by order of the chief of police to hold a carnival,
circus or tent show when and only when a proper application in writing is made
therefor and to him or her. Such application shall be approved by the chief of
the fire department, the director of transportation and public works and the
director of the department of public health. Such application shall state in
detail the different component parts of the carnival, circus or tent show,
including all concessions, shows, amusements, businesses and the proposed
location of the carnival, circus or tent show, the time it is to run and the
number of persons regularly traveling therewith, if any, and the number of
local persons connected therewith, and shall give a full and complete plan of
the proposed carnival, circus or tent show.
(1964 Code, § 11-1)
§ 20-43 SAME—REVOCATION; FORFEITURE OF FEES.
   If any carnival, circus or tent show is issued a permit required by this
division and it conducts itself in an unlawful manner in whole or in part, its
permit may be revoked by the chief of police and fees paid shall be forfeited.
(1964 Code, § 11-4)
§ 20-44 SCOPE OF PERMIT AND FEE.
   The permit and fee required by
Chapter 16, Article XIV of this code for the operation of carnivals, circuses
and tent shows shall not be collected as a separate or additional fee, but same
shall be and is hereby expressly included in and made a part of the permit and
fee required by this division.
(1964 Code, § 11-3)
§ 20-45 OPERATION NEAR RESIDENCES, SCHOOLS, CHURCHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any carnival, circus or tent show to operate, and
no permit shall be issued for any carnival or tent show to operate, within the
space of 300 feet from any residence, school or church building within the
corporate limits of the city except as provided in §
20-47.
(1964 Code, § 11-5)
§ 20-46 OPERATION AFTER EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any carnival, circus or tent show to operate in
whole or in part after its permit required by this division expires or after it
is revoked for cause, and all persons assisting in such operation shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1964 Code, § 11-6)
§ 20-47 EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Short-term shows or activities sponsored solely by any church, school,
school organization or hospital which are operated on church, school or
hospital grounds and all the profits from which go to such church, school,
school organization or hospital, shall not be deemed to be carnivals, circuses
or tent shows under the provisions of this division and shall not require the
fee set out in this division.
   (b)   Permanent installations of mechanical amusement rides shall not be
deemed to be carnivals, circuses or tent shows under the provisions of this
division and shall not require the permit or fee set out in this division.
(1964 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. 11189, § 1, passed 10-20-1992)
§ 20-48 AIDING OR ABETTING VIOLATION.
   Each person aiding or abetting the holding of any carnival, circus or its
subsidiary shows, concessions, amusements and businesses or tent shows shall be
equally guilty of a violation of this chapter when such carnival or tent show
commences without a permit as required by §
20-41.
(1964 Code, § 11-8)
§ 20-49—20-60 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: DANCE HALLS
§ 20-61 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, when used in this division, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   CABARET, NIGHTCLUB or TAVERN. Any space, structure, building or resort
opened to the public, enclosed or unenclosed, where food, beer, wine or other
beverage is served on the premises, including restaurants and cafés, and where
patrons are provided with a space for dancing or are permitted to dance.
   CLUB. Any bona fide nonprofit society, association of persons or corporation
organized for civic, fraternal, social or charitable purposes, or any purpose
not a business or commercial purpose, which owns, rents or operates a place or
building for the accommodation of its members when such place or premises or
any part thereof is used for dancing by members of the club or is rented to
others for such purposes.
   DANCING SCHOOL. Any room, space or academy in which classes are held and
instruction in dancing is given for hire.
   OPERATOR. The person who conducts, manages, maintains or controls, either
directly or indirectly, any dance hall.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which admission can be had by paying a fee or by
the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or in which a
charge is made for checking wearing apparel or parcels, or any other dance in
which the public generally may gain admission with the payment of a fee
directly or indirectly or without payment of a fee.
   PUBLIC DANCE HALL. Any room, space or building where a public dance is held.
   PRIVATE DANCE. Includes any dance given at any home or any dance given or
held by a bona fide club, admission to which is granted to members and their
invited guests and from which the general public is excluded.
(1964 Code, § 13-1)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 20-62 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this division shall not apply to private clubs, societies,
persons or corporations where the attendance is restricted to the members of
the society, club or corporation and their invited guests, and from which the
general public is excluded.
(1964 Code, § 13-2)
§ 20-63 CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
   The classifications and license fees for each type of dance hall are as
follows:
   (a)   All cabarets, nightclubs and taverns are class A dance halls, and the
license fee shall be $100 per year.
   (b)   All other dance halls are class B, the license fee for which shall be
$15 per year, save and except as provided in subsection (c) below.
   (c)   Class C dance halls shall be dancing schools, the license fee for
which shall be $1 per year.
(1964 Code, § 13-4) (Ord. 8811, § 1, passed 5-10-1983)
§ 20-64 LICENSE—REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any public dance or
dancing school, as defined in this division, within the city unless the dance
hall where same may be held has first been licensed for such purpose. Such
license shall be issued by the assessor-collector of taxes when the conditions
of this division have been complied with and when such application has been
approved by the chief of police or his or her designee or the city council.
(1964 Code, § 13-3)
§ 20-65 SAME—APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license required by this division to operate a dance
hall shall file with the chief of police a sworn written application for such
license, which application shall state:
   (a)   The location by street and number of the place, space, building, room
or floor and the size thereof which is proposed to be used for such purpose and
the name and address of the applicant;
   (b)   If the applicant is an individual, that he or she is a bona fide
resident of the city and the state, and the length of such residence therein,
that he or she has not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and, if so,
the nature of the offense;
   (c)   If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all of the
information prescribed in subsection (b) of this section as to each individual
composing the firm, association or partnership;
   (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, that the applicant is organized and
chartered under the laws of the state, or if a foreign corporation, that such
corporation has complied with the laws of the state, and the same information
with reference to the operator or person in charge of such dance hall shall be
given as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section; in addition thereto a
list of the officers, directors and stockholders of such corporation shall be
given;
   (e)   Previous occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of
five years next preceding the filing of his or her application;
   (f)   In the case of applications for class C licenses, such application
shall give the names and addresses of each instructor in the school of dancing;
and
   (g)   Whether a hotel, rooming house or lodginghouse is conducted in any
part of the premises for which a license is sought, and if so, the number of
rooms contained in such hotel, rooming house or lodginghouse.
(1964 Code, § 13-5)
§ 20-66 SAME—CONTENTS; DISPLAY.
   The dance hall license required by this division shall state on its face to
whom it is issued, the date it will expire, the address and location of such
dance hall and whether the license is issued for class A, B or C dance hall. It
shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
and in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time of day
or night.
(1964 Code, § 13-8) (Ord. 22768-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 20-67 SAME—DURATION; REFUND POLICY.
   All dance hall licenses shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issue. There shall be no refund of any license fee paid under this
division for any cause whatsoever.
(1964 Code, § 13-9) (Ord. 10734, § 1, passed 11-15-1990)
§ 20-68 SAME—NONASSIGNABLE; TRANSFER.
   Dance hall licenses shall be deemed personal to the licensees and shall not
be assignable; provided, however, that licenses issued under this division may
be transferred from one location or place of business to another location after
the chief of police shall have been given five days’ notice and shall have
approved of such change.
(1964 Code, § 13-10)
§ 20-69 FINGERPRINTING OF LICENSE APPLICANT.
   Every applicant for a dance hall license shall be fingerprinted by the
police department.
(1964 Code, § 13-6)
§ 20-70 REJECTED LICENSE APPLICATIONS; APPEAL.
   If the chief of police disapproves a dance hall license application the
applicant shall have the right to appeal within ten days after such refusal, in
writing, to the city council requesting a hearing by the council upon the
application. In the event of such appeal, a hearing shall be had before the
council within 30 days thereafter to determine the correctness of the action of
the chief of police on such application. Whatever action shall be taken by the
city council on such appeal shall be final.
(1964 Code, § 13-13)
§ 20-71 LICENSE REVOCATION HEARING; APPEAL.
   (a)   If any dance hall licensee shall violate any of the terms of this
division, this code or other ordinances of the city or laws of the state, the
chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to such licensee or
operator of such dance hall of a hearing to be held in the city hall for the
purpose of cancelling such license, and upon such hearing the chief of police
may cancel such license for any of the above causes, which action shall become
final at the end of ten days from the expiration of such hearing.
   (b)   The licensee shall have the right of appeal to the city council within
such ten-day period from and after the expiration of such hearing, and if such
appeal is taken, then the city council shall conduct a hearing on such
cancellation and may cancel such license for any of the causes so shown, which
action shall become final.
(1964 Code, § 13-14)
§ 20-72 MISREPRESENTATION IN LICENSE APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of the dance
hall to be operated or any other fact or statement made in an application for a
dance hall license. Any misrepresentation of any applicant for the purpose of
avoiding the provisions of this division shall, in addition to the other
penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation of the license.
(1964 Code, § 13-7)
§ 20-73 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   No dance hall license shall be granted unless it shall appear, upon
investigation by the chief of police and building commissioner, that the
premises desired to be used for the purpose of conducting a dance hall complies
with all ordinances of the city and laws of the state.
(1964 Code, § 13-12)
§ 20-74 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All class A and class B dance halls shall close and not operate between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., except on Saturday nights when the hour of
closing shall be 3:00 a.m.; provided, however, that the chief of police may
grant special permits in writing to licensees to operate until a later hour
upon special occasions. Applications for such special permits shall be made not
less than 48 hours prior thereto.
(1964 Code, § 13-15)
§ 20-75 DANCING IN UNLICENSED HALLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dance at an unlicensed dance hall;
provided, that this section shall not apply to any entertainer performing any
sort of entertainment at a public gathering.
(1964 Code, § 13-16)
§ 20-76 AGE RESTRICTION.
   No person under the age of 17 years shall be permitted to attend or take
part in any public dance after 9:00 p.m., unless such minor is accompanied by
his or her parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely
represent himself or herself to be either parent or guardian of such minor for
the purpose of gaining his or her admittance to such dance hall.
(1964 Code, § 13-17)
§ 20-77 SLEEPING ROOMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No dance hall shall have in any way connected with it any room or rooms
equipped or fitted in any way as sleeping rooms which are opened to or let to
the patrons of such dance hall or to the public with or without a charge being
made therefor, except bona fide hotels.
(1964 Code, § 13-19)
§ 20-78 TOILET FACILITIES.
   Each dance hall shall be supplied with separate and convenient toilet
facilities for each sex.
(1964 Code, § 13-20)
§ 20-79 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF POLICE.
   Free access and entrance into all dance halls shall at all times be accorded
and granted to the police officers of the city when on official duty.
(1964 Code, § 13-21)
§ 20-80 “TAXI DANCE HALLS” PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this division shall be construed as authorizing the issuance of a
license under any circumstances for the conduct of any dance hall commonly
known as “taxi dance halls,” wherein there are kept and provided male or female
dancing partners for male and female guests who pay by the dance for the
privilege of dancing with such partners.
(1964 Code, § 13-23)
§§ 20-81—20-90 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: POOL HALLS
§ 20-91 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BILLIARD OR POOL TABLE. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or
without pockets, upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue.
   COIN-OPERATED BILLIARD OR POOL TABLE. Every coin-operated table surrounded
by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets, upon which balls are impelled by
a stick or cue.
   POOL HALL. Any room, hall, building or place in which there is located any
pool or billiard table or tables for the use of which a fee or charge is made,
either directly or indirectly, and which place is operated for profit or gain
of any kind.
(1964 Code, § 13-25) (Ord. 6738, § 1, passed 10-18-1972)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 20-92 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this division shall not apply to religious, charitable or
educational organizations, authorized under the laws of the state, even though
a charge is made for playing, where use of the pool or billiard tables or coin-
operated billiard or pool tables is restricted to the members of the
organization and from which the general public is excluded.
(1964 Code, § 13-39) (Ord. 6738, § 4, passed 10-18-1972)
§ 20-93 LICENSE—REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall within the city
unless the pool hall has first been licensed for such purpose. The license
shall be issued by the assessor-collector of taxes when the conditions of this
division have been complied with and when application for license has been
approved by the chief of police or the city council.
(1964 Code, § 13-26)
§ 20-94 SAME—APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license to operate a pool hall shall file with the
chief of police a written application for such license, duly verified under
oath, which application shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The location by street and number of the place which is to be used for
such purpose, the size thereof, the number of pool or billiard tables proposed
to be used and the name and address of the applicant;
   (b)   If the applicant is an individual, a statement that he or she is a
bona fide resident of the city and the state, the length of such residence
therein, whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense, and in this connection he or
she may be required to submit to fingerprinting by the police department;
   (c)   If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all of the
information prescribed in subsection (b) of this section as to each individual
composing the firm, association or partnership;
   (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, a statement that the applicant is
organized and chartered under the laws of the state, or if a foreign
corporation, that such corporation is licensed to do business in the state, and
the same information with reference to the operator or person in charge of such
pool hall shall be given as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section; in
addition thereto a list of the officers, directors and stockholders of such
corporation shall be given; and
   (e)   Occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five years
next preceding the filing of his or her application.
(1964 Code, § 13-27)
§ 20-95 SAME—FEES.
   From every person, firm, association of persons, corporation and every other
organization, save and except religious, charitable or educational
organizations authorized under the laws of the state, owning and operating for
profit any billiard or pool table, as defined under this article, there shall
be collected on each billiard or pool table an annual license fee of $10..
(1964 Code, § 13-28) (Ord. 6738, § 2, passed 10-18-1972)
§ 20-96 SAME—DURATION; REFUND POLICY.
   All licenses issued under this division shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of issue. There shall be no refund of any license fee paid
under this division for any cause whatsoever.
(1964 Code, § 13-29) (Ord. 10735, § 1, passed 11-15-1990)
§ 20-97 SAME—CONTENTS; DISPLAY.
   The license provided for in this division shall state on its face to whom it
is issued, the expiration date, the address and location of such pool hall and
the number of pool tables permitted. It shall be posted by the licensee in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such pool hall in such a place and
position that it may be easily read at any time.
(1964 Code, § 13-33) (Ord. 22768-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-20-2017)
§ 20-98 REJECTED LICENSE APPLICATIONS; APPEAL.
   If the chief of police shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant
under the provisions of this division, such applicant shall have the right of
appeal to the city council by giving to the council, within ten days after
refusal, written notice of intention to appeal such refusal and by requesting a
hearing by the council upon the application. In the event of such appeal, a
hearing shall be had before the council, within 30 days after notice is given,
to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police on such
application. The determination of the city council on such appeal shall be
final.
(1964 Code, § 13-30)
§ 20-99 LICENSE CANCELLATION HEARING; APPEAL.
   (a)   If any licensee under the provisions of this division violates the
provisions of this or other ordinances of the city or laws of the state, the
chief of police may at any time give notice in writing to such licensee or
operator of such pool hall of a hearing to be held for the purpose of
determining if the license should be cancelled, and upon such hearing the chief
of police may cancel such license for any of the above causes, which action
shall become final at the end of ten days after such hearing.
   (b)   The licensee shall have the right of appeal to the city council,
within such ten-day period, and if such appeal is taken, the city council shall
conduct a hearing on such cancellation and may cancel such license for any of
the causes so shown, which action shall be final.
(1964 Code, § 13-31)
§ 20-100 MISREPRESENTATION IN LICENSE APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful to misrepresent the kind and character of the pool hall
to be operated or any other fact or statement made in an application for a
license required by this division. Any misrepresentation of any applicant for
the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this division shall, in addition to
the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation or denial of
the license as provided hereafter.
(1964 Code, § 13-32)
§ 20-101 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   No license shall be granted under the provisions of this division unless it
shall appear, upon investigation by the chief of police and the building
commissioner, that the premises desired to be used as a pool hall complies with
all provisions of this code, other ordinances of the city and laws of the
state.
(1964 Code, § 13-34)
§ 20-102 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All pool halls shall close and shall not operate during those hours of each
day or night during which the sale of any alcoholic beverage is prohibited by
the laws of the state.
(1964 Code, § 13-35) (Ord. 6738, § 3, passed 10-18-1972)
§ 20-103 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any pool hall to permit persons
under the age of 17 years to engage in or play pool or billiards on the
premises of such pool hall unless such persons under the age of 17 years shall
be accompanied by a parent or guardian or shall have obtained written and
signed permission to play from a parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for
the operator of any pool hall to allow any persons attending elementary, middle
or high school to engage in or play pool or billiards on the premises of such
pool hall before such person has completed his or her last class of that day.
(1964 Code, § 13-36) (Ord. 6786, § 1, passed 1-29-1973)
§ 20-104 GAMBLING.
   The operator of a pool hall shall not permit gambling, betting or wagering
of any kind or character to take place on the premises of such pool hall.
(1964 Code, § 13-37)
DIVISION 6: RESERVED
§§ 20-105—20-121 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 22686-05-2017, adopted May 2, 2017, repealed §§ 20-122
through 20- 125, Gasoline filling stations, derived from §§ 18- 1 through 18-
4 of the 1964 Code and § 1 of Ord. 9231, passed October 2, 1984. See also Code
Comparative Table.
§§ 20-122—20-140 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: VENDORS
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of weights and measures and measuring devices, see Tex. Agric.
Code §§ 13.101 et seq.
   Refusal to leave premises after notice, see Tex. Penal Code, § 30.05(a)(2)
DIVISION 1: DOOR-TO-DOOR VENDORS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15245, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2002, amended Div. 1, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out in §§
20-142 through
20-145. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 1 was entitled “Itinerant
Vendors.” See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 20-141 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to provide for the general health, public
safety and welfare, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and its
residents by:
   (a)   Prohibiting door-to-door solicitation activity at residences during
the times when such activity is most intrusive and disruptive to citizens’
privacy;
   (b)   Regulating the manner in which any solicitation activities may occur
to promote good order and protect citizens from aggressive and intimidating
practices; and
   (c)   Requiring solicitors to register with the city to aid crime detection
and deter deceptive practices and fraud.
(Ord. 21674-03-2015, § 1, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 20-142 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, DOOR-TO DOOR VENDOR means a person who
travels by foot or vehicle, from door-to-door, house-to-house, building-to-
building or place-to-place, within the city, for the purpose of offering for
sale, or soliciting orders for future delivery, of food, goods, services or
merchandise.
(Ord. 15245, § 1, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 21674-03-2015, § 2, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 20-143 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   It shall be unlawful for a door-to-door vendor as defined in §
20-141 of this code to engage in such business within the city without first
registering with the city and obtaining a registration certificate. The
registration certificate must be carried by the vendor when engaging in vending
activities. No registration fee shall be charged for the issuance of a
registration certificate.
(Ord. 15245, § 1, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 21674-03-2015, § 2, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 20-144 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   Each door-to-door vendor shall be required to provide the following
registration information:
   (a)   Name and address as indicated on a government issued form of
identification;
   (b)   If acting as an agent or employee, the name and business address of
the employer or principal;
   (c)   A brief description of food, goods, services or merchandise to be
sold;
   (d)   The hours and location of the vending activity;
   (e)   The model, make, year and license plate number of the vehicle to be
used by the vendor; and
   (f)   The vendor’s sales tax identification number.
(Ord. 15245, § 1, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 21674-03-2015, § 2, passed 3-3-2015)
§ 20-145 REGULATIONS.
   A door-to-door vendor shall not engage in solicitation activities:
   (a)   At any residence or business that has a “No Soliciting” or “No
Trespassing” sign posted on the property;
   (b)   At any residence or business where the door-to-door vendor has been
verbally informed that no solicitation of food, goods, services or merchandise
is allowed; or
   (c)   At any residence before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. Central Standard
Time and after 8:00 p.m. during Daylight Savings Time, unless at the occupant’s
request.
(Ord. 15245, § 1, passed 9-17-2002; Ord. 21674-03-2015, §§ 2, 3, passed 3-3-
2015)
§§ 20-146—20-160 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 22242-05-2016, § 1, adopted May 24, 2016, repealed §§ 20-161 through
20-181 which pertained to pushcarts. See also Code Comparative Table.
§§ 20-161—20-185 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: RESERVED
§§ 20-186—20-205 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: RAILROADS
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
§ 20-206 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10670, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1990, repealed §
20-206 which pertained to speed limit and derived from 1964 Code, §
31-1.
§ 20-207 OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any officers, agents, servants or receivers
of any railway corporation to willfully obstruct for more than five minutes at
any one time any street, railway crossing or public highway by permitting their
train to stand on or across such crossing, except that this section shall not
apply to any through train kept in constant forward motion while passing over
such street, railway crossing or public highway.
   (b)   An officer making an arrest for an offense under this section shall
prepare in duplicate a citation to appear in court showing the name and address
of the individual, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where
the individual, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where the
individual shall appear in court. The conductor of the train is an agent for
the service of the citation. The person served the citation gives a written
promise to appear in court by signing the citation in duplicate. The arresting
officer shall keep the original, and the person signing shall keep the copy.
The officer shall release the person from custody after the person signs the
citation.
   (c)   The hearing must be before a magistrate within the city who has
jurisdiction of the offense.
   (d)   A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an
appearance by counsel.
(1964 Code, § 31-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S., Art. 6701d-5
§ 20-208 JUMPING ON OR OFF TRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person not an employee or
official of the railroad to jump on or off, cling or hang to, any railroad
engine, car or tender while the same is in motion.
(1964 Code, § 31-2)
§ 20-209 CROSSINGS, CULVERTS, BRIDGES—CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED UPON NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of any railway company within the city to construct, at
its own cost and expense, safe, suitable and convenient crossings, culverts and
bridges where its tracts intersect any public street or thoroughfare in the
city, upon being notified in writing by the director of the department of
public works so to do. Such notice shall prescribe the time within which such
crossings, culverts and bridges shall be constructed, which time shall be as to
the director of the department of public works may appear reasonable, equitable
and just. In cases of unavoidable delay, and after satisfactory proof of the
cause thereof has been made by such railway company, the director of the
department of public works may extend the time for making such improvement for
such a period as may appear reasonable, equitable and just.
(1964 Code, § 31-5)
§ 20-210 SAME—SERVICE OF NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT.
   The notice provided for in the preceding section shall be served upon the
manager, superintendent or agent representing such railway company in the city,
or by leaving a copy of the same at the principal office of such company during
office hours. Service shall be made by any qualified police officer of the city
who shall make his or her return showing the way and manner in which service
was had, and such return shall be sufficient proof of service.
(1964 Code, § 31-6)
§ 20-211 SAME—REPAIR, MAINTENANCE.
   All railroad companies whose tracks enter or pass through the city shall
repair, keep and maintain good, safe and sufficient crossings, culverts and
bridges, with good, safe and easy approaches thereto on all streets and
highways where their respective tracks pass under, across or over any street or
highway within the city.
(1964 Code, § 31-7)
§ 20-212 SAME—NOTICE TO REPAIR.
   Whenever any crossing, culvert or bridge upon the line of any railroad
within the city shall be deemed insufficient or unsafe, or shall need
repairing, it shall be the duty of the director of the department of public
works to give to such company five days’ notice of the work to be done and the
place where required. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to neglect
or refuse to repair any crossing, culvert or bridge after having received five
days’ notice to do so.
(1964 Code, § 31-8)
§ 20-213 LIGHTS AT CROSSINGS—NOTICE TO PROVIDE.
   Notice to railway companies to provide lights at the crossings of their
respective railways with the streets of the city shall be made by resolution of
the city council. Such resolution shall state the place or crossing to be
lighted and the time such lights shall burn. A certified copy of such
resolution shall be served on the local agent or representative of such company
by the chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any railway company to fail to
provide the lights required at the places or crossings designated, within ten
days after service upon it of the resolution.
(1964 Code, § 31-9)
§ 20-214 SAME—TIME AND MANNER.
   Each and every railroad company whose tracks cross any street of the city
shall keep each such crossing well lighted at all times from dusk to daylight,
so that the traveled way and the limits thereof and all obstructions thereon
and all inequalities in the surface thereof shall be at all times plainly
visible.
(1964 Code, § 31-10)
§ 20-215 CREW MEMBER TO FLAG CERTAIN CROSSING.
   Each railroad company operating trains or switching movements over the
Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad Company tracks where same cross East
First Street shall be required to use a crew member at the crossing for
flagging purposes, at its sole cost and expense.
(1964 Code, § 31-12) (Ord. 6430, § 2, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 20-216 DUTY OF CREW MEMBERS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of a crew member on each train to give sufficient
warning of all engines and cars moving along the tracks under his or her
charge, upon or toward the crossing on East First Street, and to use all
possible diligence and care to prevent injuries being caused by such engine and
cars to persons upon the street. Such crew member shall also prevent such
street from being obstructed at such crossing by engines or cars upon the
tracks under his or her charge.
   (b)   In every case of an obstruction in violation of this code, such crew
member shall, within 24 hours thereafter, report to the chief of police or his
or her assistant all the particulars of such obstruction, and the name of every
person responsible therefor.
(1964 Code, § 31-13) (Ord. 6430, § 3, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 20-217 FAILURE TO USE CREW MEMBER.
   A failure on the part of railway companies to use a crew member for the
purposes designated in this chapter shall be good and sufficient cause for the
forfeiture of any and all rights and franchises enjoyed by such railroads in
the city insofar as the same may have been granted to them or recognized in
them by the city.
(1964 Code, § 31-14) (Ord. 6430, § 4, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 20-218 LIGHTS ON LOCOMOTIVES.
   All locomotive engines run or operated, or caused to be run or operated, on
or across any public street or highway within the city, between sundown and
sunup, by any person shall be equipped with a headlight so that the same shall
throw the light forward in the direction the engine may be moving, and the
headlight shall be kept burning from sundown to sunup.
(1964 Code, § 31-15)
§ 20-219 COMPANIES TO FILE MAP WITH CITY.
   All railway companies operating their roads in the city shall place on file
in the office of the city secretary a map or plan, on a scale of not less than
600 feet to the inch, of all existing lines of railway, whether double or
single, operated by them, having correctly delineated thereon all tracks,
switches, curves, bridges, trestle-work, turnouts and turning tables.
(1964 Code, § 31-16)
§ 20-220 CHANGES IN TRACKS, SWITCHES, ETC.
   No changes shall be made in the tracks, switches, curves, culverts, bridges,
trestle-works, turnouts and turning tables, as set down on the maps and plans
under the preceding section, without the consent of the director of the
department of public works, whose duty it shall be to note the same upon such
maps and plans.
(1964 Code, § 31-17)
§ 20-221 GRADES OF NEW LINES.
   In the construction of any new line of railway, grades shall be first given
by the director of public works, the cost of which shall be paid by the
company, and the work staked off to the required height of the tracks to be
built, but this shall not be considered as the established grade proper, and
shall be only for the purpose of making the grades uniform, it being considered
impracticable to conform to every undulation of the streets as they now are in
all portions of the city.
(1964 Code, § 31-18)
§ 20-222 RAISING STREET BETWEEN TRACKS.
   Whenever the tracks, to conform to the grades given, shall be above the
level of the street, the railway company occupying the same shall, at its own
expense, raise the street between its tracks to a level with the top of the
rails. This shall be done by filling such lower space with the same material
that the street upon which the roadbed is laid is made, or with some good
filling material in case the street has not been improved. Such raising and
filling shall be approved by the director of public works, and shall cover all
cross ties and timbers. Timbers shall not extend more than one foot beyond the
rails on either side of the track.
(1964 Code, § 31-19)
§ 20-223 MAINTENANCE OF TRACK, ROADBED AT CURVES, CROSSINGS, INTERSECTIONS.
   At all curves, and at all street intersections or crossings, railway
companies shall maintain and keep their roadbed and tracks, and approaches
thereto, for the full width of the street, in good, safe and passable condition
for vehicles, by filling between the rails or tracks, and the approaches
thereto, either with approved ballasting material, plank or pavement.
(1964 Code, § 31-20)
§ 20-224 MAINTENANCE OF TRACKS IN STREETS.
   All tracks constructed on the streets of the city, over which rights-of-way
have been granted, or which may hereafter be granted, shall be put in good
order. The space from the centerline of the street, which is also to be
considered as the centerline of the track, including all switches and turnouts,
shall be filled their entire length with the same material of which the street
is constructed, or its equivalent, or in the case of unimproved streets with
plank or some good ballasting material.
(1964 Code, § 31-21)
§ 20-225 FILLING OF TRACKS ON TRESTLES.
   Whenever any tracks are laid upon trestle or pile formations along the
streets of the city, the space between the tracks, for the entire width, shall
be filled in, in the same manner as provided for in §
20-224, or the whole distance between the rails and tracks shall be entirely
planked over with two-by-12 plank, securely spiked down and made safe for
traffic over them, and the sides sloped off for a distance of six feet by
filling or planking.
(1964 Code, § 31-22)
§ 20-226 FORMING INTERSECTIONS WITH OTHER RAILWAYS.
   Every railway company whose railway is intersected by any new railway shall
unite with the railway company owning such new railway in forming intersections
and connections and grant to such new railway facilities therefor.
(1964 Code, § 31-23)
§ 20-227 DIGGING FROM SIDES OF TRACKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig material from the sides of tracks
either for filling purposes between the tracks or for surfacing up same, or to
remove the material dumped along the tracks for sale to private parties or
corporations.
(1964 Code, § 31-24)
§ 20-228 NEW GRANT OR CONCESSION.
   Each and every railroad company to which shall be granted by the city
council any additional right-of-way, concession or other right to change or
alter any of its tracks, shall file with the city secretary a written
acceptance of the provisions of this article. No grant or concession shall take
effect until such acceptance is filed.
(1964 Code, § 31-25)
§ 20-229 EXISTING RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED.
   The provisions of this article shall not be construed as affecting existing
rights, grants or privileges, or so long as any condition upon which they were
granted or contracted with remain intact, unless from their nature they must
adapt themselves to such provisions.
(1964 Code, § 31-26)
§ 20-230 RESTORATION OF EXCAVATED STREETS.
   All excavations or displacements made while repairing or changing any
roadbed or track in the city shall be restored or replaced as nearly as
possible to its former condition immediately upon completion of such work.
(1964 Code, § 31-27)
§ 20-231 RESERVED.
§ 20-232 SWITCHMAN REQUIRED; DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of all persons operating switch trains or switch
engines over, on or across public streets and highways within the city to keep
a switchman stationed on the end of such switch train or switch engine nearest
the crossing to be crossed in sight of the engineer or in sight of some member
of the switching crew. From the time such train or engine is within 100 feet of
such crossing it shall be the duty of the switchman to keep a lookout at the
crossing until the train crosses such street or public highway, and warn any
and all persons who may be on or approaching such crossing of the approach of
such train or engine and give signals to the engineer or other members of the
switching crew of any person who may be on or about to go upon such crossing in
front of such train or engine.
(1964 Code, § 31-29)
§ 20-233 SWITCHMEN ON FIVE CARS OR MORE.
   It shall be the duty of all persons operating trains of five cars or more,
over, on or across public streets and highways within the city where such cars
are being shoved or pushed ahead of the engine, to place on such train not less
than four competent switchmen. The other members of the crew operating such
trains within the city shall be stationed so that signals given by switchmen
stationed on the end nearest the crossing may be properly conveyed to the
engineer operating the engine shoving or pushing such train.
(1964 Code, § 31-30)
§ 20-234 CONNECTING AIR COUPLINGS.
   It shall be the duty of all persons operating trains as provided for in the
preceding section to connect and couple up all air couplings and have same in
working condition so that same can be operated by the engineer when such trains
are shoved or pushed over, on or across public streets and highways within the
city.
(1964 Code, § 31-31)
§§ 20-235—20-250 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: SECONDHAND DEALERS AND RELATED BUSINESSES
Statutory reference:
   Crafted precious metals, see V.A.C.S. Art. 9009a
   Secondhand metal dealers, see V.A.C.S. Art. 9009
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 20-251 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BUSINESS MACHINES. Typewriters, adding machines, check-writing devices, cash
registers, calculators, addressing machines, letter sorting or folding devices,
and recording, copying and accounting equipment.
   CRAFTED PRECIOUS METALS. Jewelry, silverware, art objects or any other thing
or object made, in whole or in part, from gold, silver, platinum, palladium,
iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium or their alloys, excluding coins,
commemorative medallions or bullion or bars of such metals.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license has been issued, or a person
listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
   POWER TOOLS. Tools powered by electrical current or by liquid or gaseous
fuels, including, but not limited to, welding equipment and pneumatic
equipment.
   SECONDHAND DEALER.
      (1)   Any person who, in the usual and ordinary course of business,
engages in the purchase, sale, barter or trade of used or secondhand goods,
wares or merchandise.
      (2)   SECONDHAND DEALER shall include:
         a.   Any business conducted by an established dealer in a permanent
location within the city; or
         b.   Any temporary or transient business where the dealer conducts
business within the city for a period of more than 30 consecutive days.
   USED OR SECONDHAND GOODS, WARES OR MERCHANDISE.
      (1)   Any item of personal property which is not purchased or sold by a
dealer as new or which is acquired by a dealer after having been used or
purchased by another.
      (2)   USED OR SECONDHAND GOODS, WARES OR MERCHANDISE shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
         a.   Wearing apparel or clothing of any kind;
         b.   Crafted precious metals, jewelry, precious gems and watches;
         c.   Furniture, home and kitchen appliances, luggage, musical
instruments, clocks and photography equipment;
         d.   Weapons and firearms;
         e.   Automobile parts and accessories;
         f.   Business machines;
         g.   Tools, power tools and toolboxes;
         h.   Electronic equipment such as televisions, radios and stereo
equipment and accessories; and
         i.   Tobacco products.
      (3)   This term shall not be construed to include goods, wares or
merchandise which are purchased or sold as new by the original manufacturer,
wholesale distributor or retail businesses.
(1964 Code, § 22-1) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 20-252 REQUIRED RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (a)   Any secondhand dealer doing business in the city, or any employee or
agent of such dealer, who purchases or trades for used or secondhand goods,
wares or merchandise in the city for the purpose of resale to the public shall,
at the time of purchase, record in a legible manner in duplicate on a
sequentially numbered report form, approximately five inches by eight inches in
dimension, the following information:
      (1)   An accurate and complete description of the article purchased;
      (2)   Date and time of purchase;
      (3)   The amount of money paid or other consideration exchanged for the
property purchased;
      (4)   The name, age, sex, race and place of residence of the person
selling the article;
      (5)   The license number of the automobile in which the article was
delivered to the secondhand dealer, and the state that issued the license, as
reported by the seller;
      (6)   The number of the seller’s drivers license, military identification
card, state-issued identification card, or federally issued identification
card, except a social security card; and
      (7)   The signatures of the seller and the secondhand dealer.
   (b)   Neither the secondhand dealer nor any employee or agent of such dealer
shall purchase or trade for any used or secondhand property unless the seller
of such property provides one of the forms of identification required in
subsection (a)(6) above.
   (c)   Any secondhand dealer who trades for or purchases used or secondhand
goods, wares or merchandise from another licensed secondhand dealer shall be
required to record upon the report form only the city license of the secondhand
dealer from whom the used or secondhand articles were received, in lieu of the
information required by subsection (a) above.
   (d)   The report forms described above shall be furnished by the city to
secondhand dealers free of charge. Any secondhand dealer may, at his or her own
expense, print and use his or her own report forms, provided such forms conform
in dimension and in the information required to the forms furnished by the
city.
   (e)   One copy of the completed report shall be mailed to the police
department within 48 hours from the time of purchase or trade. The second copy
shall be retained by the secondhand dealer for a period of two years. The
reports required above shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by
the chief of police or any police officer of the city.
   (f)   Neither the secondhand dealer nor any employee or agent of such dealer
shall knowingly record false information of a material fact on a report
required by this section.
(1964 Code, § 22-8) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-253 IDENTIFICATION OF ARTICLES PURCHASED.
   Each article purchased by a secondhand dealer shall be kept intact and
separate from property purchased from other sellers. Each article shall have
attached on the container or, if no container, on the article itself a tag on
which is legibly printed the corresponding number of the report required in §
20-252.
(1964 Code, § 22-9) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-254 HOLDING PERIOD PRIOR TO RESALE.
   All secondhand articles purchased by secondhand dealers shall be retained by
them in their original shape, form and condition for a period of 14 consecutive
days after such purchase during which period no part of such purchase shall be
sold or removed from the place of business of such dealer. Secondhand articles
may be held for less than 14 days upon the written authorization of the police
department. The aforementioned holding period is not required for secondhand
articles purchased from other licensed secondhand dealers within the city.
(1964 Code, § 22-10) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-255 REMOVAL, OBLITERATION OF MANUFACTURER’S BRAND NAME OR SERIAL NUMBER.
   No secondhand dealer shall remove, alter or obliterate the manufacturer’s
brand name, serial number or other identifying numbers or marks from any
secondhand article purchased.
(1964 Code, § 22-11) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-256 INSPECTION OF PURCHASED ITEMS.
   Each article purchased by any secondhand dealer shall at all reasonable
times be open to inspection by the chief of police or any police officer of the
city.
(1964 Code, § 22-12) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-257 PURCHASES FROM MINORS.
   No secondhand dealer shall purchase for any purpose any used or secondhand
article from any person under the age of 18 years or which may be owned or
claimed by or in the possession or control of such person unless the parent or
guardian of such person shall state in writing that such transaction took place
with such parent’s or guardian’s full knowledge and consent. The written
statement shall be signed by a parent or guardian and have thereon the address
and telephone number, if any, of such parent or guardian.
(1964 Code, § 22-13) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-258 EXEMPTIONS.
   This article shall not apply to:
   (a)   Charitable, philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic,
social or school-sponsored organizations or associations or to any non-profit
corporations or associations;
   (b)   Any person dealing solely in the purchase, sale or trade of used or
secondhand motor vehicles;
   (c)   The occasional sale to the public of used or secondhand goods and
wares that have been used primarily for personal, family or household purposes
by the owner, if the seller, at the time of sale, is not engaged in the
business for profit of selling goods of that or of a similar nature, which
shall include garage sales conducted at a private residence and neighborhood
garage sales;
   (d)   Public and private auctions;
   (e)   Sales made by any public officer in his or her official capacity as a
trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, receiver or public official
acting under judicial process or authority, or sales on the execution of, or by
virtue of, any process issued by a court;
   (f)   Sales and purchases made by the United States, the state or the city
or any political subdivision, department or agency thereof;
   (g)   Used or secondhand articles which are deposited with or otherwise
actually delivered into the possession of a pawn broker in the course of his or
her business in connection with a pawn transaction under the provisions of the
Texas Pawnshop Act, Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 5069-51.02;
   (h)   Any person dealing in secondhand or used merchandise whose dealing is
limited to the acquiring of such merchandise through an exchange for new
merchandise, and to the selling of such by sale only incidental to any part of
the main business of dealing in new goods or merchandise;
   (i)   Itinerant vendors as defined by §
20-141 of this code; provided, however, any itinerant vendor who purchases,
barters or trades for any used or secondhand good, wares or merchandise while
doing business in the city shall comply with the reporting requirements in §
20-252 of this article; and
   (j)   Recyclers and recycling facilities as defined in
Chapter 20, Article XI, §
20-384 of the city code.
(1964 Code, § 22-14) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§§ 20-259—20-270 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: SECONDHAND DEALER LICENSES
§ 20-271 APPLICATION; FEE; DURATION.
   (a)   No secondhand dealer shall transact or engage in business within the
city unless and until such secondhand dealer has obtained a license as follows.
      (1)   Any secondhand dealer desiring a license shall make written
application to the chief of police upon forms provided by the police
department.
      (2)   The application must be signed and sworn to by the applicant before
an officer authorized by law to administer oaths.
      (3)   Secondhand dealers shall pay an annual license fee in the amount
set by city council.
      (4)   Upon approval of the application by the chief of police, the city
tax assessor-collector shall issue a license to the applicant.
   (b)   All secondhand dealers licenses shall expire one year from date of
issuance. Upon expiration, licenses shall be renewed for another year by
submitting an application.
(1964 Code, § 22-2) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1,
passed 9-24-2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 27977-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-16-2025,
eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 20-272 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   The chief of police may deny a license under this division on one or more of
the following grounds:
   (a)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
   (b)   The applicant has made a false statement or misrepresentation of a
material fact on the sworn application submitted to the chief of police; and/or
   (c)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony or any theft offense and
three years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or
probation.
(1964 Code, § 22-3) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-273 EXHIBITING FOR INSPECTION.
   Every secondhand dealer, while engaged in the conduct of his or her
business, shall at all times have available for inspection his or her license
to engage in such business as required by this division.
(1964 Code, § 22-4) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-274 TRANSFER.
   No secondhand dealer shall assign or transfer his or her license under this
division to another or knowingly permit his or her license to be used by
another, and no person shall exhibit or use the license of any secondhand
dealer, except one issued to him or her, while engaging in the purchase, sale
or trade of secondhand goods, wares and merchandise.
(1964 Code, § 22-5) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-275 REVOCATION.
   The chief of police, upon notice and hearing, may revoke the license of any
secondhand dealer on any of the following grounds:
   (a)   The licensee has made a false statement or misrepresentation of a
material fact on the sworn application submitted to the chief of police;
   (b)   The licensee has knowingly failed to make a report as required by §
20-252 or has knowingly recorded false information of a material fact on a
report required by such section;
   (c)   An employee or agent of a licensee has knowingly failed to make a
report as required by §
20-252 or his or her knowingly recorded false information of a material fact on
a report required by such number under circumstances which indicate that the
licensee knew or should have known of his or her employee’s or agent’s conduct;
   (d)   The licensee has refused to allow the chief of police or any police
officer of the city to inspect the records required by §
20-252 or to inspect any used or secondhand articles purchased by the licensee
as required by §
20-256;
   (e)   The licensee has violated any other provision or requirement of this
article; and/or
   (f)   The licensee has been convicted of a felony or any theft offense.
(1964 Code, § 22-6) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§ 20-276 APPEAL.
   (a)   If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license required by
this division or revokes such a license, he or she shall send to the licensee
by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his or her
action and the right to an appeal. The licensee may appeal the decision of the
chief of police to the city council within ten days after receipt of the notice
from the chief of police. The action of the chief of police is final unless a
timely appeal is made. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of
police in revoking a license until the city council makes its final decision.
The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the chief of
police, and the decision of the city council is final.
   (b)   When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date the revocation became final. If, subsequent to the
revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the licensee may again be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became final. If the
license was revoked under §
20-275(f) of this division, the licensee may not be granted another license
within three years of the termination of any sentence, parole or probation.
(1964 Code, § 22-7) (Ord. 9175, § 3, passed 8-21-1984)
§§ 20-277—20-290 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARDS
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
§ 20-291 DEFINITION.
   A MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD OR BUSINESS is hereby defined as any business and
any place of storage or deposit which displays, or in or upon which there are
displayed, to view from a public right-of-way, two or more unregistered motor
vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways, or
used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other
waste, discarded or secondhand material which has been a part or intended to be
a part of any motor vehicle the sum of which parts or material shall be equal
in bulk to two or more vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 22-16) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 20-292 PREREQUISITES FOR ESTABLISHMENT, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish,
operate or maintain a motor vehicle junkyard or business unless same is
established, operated and maintained in strict compliance with the provisions
of the Litter Abatement Act, Tex. Revised Civil Statutes, Article 4477-9a. It
shall further be unlawful for a motor vehicle junkyard to be established,
operated or maintained unless it is completely surrounded by a fence or
structure at least six feet in height and of material which obscures the
outside view from the main-traveled way of public rights-of-way.
   (b)   No such yard or business shall be established, operated or maintained
until each of the following additional requirements is met:
      (1)   Acquisition of proper zoning for the site;
      (2)   Approval by the board of adjustment;
      (3)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy by the building official;
      (4)   Approval by the fire, police, city services and planning and
development departments, following inspection by each of such departments; and
      (5)   Issuance of license by the building official.
(1964 Code, § 22-17) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972; Ord. 10661, § 1, passed
8-28-1990; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 20-293 APPLICATION FOR PROPER ZONING, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT APPROVAL.
   Application for proper zoning and application for board of adjustment
approval shall be made to the planning and development department, applications
division, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance
of the city.
(1964 Code, § 22-18) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed
4-24-2007)
§ 20-294 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   Upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that all fees and taxes,
including ad valorem taxes, as may be required by law, levied upon the motor
vehicle junkyard or business of an applicant have been fully paid, that the
site for such yard or business is properly zoned and that such yard or business
has received the required board of adjustment approval, the building official
shall issue a certificate of occupancy for such yard or business.
(1964 Code, § 22-19) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972)
§ 20-295 INSPECTIONS.
   Inspections of motor vehicle junkyards or business to ascertain compliance
with their applicable ordinance requirements shall be conducted by the fire,
police, city services and planning and development departments upon application
for a license to operate such a yard or business and/or upon application for
renewal of such license. Failure to pass any of the inspections shall
constitute grounds for denial of the issuance of such license. Reasons for such
denial shall be made in writing and tendered to the applicant.
(1964 Code, § 22-20) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972; Ord. 10661, § 1, passed
8-28-1990; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 20-296 LICENSE.
   (a)   The building official shall issue a license to operate a motor vehicle
junkyard or business upon presentation of a certificate of occupancy and
written approvals by the fire, police, city services and planning and
development departments, following the inspections required in §
20-295. Such license shall be issued in the name of the applicant and shall not
be transferable. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount
established by the city council. The license shall be renewed on or before the
anniversary date of the last issuance.
   (b)   Such license may be revoked by the building official upon the
rendition of a final judgment in any court of competent jurisdiction against
the licensee for the unlawful operation of such yard or business. No such
license shall be reissued prior to the passage of six months following such
rendition.
(1964 Code, § 22-21) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972; Ord. 8819, § 1, passed
5-10-1983; Ord. 10661, § 1, passed 8-28-1990; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-
2007)
§ 20-297 LICENSE DENIAL; APPEAL.
   (a)   Where a license under this division has been denied, the applicant
may, within ten days of such denial, appeal such decision to the city council.
Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city secretary.
   (b)   In considering such appeal, the city council shall examine the results
of the investigations, findings and conclusions of the applicable city staff,
to include those of the fire, police, city services and planning and
development departments; shall make or cause to be made such other
investigations as it may consider necessary, including any hearings that it may
determine desirable; shall determine whether or not in the interest of the
safety, health, decency, comfort, convenience, necessity and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city a requirement for the operation of such a business
exists; shall determine whether or not the applicant is fit and proper to
conduct such business; and may investigate the fitness of the stockholders and
officers of any corporation making such application. The city council shall
also consider the nature and development of surrounding property, the proximity
of churches, schools, hospitals and public buildings and other places of public
gatherings; the sufficiency in number of such other yards or businesses in the
vicinity; the health, safety and general welfare of the public; and the
suitability of the applicant to establish, maintain and operate such yards or
businesses and receive a license therefor.
   (c)   If the city council finds that the convenience, necessity, welfare and
comfort of the public require the operation of a motor vehicle junkyard and
that the applicant is fit to conduct the business and that the requirements of
this division have been met, it shall notify the applicant of its findings and
direct the building official to issue such a license. If it finds that the
public convenience, necessity, welfare and comfort do not require the operation
of such business in the location applied for or that the applicant is not fit
to conduct such business or that the requirements of this division have not
been met, no license shall be issued to such applicant.
(1964 Code, § 22-22) (Ord. 6702, § 1, passed 7-31-1972; Ord. 10661, § 1, passed
8-28-1990; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§§ 20-298—20-310 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 20-311
through 20-335. Formerly, said sections pertained to recyclers and derived from
§§ 22-23 through 22-23, 22-31 and 22-32 of the 1964 Code, and § 1 of Ord. 9182,
adopted August 28, 1984.
§§ 20-311—20-335 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10402, § 1, adopted September 26, 1989, repealed Article VIII,
solicitations, consisting of §§ 20-336 through 20-347, as derived from Ord.
9730, § 1, adopted September 30, 1986.
§§ 20-336—20-351 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: SIDEWALK CAFÉS
Cross-reference:
   Food and food establishments generally, see §§
16-101 et seq.
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
§ 20-352 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by this section, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
   ABUTTING PROPERTY. Restaurant property contiguous to a public street right-
of-way on which a sidewalk café will be operated under the terms of this
article.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department of planning and development of the
City of Fort Worth or his or her designee.
   OWNER. Includes any owner of fee simple title, part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole of the land contiguous to the right-of-way on which a sidewalk
café is to be operated under the authority of this article.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY. That portion of a sidewalk which is free of any
obstruction, fixture or appurtenance and is used for pedestrian travel.
   PERSON. An individual, a group of individuals, an association, a club, a
society, a firm, a partnership or a corporation.
   PUBLIC NECESSITY. Any lawful need or use of property by a governmental body
including needs created by a change in circumstances affecting pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
   PUBLIC STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
which is held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel;
provided the term PUBLIC STREET shall not include any designated state or
federal highway or road or any designated county road.
   RESTAURANT. A food service establishment where food is served in individual
portions for consumption on the premises. This term shall not include an
establishment which operates exclusively as a caterer, a commissary, a food
processing establishment, a mobile food unit, a retail food store or a
temporary food service establishment.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a public street which is improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm or shoulder.
In the event that a public street includes two or more separate roadways,
ROADWAY means each such roadway separately.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the public street which is between the curblines,
or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines and which is
improved and designed for or is ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. An outdoor dining area located on a sidewalk and containing
removable tables, chairs, plants and related appurtenances, which is not
located on or does not encroach upon the public walkway as established by the
director under the provisions of this article. It shall not be enclosed by
fixed walls and shall be open to the air, except that it may have a canopy.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 20-353 REQUIREMENTS.
   All sidewalk cafés operating within the corporate city limits of the City of
Fort Worth shall comply with the requirements of this article except as
otherwise provided herein or elsewhere in the city code. The regulatory
authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards
related to sidewalk café operation and may modify requirements for physical
facilities when health, safety or welfare concerns may arise.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-354 PERMITS.
   (a)   Generally. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, vend,
operate, maintain or serve any item from a sidewalk café without a valid
permit.
      (1)   Application for a sidewalk café permit shall be made in writing to
the director of planning and development.
      (2)   Permits for sidewalk cafés shall only be available under the terms
of this article. The encroachment committee shall have no authority to grant
permits for sidewalk cafés for any reason except as prescribed and approved
hereunder by the director of planning and development or the city council.
      (3)   All sidewalk cafés and attendant facilities shall be inspected by
the health department and the department of planning and development prior to
the issuance of a sidewalk café permit.
      (4)   Sidewalk cafés shall be permitted only when such are abutting and
contiguous to a restaurant in which food preparation, sanitation and related
services for the sidewalk café shall be performed.
      (5)   Acceptance of a sidewalk café permit is an express acknowledgment
and consent to the terms and restrictions set by this article and the
regulatory authority. The grant and usage of such permit is a privilege, not a
right, subject to reasonable restrictions as set out herein or as may be
promulgated by the regulatory authority.
      (6)   As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder,
recipient agrees to police for trash and debris an area extending 15 feet in
each direction from the outermost portion or boundary of the sidewalk café.
   (b)   Insurance and indemnification.
      (1)   No permit shall be issued to an applicant unless verification of
insurance is confirmed by a representative from the risk management division of
finance. The applicant shall have filed in the city secretary’s office a
certificate of insurance documenting that the applicant has secured the
required insurance and agrees to keep such in force during the term of the
permit a policy providing comprehensive general liability insurance in the
minimum amount of $500,000 combined single limit (CSL) per occurrence for all
coverages required; and the policy shall have a minimum annual aggregate of
coverage to the $1,000,000 limits. Such policy shall provide that it cannot be
canceled or amended without at least 30 days’ notice in writing to the director
of planning and development. In addition to bodily injury and property damage
coverage, such insurance policy shall include personal injury liability
coverage and product liability coverage. Liquor liability insurance in the
minimum amount of $500,000 is required if the applicant offers alcoholic
beverages for sale. A garage policy is required if the applicant provides or
offers parking facilities and/or valet service; such policy shall include
garage liability coverage in the minimum amount of $500,000 combined single
limit (CSL) and garagekeepers legal liability coverage according to the total
value of vehicles comprising the average overall exposure to loss by perils
covered by a combination of K-1, K-2 and K-3 on a Texas policy.
      (2)   As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the
permit holder thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, its
officers, agents, servants and employees from and against any and all claims or
suits for property damage or any loss and/or bodily or personal injury,
including death, to any and all persons, of whatsoever kind or character,
whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with, directly or
indirectly, a sidewalk café, its officers, agents, employees or servants; and
permittee does hereby covenant and agree to assume all liability and
responsibility of the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, for
such claims or suits or causes of action, whether or not such responsibility is
caused by the negligence of the city, its officers, agents, employees,
contractors or subcontractors.
      (3)   As a further condition, permit holder by acceptance of the permit
expressly agrees to indemnify and hold harmless and defend the city, its
officers, agents, servants and employees from and against any and all claims or
suits for personal injury, including death, of whatsoever kind or character,
whether real or asserted, arising out of or in connection with the consumption
of food products sold on any public property herein described.
      (4)   These conditions of indemnification shall be covenants which shall
run with the title of the abutting land wherein such sidewalk café lies, or is
located.
   (c)   Standards for sidewalk cafés. Any sidewalk café which rests in whole
or in part upon any public sidewalk, public park, public property, private
property or public or private right-of-way shall comply with the following
standards.
      (1)   No sidewalk café shall encroach in whole or in part upon any
sidewalk or public walkway in such a manner so as to leave less than eight feet
of clear and unobstructed passage for pedestrian use; except that a clean and
unobstructed passageway of six feet may be permissible on those sidewalks which
are less than ten feet wide where there has been a showing, by trained and
registered traffic engineers, that by a traffic study measuring the peak
pedestrian usage periods, that pedestrian traffic will not be significantly
impeded or inconvenienced and the city traffic engineer and city manager are in
agreement that such location may be used for sidewalk café purposes.
      (2)   No sidewalk café may be enclosed by fixed walls except that
sidewalk café boundaries may be delineated by the use of temporary barriers
such as balustrades, cordons or railings. Any such temporary barrier must be
easily removed and three feet or less in height above the sidewalk. Under no
circumstances shall temporary barriers as authorized hereunder be allowed in
the public walkway as established by the city traffic engineer. Nor shall a
temporary barrier be affixed to the sidewalk or to any permanent structure,
except that it may be attached by removable clips or devices approved in
advance by the public works engineer. With the approval of the public works
engineer, a permittee may drill holes in the sidewalk to secure such clips or
devices to the sidewalk. Said clips or devices shall enable a temporary barrier
to be easily attached, detached and removed without the temporary barrier,
clips or devices causing damage to the sidewalk.
      (3)   All sidewalk cafés shall be open to the air.
      (4)   Canopies may be permitted in accordance with specifications, as
delineated by the building code, which relate to height, placement,
interference with pedestrian passage and traffic sight easements.
      (5)   Sidewalk cafés shall in no way obstruct the ingress to or egress
from any other building or business.
      (6)   All sidewalk cafés and their attendant facilities or improvements
shall comply with clearances required for structures in relation to utility
lines as provided in the city building code.
      (7)   No portion of a sidewalk café or its facilities, appurtenances,
planters, shrubs, tables, chairs or other materials shall be permitted in the
public walkway.
      (8)   Sidewalk cafés shall provide and maintain adequate lighting in and
around the public walkway so as to prevent inability of sidewalk users to
observe and avoid obstructions. Additionally all lighting shall be in
compliance with the following requirements.
         a.   Lighting shall not be located or affixed in a manner which shall
interfere with or obscure the vision of vehicular traffic.
         b.   Lighting shall be shaded so as to illuminate no further than the
outer boundaries of the property upon which the sidewalk café is located and in
a manner such that it is not obtrusive to adjacent property owners.
         c.   Such illumination shall be no brighter than the illumination
yielded by an ornamental street light.
         d.   The design or color of the lighting shall not be done in a manner
which could be mistaken for a traffic signal. No red, green or amber lights
shall be used.
      (9)   Sidewalk cafés shall not obstruct access to hydrants, street
lights, telephones, mailboxes, transit stops or any other public service
facility on the sidewalk or street.
      (10)   Sidewalk café signs shall be in accordance with the city sign
code.
      (11)   Neither food nor beverages shall be served to a patron at a
sidewalk café unless that patron is seated at a table.
      (12)   No sidewalk café appurtenance shall be placed, erected or
constructed within two feet of a curbline.
      (13)   No sidewalk café shall use disposable or paper plates or napkins.
Glasses, drinking receptacles and eating utensils used shall also be made of
nondisposable materials. Place settings shall only be situated on tables after
patrons are seated.
   (d)   Revocation of permit. Sidewalk café permits are a privilege, not a
right, subject to demands to remove any and all facilities, without liability,
upon notice by the director that public necessity requires an immediate
revocation of the permit and termination of the operation or any lawful need
for the site or access thereto by the city, or any utility company arises.
      (1)   Written notice shall be provided as promptly as possible.
      (2)   The notice shall provide the reason or reasons for removal and or
revocation.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987; Ord. 14934, § 8, passed 1-22-2002; Ord.
17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007)
Cross-reference:
   Building code, see §§
7-46 et seq.
   Sign code, see
Ch. 29
§ 20-355 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Application for a sidewalk café shall contain the following:
   (a)   Name and street address of the applicant;
   (b)   Name and street address of the owner of the sidewalk café, of the
owner of the underlying feehold and/or abutting property owner if not the same
person and:
      (1)   A description of the owner, if other than a natural person,
including its legal status (corporation, partnership, etc.) and a general
description of the type(s) of business operated on the abutting property; and
      (2)   Written authority in the form of a power of attorney from the owner
to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner of the abutting
property.
   (c)   The name and street address of the registered agent for the service of
process, if the applicant represents a corporation; or the names and street
addresses of the officers or partners, if the applicant represents an
association, partnership or other entity;
   (d)   The name and street address of the operator, manager or other person
responsible for the operation of the sidewalk café;
   (e)   The name under which the sidewalk café will be operated;
   (f)   The street address and the city food establishment license number of
the sidewalk café;
   (g)   One or both of the following:
      (1)   A copy of a title policy covering the abutting property and
verification by the owner that there has been no change in ownership since the
issuance of that policy; or
      (2)   A certified copy or copies of the most recent deed or deeds
conveying all or a portion of the abutting property so that ownership of all of
the abutting property is accounted for, and verification by the owner or owners
that there has been no change in ownership since the date or dates of that deed
or deeds.
   (h)   A site plan of legible proportions prepared by a registered public
surveyor or professional engineer showing:
      (1)   The entirety of the abutting property of the owner;
      (2)   All contiguous and/or adjacent properties;
      (3)   All existing sidewalk features including, but not limited to,
utility poles, sign poles, fire hydrants, permanent litter receptacles,
telephone booths, news vending racks and mailboxes;
      (4)   Streets for a distance of at least 25 feet on either side of the
abutting property; and
      (5)   Traffic studies prepared by professional traffic engineers of
pedestrian usage during peak hours for areas where public walkways would be
reduced to six feet.
   (i)   Detailed drawings of legible proportions showing the design, dimension
and proposed location of all temporary structures (i.e., canopies, umbrellas,
planters, landscaping, tables, chairs, all exterior lighting, electrical
outlets, etc.), the proposed public walkway and the side and front elevations
of the proposed sidewalk café. Detailed drawings at a scale of one-half inch
equals one foot showing the front facade of the abutting property and at least
ten feet of the first story facade of adjacent buildings;
   (j)   The seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk café and the seating
capacity of the restaurant which will be associated with the sidewalk café;
   (k)   A copy or copies of the certificate or certificates of insurance
required to be provided; and
   (l)   Written documentation showing that adequate public water and sewer
utilities are available to serve the sidewalk café.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-356 LOCATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be permissible for sidewalk cafés to operate within the
following designated areas:
      (1)   Within the boundaries of the Downtown Special Improvement District
delineated as follows:
         Jones Street on the east; Lancaster Avenue on the south; Texas Street,
Macon, Fourth Street, Burnett Street, Belknap Street and Taylor Street on the
west; the Trinity River and East 100 and East 200 blocks of Bluff Street on the
north; so long as an eight-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian walkway is
preserved for the use of the public.
      (2)   In other areas throughout the city where the pedestrian walkway is
provided in compliance with the terms and specifications of this article.
   (b)   Sidewalk cafés shall only be located adjacent to abutting and
contiguous restaurants in which food preparation, sanitation and related
services will be performed.
   (c)   It shall be permissible for sidewalk cafés to use specified and
approved sections of the public right-of-way upon the written consent (as
evidenced by the issuance of a valid permit) of the director.
   (d)   Any sidewalk café which rests in whole or in part upon any portion of
the public right-of-way shall be situated in accordance with these provisions.
      (1)   No sidewalk café shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any
public sidewalk or parkway, when such location endangers the safety of persons
or property, or when such site or location is used for utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such sidewalk café
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or
egress from any residence or place of business (except the restaurant to which
said café is adjacent) or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, mail boxes or other objects which are permitted at or near said
location.
      (2)   No fixture or portion of a sidewalk café shall be permanently
affixed to or upon any public property.
      (3)   No sidewalk café shall be situated:
         a.   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;
         b.   Within 12 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
         c.   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
         d.   Within five feet of any driveway;
         e.   Within three feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop;
         f.   Within three feet of the outer end of any bus stop bench;
         g.   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than eight feet;
         h.   In a manner which restricts sight easements of vehicular traffic;
or
         i.   In a manner which obstructs traffic-control devices or traffic
signs.
      (4)   No food serving or food service equipment may be used by a
restaurant to hold, store, heat, warm, cool, chill or otherwise keep food to be
served outside of the restaurant for use in or by a sidewalk café.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-357 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   A sidewalk café may operate only during the normal and regularly operated
hours of the restaurant to which it is adjacent.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-358 PERMIT FEES.
   Application for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be made in accordance with the
provisions specified by the director who shall issue a permit upon compliance
with the terms and conditions of this article. The permit fee shall be as
specified in the building code and such permit shall be valid for one (1) year
from date of issuance.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987; Ord. 19601-03-2011, § 6, passed 3-22-2011;
Ord. 22517-12-2016, § 6, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1- 2017; Ord. 25382-03-2022,
§ 6, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 20-359 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   (a)   A sidewalk café permit may be renewed annually, upon review of the
renewal application and complaint history, if any, which shall be provided by
the health department and planning and development department. Each said
department shall provide to the director copies of any inspection results,
complaints filed and citations issued concerning the sidewalk café under
consideration, renewal application shall be made 60 days prior to the
expiration of a permit.
   (b)   If no renewal application is made prior to this expiration, all
tables, chairs and other appurtenances associated with the facility shall be
removed prior to or upon the expiration date thereof.
      (1)   A permittee who allows its permit to expire without renewal and who
wishes to continue operation of a sidewalk café must submit an application for
said permit as if there had been no previous permit.
      (2)   The renewal fee for a permit shall be $150.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 20-360 PERMIT SUSPENSION.
   Failure to observe any of the conditions set out herein is grounds for a
one-year suspension of a permit. Prior to such suspension the director shall
give ten days’ written notice to the permittee of his or her violation of or
his or her failure to observe a general condition as set out above. If the
permittee requests a hearing prior to the expiration of that ten-day notice
period, the director shall hold a hearing to determine if the permit shall be
suspended. The permittee may present evidence in his or her own behalf if he or
she so desires. The decision in regard to suspension may be appealed to the
city manager. If the permittee fails to request such a hearing, the suspension
shall become effective upon the expiration of the ten-day notice period. If
operations under a permit granted under this section are suspended, all tables,
chairs and other appurtenances used as a part of the sidewalk café shall be
immediately removed from the sidewalk.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-361 BOND REQUIREMENT.
   No sidewalk café permit shall be issued until an applicant has provided a
cash bond or surety bond, with permittee as the principal and a corporate
bonding company licensed to do business in the State of Texas as a surety, in
an amount determined by the director to be sufficient to cover the costs of
removal of the facilities or improvements by the city or any public utility
under any of the provisions of this article. Should permittee fail to timely
remove its facilities upon request or demand, said permittee shall reimburse
the city or any public utility in the event that the city or public utility
removes the facilities pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-362 NOTICE.
   All notices required or permitted under this article shall be in writing and
shall be deemed delivered three days after deposit in a United States Postal
Service post office or receptacle with proper postage affixed and addressed to
the permittee at the street address provided by the permittee in the
application for a sidewalk café permit.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§ 20-363 APPEAL.
   Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action
taken under the provisions of this article may file an appeal in writing with
the city manager. An appeal must be filed within five days after receipt of
notice of any protested decision or action by filing with the office of the
city manager a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such
appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no more than 15 days after receipt of
the letter of appeal unless extended by mutual agreement of the parties.
Appellant shall be given at least five days’ notice of the time and place of
the hearing. The city manager shall give the appellant, and any other affected
party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the
determination of the director should not be upheld. In all such cases the
burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no
substantial evidence to support the action taken by the regulatory authority.
The city manager shall make his or her determination and shall notify the
appellant in writing of his or her determination. The decision of the city
manager shall be final.
(Ord. 9881, § 1, passed 6-4-1987)
§§ 20-364—20-365 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: MINORITY AND WOMEN BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 24534-11-2020, adopted November 17, 2020, effective January 1, 2021,
superseded all previous policies relating to minority and women business
enterprises and established the policies set forth below. Section 7 of that
ordinance provides that “For any procurement activity where formal solicitation
occurred prior to January 1, 2021, the 2011 Ordinance shall continue to be in
full force and effect.” Prior to the effective date of Ord. 24534-11-2020,
policies relating to minority, women and disadvantaged business enterprises
were set forth in this article and derived from Ord. 20020-12-2002, adopted
December 13, 2011, Ord. 21606-01-2015, passed 1-13-2015, Ord. 21650-02-2015,
passed 2-17-2015, Ord. 21652-02-2015, passed 2-17-2015, and Ord. 22972-10-2017,
passed 10-24-2017. Prior to the adoption of that ordinance, this article
pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 11923, adopted April
18, 1995, 13571, adopted June 2, 1998, and 15530, adopted April 22, 2003.
   Department of Diversity and Inclusion were suspended per Resolution 6126-08-
05, passed August 5, 2025.
§ 20-366 DEFINITIONS.
   ANNUAL GOAL. The overall target for business equity firm utilization in
contracts (prime contracts and subcontracts combined) as defined by the
calculation method used in the city's most recent disparity study, and should
be the basis for consideration of overall, annual spending targets for city
funds. This target can be the city's goal for its overall spending with
certified firms across all industry categories.
   ARTICLE. Chapter 20, Article X Code of the City of Fort Worth (2015).
   BEST VALUE. A procurement method in which the selected bidder is not
determined solely by the lowest price bid.
   BIDDER. Any person seeking to be awarded a contract.
   BID SHOPPING. The practice of divulging a contractor's or subcontractor's
bid to other prospective contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) before the award of
a contract in order to secure a lower bid.
   BUSINESS EQUITY BOARD. The group of industry stakeholders established by
city council tasked with advising the city on business equity firm
participation in city procurement activities and is formerly known as the
minority and women business enterprise advisory committee.
   BUSINESS EQUITY FIRM. An independent firm that is a certified MBE and or WBE
with a significant business presence in the city's marketplace.
   BUSINESS EQUITY GOAL. A calculation prepared by the DVIN that includes all
the following factors: the detailed cost estimate of the work to be performed,
or goods purchased; the marketplace; the availability of business equity firms
and non-business equity firms in the marketplace determined on a contract-by-
contract basis; and the subcontracting/supplier opportunities of each project.
   BUSINESS EQUITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. An online business equity contract
tracking system utilized by DVIN.
   CERTIFIED. Those firms identified by the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) that have been determined to be a bona fide MBE
or WBE by the North Central Texas Regional Certification Agency (NCTRCA), the
Dallas/Fort Worth Minority Supplier Development Council (DFW/MSDC), Women's
Business Council-SW (WBCS), Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) or other
certifying agency that the DVIN may deem appropriate and accepted by the City
of Fort Worth.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY FUNDS. All revenues derived from any source other than federal or state
grants or allocations.
   CITY MANAGER. The city manager of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   COMBINED PROJECT. A construction contract including more than one of the
following: paving, drainage, or water/sanitary sewer; the term does not include
a standard water/sanitary sewer contract where the pavement is only temporarily
or permanently repaired incidental to the water/sewer work.
   COMMERCIALLY USEFUL FUNCTION. Responsibility for the execution of a distinct
element of the work of a contract, which is carried out by actually providing
materials, equipment, supplies, goods, or performing, managing, and supervising
the work.
   CONSTRUCTION. The processes involved in delivering buildings,
infrastructure, or facilities; the term includes but is not limited to the
erection, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, demolition,
improvement, remodeling or repair to any real property, including streets,
storm drains and facilities providing utility service owned by the city.
   CONTRACT. Any purchase order or contract that (i) involves expenditure of
$100,000 or more of city funds; (ii) could use subcontractors; and (iii) is
awarded by the city, whether directly or indirectly, for work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment, professional services, goods, construction, or
construction-related activities, and materials or any combination of the
foregoing; the term specifically includes but shall not be limited to, any
purchase or lease of materials pursuant to Texas state law, any public work
project authorized pursuant to Texas state law, or contract in which public
bids are not required by law. A contract does not include an emergency
contract.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person that has been awarded a contract.
   DEBAR or DEBARMENT. The city will not consider offers from or award new
contracts to a bidder. A debarred business equity firm shall not be included in
calculating a business equity goal.
   DISPARITY STUDY. The City of Fort Worth Disparity Study finalized and
presented to city council on June 16, 2020 or a study presented to the city
council after that date.
   DOING BUSINESS. Engaging in for-profit activities in the scope of the
expertise of the firm and having a physical location and/or digital presence
from which to do so.
   DVIN. The city's department of diversity and inclusion.
   EMERGENCY CONTRACT. A contract that is awarded on an emergency basis due to
a threat of harm to person or property or threat of disruption of governmental
services and approved by the city attorney's office as an emergency contract
exempt from Texas public bidding laws.
   GOOD FAITH EFFORTS. The actions undertaken by a contractor and approved by
DVIN as described in §
20-370, below.
   HORIZONTAL CONSTRUCTION. Construction of highways, roads, streets, bridges,
utilities, water supply projects, water plans, wastewater plants, water and
wastewater distribution or conveyance facilities, wharves, docks, airport
runways and taxiways, drainage projects, or related types of projects
associated with civil engineering construction as referenced in this article.
   INDEPENDENT FIRM. A person whose viability does not depend on its
relationship with another person.
   JOINT VENTURE. A business entity formed by two or more independent persons
for the purpose of pursuing a common objective, such as a prime contract. The
resulting business entity has additional resources and capacity, enhancing its
ability to compete for larger awards. A joint venture is generally
characterized by shared ownership, shared returns and risks, and shared
governance. In a joint venture, the prime managing partner holds 51% or more
interest in the business. Partner(s) hold less than 51% interest but in most
cases, not less than 20%.
   MARKETPLACE. The geographic area as defined by the city's most current
disparity study.
   MAYOR. The mayor of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   MENTOR PROTÉGÉ PROGRAM. The mentor protégé program described more fully in §
20-369, below.
   MINORITY INDIVIDUAL. A person who is a member of any of the following:
      (1)   “Black Americans” means persons having origins in any of the Black
racial groups of Africa;
      (2)   “Hispanic Americans” means persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban,
Dominican, Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or
origin, regardless of race;
      (3)   “Native Americans” means persons who are enrolled members of a
federally or State recognized Indian tribe, Alaska Natives, or Native
Hawaiians;
      (4)   “Asian-Pacific Americans” means persons whose origins are from
Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Burma (Myanmar), Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia
(Kampuchea), Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei, Samoa,
Guam, the U.S. Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands (Republic of Palau),
Republic of the Northern Marianas Islands, Samoa, Macao, Fiji, Tonga, Kirbati,
Tuvalu, Nauru, Federated States of Micronesia, or Hong Kong; and
      (5)   “Subcontinent Asian Americans” means persons whose origins are from
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Maldives Islands, Nepal or Sri Lanka.
   MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (MBE). A business entity, including but
not limited to a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association or joint venture:
      (1)   Which is at least fifty one percent (51%) owned by one or more
minority individuals, or in the case of a publicly traded business, at least
fifty one percent (51%) of all classes of the stock of which is owned by one or
more minority individuals; and
      (2)   Whose management, policies, major decisions and daily business
operations are independently managed and controlled by one or more such more
minority individuals.
   PERSON. A natural person or business entity, including but not limited to a
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
association or joint venture.
   PROGRAM. The administrative regulations for contracts with business equity
firms that do not involve subcontractors.
   RESPONSIVE. A person is in compliance with the requirements of this article.
   SIGNIFICANT BUSINESS PRESENCE. A person:
      (1)   Which has its principal place of business located inside the
marketplace;
      (2)   Which has its principal place of business located outside the
marketplace but has been verified to be in existence for a minimum of 24 months
and from which at least 20% of the business's workforce is based in the
marketplace; or
      (3)   Which has cumulative business receipts greater than $1,000,000 for
work done in the marketplace since January 1, 2013.
   SOLICITATION. The process of inviting companies to bid on opportunities to
provide goods and services.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. Any person entering into a contract with a contractor or a
higher tier subcontractor to directly furnish services or supplies toward the
contract.
   TIER. The numerical level of subcontracting below the contractor.
   UTILIZATION PLAN. The list of business equity firms that a contractor
commits will be utilized to meet the business equity goal for a specific
project, the scopes of the work and the dollar values or the percentages of the
work to be performed.
   VERTICAL CONSTRUCTION. The construction or remodeling of any building,
structure or other improvement that is predominantly vertical, including,
without limitation, buildings, the design and construction of which are
governed by accepted building codes.
   WOMAN. An adult person of the female gender.
   WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (WBE). A business entity, including but not
limited to a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association or joint venture:
      (1)   Which is at least fifty-one percent (51%) owned by one or more
women, or in the case of a publicly traded business, at least fifty-one percent
(51%) of all classes of the stock of which is owned by one or more women; and
      (2)   Whose management, policies, major decisions and daily business
operations are independently managed and controlled by one or more such women.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-367 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to remedy past underutilization and
provide a fair and level playing field for business equity firms and to
encourage the participation of business equity firms to contract with the city.
   (b)   It is intended to promote equal opportunity and the utilization of
business equity firms in the city's contracting opportunities.
   (c)   This article applies to any contract awarded by the city or any of its
departments, boards or commissions for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing; specifically
including but not be limited to, any purchase or lease of materials, any public
work project, or contract in which public bids are not required by law.
   (d)   The requirements of this article shall not apply to emergency
contracts, however any department that procures an emergency contract must
notify the DVIN, in writing, at the time it seeks legal approval of an
emergency contract.
   (e)   Where contracts involve the expenditure of federal or state funds, the
state or federal policy related to business equity firms participation may take
precedence over this article.
   (f)   The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed for the
accomplishment of its policies and purposes.
   (g)   Narrowly tailored goals shall be established in the areas of
procurement and contracting.
   (h)   A business equity goal may be set on a contract-by-contract basis
based on the type of work or services to be performed, or goods to be acquired
and the availability of business equity firms in the marketplace.
   (i)   All required notifications under this article must be made to the DVIN
at the following email address: DVIN_BEOffice@fortworthtexas.gov.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-368 BUSINESS EQUITY GOAL SETTING.
   (a)   A business equity goal should be set by DVIN for the entire scope of
work on a contract.
   (b)   A business equity goal shall be expressed in terms of a percentage of
the total dollar value of each contract awarded by the city.
   (c)   Except as stated otherwise herein, a business equity goal shall be
established for all contracts where business equity firms exist within the
marketplace.
   (d)   DVIN shall set a business equity goal for community facilities
agreements, infrastructure construction agreements, and any other agreement
relating to the construction of public infrastructure or a public building when
the city's participation in the agreement is $1,000,000.00 or more in city
funds.
   (e)   If city funds are used in conjunction with state or federal grants or
allocations, the city shall not set a business equity goal for community
development block grants, HOME programs, or other projects that include federal
funds except where the city is mandated to set goals by state or federal
requirements.
   (f)   A business equity goal may be established for tax abatement agreements
and Chapter 380 grant agreements if allowed by and in accordance with the most
recently adopted Tax Abatement Policy and Chapter 380 Grant Agreement Policy.
   (g)   The city will count a business equity firm's self-performance towards
meeting a business equity goal.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-369 JOINT VENTURES AND MENTOR-PROTÉGÉ.
   (a)   Joint ventures. Where it is economically feasible, the establishment
of joint ventures to ensure prime contracting opportunities for business equity
firms on certain solicitations is encouraged. The factors used to evaluate
economic feasibility, include, but are not limited to, the estimated dollar
value of the solicitation, the scope of work, the duration of the work, the
complexity of the work, the availability of potential business equity firm
joint venture partners in the relevant market area and the nature of the work.
      (1)   When the city uses a procurement method other than lowest
responsible bidder, the city may, at its discretion, designate a particular
solicitation as a "joint venture preferred" solicitation.
      (2)   A prospective joint venture partner shall state within its proposal
or its statement of qualifications information that specifies the role and
extent of the business equity firm joint venture partner(s) involvement. Such
information shall include, but is not limited to:
         a.   The name of the business equity firm joint venture partner(s)
that will participate on the project.
         b.   The percentage of prime contract dollars attributable to the
services to be provided by the business equity firm joint venture partner; and,
as appropriate the total dollar value of the services to be provided.
         c.   A description of the work that each business equity firm joint
venture partner shall be responsible for performing under the terms of the
joint venture agreement.
      (3)   The prospective joint venture partner must also submit a "joint
venture eligibility form." DVIN will review the "joint venture eligibility
form" and will have final approval, as to whether the proposed joint venture
conforms to the DVIN's definition of a joint venture.
      (4)   The joint venture shall ensure that, at a minimum, the following
items are addressed in the formation and governance of the joint venture:
         a.   The initial capital investment of each joint venture partner;
         b.   The proportional allocation of profits and losses to each joint
venture partner;
         c.   The sharing of the right to control the ownership and management
of the joint venture;
         d.   Actual participation of the joint venture partners on the
project;
         e.   The method of and responsibility for accounting;
         f.   The method by which disputes are resolved; and
         g.   Any additional or further information required by the DVIN as set
forth in this article, bid documents and/or otherwise.
   (b)   Mentor protégé program.
      (1)   The mentor protégé program is designed to foster relationships
between contractors and underutilized business equity firms. The objective of
the mentor protégé program is to provide professional guidance and support to
the protégé (which must be a business equity firm) in order to facilitate
protégé growth and development and increase the number of contracts and
subcontracts awarded to business equity firm.
      (2)   The mentor-protégé relationship is intended to be mutually
beneficial because it allows mentors to utilize their proteges to fulfill
business equity goals when bidding on contracts. It is advantageous to build a
partnership prior to a solicitation or contract award to establish confidence
in performance.
      (3)   DVIN shall serve as a sponsor for the mentor protégé program.
Companies interested in joining the mentor protégé program should contact DVIN
to search a list of potential business equity firm proteges that may provide
complementary services, and supply chain opportunities.
      (4)   DVIN may prioritize protégé businesses in critical areas of city
procurement or contract needs.
      (5)   DVIN will consider the following criteria for selection of a mentor
in the mentor protégé program:
         a.   The mentor must be registered with the City of Fort Worth;
         b.   Previous mentoring experience and or successful prior work
history;
         c.   The mentor must have been in operation for at least five years;
         d.   Ability to provide developmental guidance in areas identified by
the protégé; and
         e.   "Good standing" in doing business with the City of Fort Worth and
regional partners.
      (6)   DVIN will consider the following criteria for selection of a
protégé in the mentor protégé program:
         a.   Eligibility and willingness become a business equity firm, as
defined herein;
         b.   Business in operation for at least one year;
         c.   Desire to participate with a mentoring firm;
         d.   Ability to work with DVIN in identifying the type of guidance
needed for business development; and
         e.   "Good standing" in doing business with the City of Fort Worth and
regional partners.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-370 CONTRACT AWARD COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Any contract that is required to publicly bid work in accordance with
the use of city funds must follow the rules in this article, including the
requirement to publicly advertise all contracts for at least 21 days before
opening any bids.
   (b)   All bidders seeking to enter into a contract with the city shall be
registered as a vendor with the city.
   (c)   For a low bid procurement, the lowest bidder shall submit a
utilization plan no later than 2:00 p.m. on the 3rd business day after bids are
opened detailing all Subcontractors the contractor intends to utilize in its
performance of a contract. Contractors that are business equity firms may count
their self-performed services towards meeting a business equity goal.
   (d)   For a best value procurement, all bidders who wish to be considered
for evaluation scoring shall submit a utilization plan by 2:00 p.m. on the 3rd
business day after the bids are opened detailing all subcontractors the
contractor intends to utilize in its performance of a contract. Contractors
that are business equity firms may count their self-performed services towards
meeting a business equity goal.
   (e)   Non-compliance. If the lowest bidder for a low bid procurement or any
bidder for a best value procurement does not timely submit its utilization plan
with the required documents, that bidder will be deemed non-responsive. For a
low bid procurement, the city will notify the next lowest bidder who shall then
submit a utilization plan with required documents no later than 2:00 p.m. on
the 3rd business day after the bidder receives notification. This process will
be followed until a bidder submitting the required documents is selected.
   (f)   A bidder who was previously debarred must apply to DVIN for
reinstatement in order for its bid to be considered.
   (g)   Good faith effort. Where the bidder cannot achieve the business equity
goal, the bidder must provide proof of having made good faith efforts to meet
the business equity goal. Good faith effort requirement means an honest and
conscientious effort by the bidder to explore all available options to achieve,
to the maximum extent practical to meet the business equity goal.
      (1)   Compliance with each of the following steps shall satisfy the good
faith effort requirement absent mere pro forma efforts or proof of fraud,
misrepresentation, or intentional discrimination by the bidder:
         a.   List each and every opportunity for subcontractors for the
completion of a contract. On combined projects list each opportunity for
subcontractors through the 2nd tier.
         b.   Obtain a current list (dated not more than six months old prior
to the bid open date) of business equity firms from the DVIN.
         c.   Solicit participation from business equity firms, within the
subcontractor areas previously listed, at least ten calendar days prior to bid
opening, exclusive of the day the bids are opened. Both business equity firms
and non-business equity firms must receive the same solicitation for each area
of opportunity. The three methods identified below are acceptable for
soliciting participation, and each selected method must be applied to the
applicable contract. The bidder may meet the good faith effort requirement by
making at least one successful contact with a business equity firm using either
(i) email, (ii) fax, or (iii) telephone. The bidder may also meet the good
faith effort requirement by documenting, in the manners detailed below, that at
least two attempts were made using two of the three following methods:
            1.   Email: a copy of the sent confirmation to each business equity
firm with the date and time of the email printed directly from the email system
for proper documentation. If an email is returned as undeliverable, then that
"undeliverable message" received must be printed directly from the email system
for proper documentation.
            2.   Fax: a copy of sent confirmation to each business equity firm
with the date and time printed directly from the facsimile for proper
documentation. If a fax is returned as undeliverable, then that "undeliverable
confirmation" received must be printed directly from the fax for proper
documentation.
            3.   Telephone: a call log that identifies each business equity
firm contacted with the phone number, name of individual contacted, time, date
and outcome of each phone call.
         d.   Provide plans and specifications or information regarding the
location of plans and specifications which shall be communicated to all
business equity firms in each subcontractor area.
         e.   Attach a copy of the solicitation sent to the business equity
firm identifying the instructions on how to obtain plans and specifications for
this solicitation.
         f.   Submit documentation of any business equity firm whose quotes
were rejected. The documentation submitted should be in the form of an
affidavit, include a detailed explanation of why the business equity firm was
rejected and any supporting documentation the bidder wishes to be considered by
the city. In the event of a bona fide dispute concerning quotes, the Bidder
will provide for confidential review of any relevant documentation by city
personnel.
         g.   All communications from the bidder to potential business equity
firms shall be documented and submitted to the city.
      (2)   In making a good faith effort determination, DVIN will also
consider, at a minimum, the bidder's efforts to:
         a.   Solicit through all reasonable and available means (e.g.,
attendance at prebid meetings, advertising and written notices) the interest of
all business equity firms in the scopes of work of the contract. The bidder
shall provide interested business equity firms with timely, adequate
information about the plans, specifications, and requirements of the contract
to allow such firms to respond to the solicitation. The bidder must follow up
initial solicitations with interested business equity firms.
         b.   Select portions of the work to be performed by business equity
firms in order to increase the likelihood that the business equity goal will be
achieved. This includes, where appropriate, breaking out contract work items
into economically feasible units to facilitate participation, even when the
bidder would otherwise prefer to perform these work items with its own forces.
It is the bidder's responsibility to make a portion of the work available to
business equity firms and to select those portions of the work or material
needs consistent with the availability of such business equity firms to
facilitate their participation.
         c.   Negotiate in good faith with interested business equity firms.
Evidence of such negotiation includes the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of business equity firms that were contacted; a description of the
information provided regarding the plans and specifications for the work
selected for subcontracting; and why agreements could not be reached. The
bidder may not reject business equity firms without sound reasons based on a
thorough investigation of their capabilities. That there may be some additional
costs involved in finding and using business equity firms is not in itself
sufficient reason for a bidder's failure to meet the business equity goal, as
long as such costs are reasonable.
         d.   The performance of other bidders in meeting the business equity
goal may be considered. For example, when the apparent successful Bidder fails
to meet the business equity goal but others meet it, it may be reasonably
questioned whether, with additional reasonable efforts, the apparent successful
bidder could have met the business equity goal.
   (h)   A signed letter of intent from each listed business equity firm
describing the work, materials, equipment or services to be performed or
provided by the business equity firm and the agreed upon dollar value shall be
due at the time specified in the solicitation.
   (i)   If DVIN determines that a good faith effort was not made, the bidder
shall be disqualified from that specific bid.
   (j)   Exclusive contract and non-compete agreement. A bidder or contractor
may not require a business equity firm to enter into an exclusive contract or
non-compete agreement that restricts a business equity firm's ability to grow
and build capacity in the marketplace unless the business equity firm
demonstrates to DVIN that an exclusive contract or noncompete agreement with a
bidder or contractor will result or has resulted in the growth of the business
equity firm's capacity in the marketplace and the business equity firm freely
consents to the contract or agreement.
   (k)   Bid protest and procedure. In accordance with city general purchasing
policies, bidders have certain rights to protest a bid award. The protesting
bidder must submit a protest, in writing, in accordance with those general
purchasing policies.
   (l)   If a bidder, contractor, subcontractor, or business equity firm
desires to make an allegation of discrimination based on a protected class in
the city's award of a contract, they shall submit such allegation, in writing,
to DVIN before the performance of the contract. DVIN shall refer such
allegation to the city human resources labor relations unit for investigation.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-371 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Upon award of a contract by the city that includes a business equity
goal, such business equity goal becomes a covenant of performance by the
contractor in favor of the city.
   (b)   Contracts shall incorporate the ordinance and this article by
reference, and shall provide that the contractor's violation of the ordinance
and this article shall constitute a breach of such contract and may result in
debarment in accordance with the procedures outlined in this article.
   (c)   The contractor shall provide a list of all subcontractors to be used
in the performance of the contract, and detailed subcontractor information to
the city with each request for payment submitted to the city or as otherwise
directed by the DVIN.
   (d)   The DVIN shall monitor subcontractor participation and business equity
goal attainment during the course of the contract.
   (e)   The DVIN shall have full and timely access to view the contractor's
relevant books and records relating to each specific contract with the city to
determine the contractor's compliance with its commitment to business equity
firm participation and the status of any business equity firms performing any
portion of the contract. The DVIN shall not record, maintain copies, or
disclose industry or trade secrets of a contractor or vendors books and records
in its execution of this duty. This provision shall be in addition to, and not
a substitute for, any other provision allowing inspection of the contractor's
records by any officer or official of the city for any purpose.
   (f)   Business equity firm subcontractor substitution.
      (1)   The contractor shall not make changes to the utilization plan or
substitute business equity firms named in the utilization plan without the
prior written approval of the DVIN. Unauthorized changes or substitutions shall
be a violation of this article and a breach of contract, and may constitute
grounds for rejection of the bid or cause termination of an executed contract
for breach, the withholding of payment and/or subject the contractor to certain
sanctions.
      (2)   A contractor shall not substitute a business equity firm
subcontractor or perform the work designated for a business equity firms with
its own forces unless and until approval has been received in writing by the
DVIN.
      (3)   The facts supporting the request for substitution of a business
equity firm must not have been known nor reasonably should have been known by
the contractor before the submission of the utilization plan.
      (4)   Bid shopping as a part the substitution of a business equity firm
is prohibited.
      (5)   The contractor must negotiate in good faith with the business
equity firm subcontractor to resolve any issues between the contractors and
business equity firm subcontractor. Where there has been a mistake or
disagreement about the scope of work, the business equity firm can be
substituted only where an agreement cannot be reached for a reasonable price
for the corrected scope of work.
      (6)   Substitutions of the business equity firm subcontractor shall be
permitted only after submission of a request for subcontractor substitution in
the business equity management system and only on the following bases:
         a.   Unavailability after receipt of reasonable notice to proceed;
         b.   Failure of performance;
         c.   Financial incapacity;
         d.   Refusal by the subcontractor to honor the bid or proposal price;
         e.   Mistake of fact or law about the elements of the scope of work of
a solicitation where agreement upon a reasonable price cannot be reached;
         f.   Failure of the subcontractor to meet insurance, licensing or
bonding requirements; or
         g.   The subcontractor's withdrawal of its bid or proposal.
      (7)   The DVIN's final decision whether to permit or deny the proposed
substitution, and the basis of any denial, shall be communicated to the
contractor and business equity firm subcontractor in writing within seven
business days of receipt of the request for substitution in the business equity
management system.
      (8)   Where the contractor has established the basis for the substitution
to the satisfaction of the city, the contractor shall make good faith efforts
to fulfill the utilization plan. The contractor may seek the assistance of the
city in obtaining a new business equity firm.
      (9)   If the business equity goal cannot be reached and good faith
efforts have been made, the contractor may substitute with a non-business
equity firm.
   (g)   Contract amendment/change order. The contractor shall comply with the
provisions of this article with respect to any contract amendments, change
orders, or extra work orders.
      (1)   If a contract has been assigned a business equity goal and requires
a reduction in work or additional work through a change order, contract
amendment or other mechanism, the contractor shall notify DVIN.
      (2)   If the contract amendment, change order, or extra work adds work to
a project that is already being performed by a business equity firm, such firm
shall be given the opportunity to perform the additional work.
      (3)   If the amendment, change order, or extra work adds work that like
or similar work is not already being performed by a business equity firm and
the amount of such additional work is greater than or equal to $100,000.00, the
contractor shall comply with good faith effort requirements of this article
(exclusive of the time requirements stated therein) with respect to such
additional work.
      (4)   A contractor may submit an Acceptance of Previous Commitment Form
(APCF) for contract amendments and change orders in which the contractor agrees
to the original business equity goal for the project, inclusive of any prior
change orders or amendments.
   (h)   Prior to contract closeout, the DVIN shall evaluate the contractor's
fulfillment of the business equity goal, considering all approved
substitutions, terminations and changes to the contract's scope of work. If the
city determines that good faith efforts to meet the business equity goals were
not made, or that fraudulent misrepresentations have been made, or any other
breach of the contract or violation of this article has occurred, a remedy or
sanction may be imposed, as provided in this article.
   (i)   Contract payment procedures.
      (1)   For vertical construction contracts, the contractor shall submit an
invoice at least monthly and the city will pay the invoice as required by the
Texas Prompt Payment Act (Tex. Gov't. Code, Chap. 2251) or any successor
statute. The contractor shall pay subcontractors as required by the Texas
Prompt Payment Act or any successor statute. The contractor's failure to make
payments as provided by state law shall, in addition to any other remedies
provided by law, authorize the city to withhold future payments and/or reject
future bids from the contractor until compliance with this article is attained.
      (2)   For horizontal construction contracts, procedures will be
established to ensure that all progress payments are made twice a month and
that subcontractors are paid in accordance with the provisions of the Texas
Prompt Payment Act (Tex. Gov't. Code, Chap. 2251) or any successor statute. A
Contractor's failure to make payments as required by state law shall, in
addition to any other remedies provided by state law, authorize the city to
withhold future payments and/or reject future bids from the contractor until
compliance with this article is attained.
      (3)   For all other contracts, the contractor shall pay subcontractors as
required by the Texas Prompt Payment Act (Tex. Gov't. Code, Chap. 2251) or any
successor statute. The contractor's failure to make payments as provided by
state law shall, in addition to any other remedies provided by law, authorize
the city to withhold future payments and/or reject future bids from the
contractor until compliance with this article is attained.
   (j)   Payment compliance procedures.
      (1)   Contractors shall report receipt of all payments from the city in
the business equity management system related to contracts for which a business
equity goal was established within 30 days of receipt of such payment.
      (2)   Contractors shall report all payments made to each business equity
firm utilized by the contractor as a subcontractor related to contracts for
which a business equity goal was established within 30 days of making such
payment.
      (3)   Business equity firm subcontractors shall confirm the accuracy and
date of all payments made by contractors related to contracts for which a
business equity goal was established in the city's business equity management
system within 30 days of receipt of payment.
      (4)   If prompted by the city's business equity management system,
contractors and business equity firm subcontractors shall confirm notice and
receipt of all payments.
      (5)   The contractor shall notify each business equity firm subcontractor
that does not confirm receipt of payment from the contractor of its
responsibility to do so in the city's business equity management system and
provide proof of such notification to DVIN.
   (k)   Contract close-out procedure. At the completion of a contract, the
following procedures shall be followed by the contractor. The program contains
further requirements of city departments for close-out procedures.
      (1)   The contractor shall submit a notice of final payment in the
business equity management system.
      (2)   The contractor shall work with DVIN to correct any discrepancies in
payments made under a contract.
      (3)   If DVIN determines that the contractor failed to meet the business
equity goal and the city made no changes that impacted the contractor's ability
to meet the business equity goal, it shall be considered a breach of the
contract and DVIN may impose sanctions in accordance with this article.
   (l)   Counting business equity firm's participation.
      (1)   In order for a business equity firm to count toward a business
equity goal, such firm must be certified at the time of bid submission.
Business equity firms that are scheduled to become certified in an additional
NAICS area during execution of the contract may count participation towards the
business equity goal for the additional certified work upon notifying DVIN with
proof of such certification prior to completion of the work under the contract.
      (2)   The entire amount of that portion of a contract that is performed
by the business equity firm's workforce shall be counted toward a business
equity goal, including the cost of supplies and materials obtained for the work
performed by the business equity firm's workforce.
      (3)   The entire amount of fees or commissions charged for providing a
bona fide service, such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial
services, or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the
performance of a contract, shall be counted toward the business equity goal,
provided the fee is reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees
customarily charged for similar services.
      (4)   When a business equity firm performs as a participant in a joint
venture, only the portion of the total dollar value of the contract equal to
the distinct, clearly defined portion of the work of the joint venture's
contract that is performed by the business equity firms with its own forces and
for which it is separately at risk, shall be counted toward the business equity
goal.
      (5)   Only expenditures to a business equity firm that is performing a
commercially useful function shall be counted. To determine whether a business
equity firm is performing a commercially useful function, the city may evaluate
the amount of work subcontracted, industry practices, whether the amount the
registered firm is to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work
it is actually performing and other relevant factors. A business equity firms
does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited to that
of an extra participant in the contract through which funds are passed in order
to obtain the appearance of participation. When a business equity firm is
presumed not to be performing a commercially useful function, the contractor or
business equity firm may present evidence to rebut this presumption.
      (6)   In determining achievement of a business equity goal, the
participation of a business equity firm shall not be counted toward the
business equity goal until the respective amount has been paid to the business
equity firm.
      (7)   Business equity firms that meet the significant business presence
definition and bid as a contractor or subcontractor may count their
participation towards the goal. Acceptance is on a contract-by-contract basis.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-372 CONTRACT EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS.
   If a bidder or contractor is unable to comply with the business equity goal
requirements for a contract, such bidder or contractor may submit one of the
two forms prepared by the DVIN listed below. If the DVIN denies a request to
waive a goal; the bidder or city department may appeal that denial to the city
manager whose decision on the request shall be final.
   (a)   A contractor waiver form may be submitted if a bidder will perform the
entire contract without subcontractors or suppliers.
   (b)   A good faith effort form is submitted if the bidder or contractor has
a subcontracting and/or supplier opportunity but was unable to meet or exceed
the business equity goal. The bidder or contractor shall submit requested
documentation that demonstrates a good faith effort to comply with the business
equity goal.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-373 VIOLATIONS AND SANCTIONS.
   (a)   Violations. If a business equity firm, bidder, contractor, business
equity firm subcontractor, vendor, or supplier (for purposes of this section,
each referred to as an "offender") commits a violations of this article
(including payment processing and payment of business equity firm
subcontractors) or provides false or misleading information to the city in
connection with submission of a bid, responses to requests for qualifications
or proposals, good faith efforts documentation, post-award compliance, or
commits any other violations of this article, it may result in sanctions in
accordance with this section.
   (b)   Payment reporting. Failure to comply with requirements for payment
reporting procedures will result in an offender being locked out the business
equity management system until compliance with the business equity management
system is achieved.
   (c)   Payments withheld. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Texas
Prompt Payment Act (Tex. Gov't. Code, Chap. 2251) or any successor statute
shall authorize the city to withhold payment from the contractor until
compliance is attained. Noncompliance may impact bidder evaluation scoring on
future city bid opportunities.
   (d)   All other violations of this article, including persistent payment
issues (reporting or payment of subcontractors) will result in the following
sanctions:
      (1)   Warning letter. A formal written warning letter from DVIN that
shall become part of the vendor profile and may impact bidder evaluation
scoring on future city bid opportunities for up to 12 months.
      (2)   Non-responsive designation. DVIN will designate an offender as non-
responsive if DVIN determines that an offender is not responsive to any
requirements of this article. This designation shall prevent offenders from
bidding on contracts for up to six months or until compliance is met as
determined by DVIN, whichever is earlier.
      (3)   One-year debarment. Continued failure of an offender to comply with
this article may result in offender being debarred for a period of time of not
less than one year.
      (4)   Three-year debarment. An offender who intentionally and/or
knowingly misrepresents material facts may be debarred for a period of time of
not less than three years.
   (e)   Debarment procedure.
      (1)   DVIN shall determine whether debarment of an offender is
appropriate. If it decides in the affirmative, DVIN shall send a written
statement of facts and a recommendation for debarment to the city manager. The
city manager, after consultation with DVIN and the city attorney's office,
shall ultimately decide whether debarment is appropriate. If the city manager
upholds DVIN's recommendation for debarment of an offender, the city manager
shall send a certified notice to the offender informing them of the debarment.
      (2)   An offender that receives notification of debarment may appeal to
the business equity board by giving written notice within ten days from the
date of receipt of notice of debarment to the city manager and the business
equity board of its request for an appeal of the debarment.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-374 APPEAL.
   The business equity board shall conduct a hearing within 30 days from the
date of receipt of the request for any appeal of this article, unless the
appellant requests an extension of time. The business equity board will notify
the appellant of the hearing time and location.
   (a)   The appellant shall be afforded an opportunity to appear with counsel
if they so desire, submit documentary evidence, and confront any witness that
the city presents at the hearing.
   (b)   The business equity board shall render its decision not more than
thirty (30) days after the hearing and send a certified notice to the
appellant.
   (c)   If the business equity board upholds the sanctions, the appellant may
appeal to the city manager within ten days from the date of receipt of the
business equity board's decision by giving written notice to the city manager.
The city manager has the final determination whether to uphold the sanctions
assigned by the business equity board.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§ 20-375 SUNSET DATE.
   This article shall terminate on December 31, 2030 unless reauthorized by
city council.
(Ord. 24534-11-2020, § 1, passed 11-17-2020, eff. 1-1-2021; Ord. 25165-10-2021,
§ 1, passed 10-19-2021)
§§ 20-376—20-382 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: METAL RECYCLING ENTITIES
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 21615-02-2015, adopted January 27, 2015, repealed §§ 20-
383 through 20-400. Formerly, said sections pertained to Secondary Metal
Recyclers, and derived from § 1 of Ord. 17073, passed July 25, 2006.
§ 20-383 PURPOSE.
   This article is an exercise of the city's police power to promote regulation
of metal recycling entities through the recovery of stolen property. In
addition to state law, the city seeks to provide additional licensing,
recordkeeping requirements, and enforcement procedures, that will enable the
Fort Worth police department to identify and recover public and private
property composed of certain metal that may have been illegally appropriated.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-384 DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief of police for the City of Fort Worth, or a
designated representative.
   CLEAR DIGITAL STILL COLOR PHOTOGRAPH. A photo, of a resolution approved by
the chief of police, which accurately depicts the image being captured.
   CLEAR AND LEGIBLE THUMBPRINT. An intentional recording of the friction ridge
detail on the volar pads of the thumb.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license has been issued under this
article or a person listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
   METAL RECYCLING ENTITY. Shall have the meaning assigned under Tex.
Occupations Code § 1956.001(7).
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust,
association and any other legal entity.
   PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT. Shall have the meaning assigned under Tex.
Occupations Code § 1956.001(8).
   PURCHASE TRANSACTION. A transaction in which a metal recycling entity gives
consideration in exchange for regulated material.
   REAL-TIME ELECTRONIC WEB-BASED DATABASE. The electronic filing system
approved by the chief of police in which data is organized by fields and
records, and that is capable of transmitting a file or responding to input
immediately via the internet.
   REGULATED MATERIAL. Shall have the meaning assigned under Tex. Occupations
Code § 1956.001(9).
   SELLER. Any person who, in a purchase transaction, receives consideration
from a metal recycling entity in exchange for regulated material.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-385 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (a)   A metal recycling entity shall maintain an accurate and legible record
of each purchase transaction. Each transaction must be recorded and filed
separately.
   (b)   With the exception of the sale or transfer of aluminum cans, a metal
recycling entity shall keep at its place of business a record in the real-time
electronic web-based database, in which he or she shall enter daily in English,
a full description of each purchase transaction at his or her place of
business. The record must contain the items required under Tex. Occupations
Code §§ 1956.033 and 1956.0331 as well as the following:
      (1)   The name and street address of the metal recycling entity;
      (2)   The name or initials of the individual recording the information
required by this section for the metal recycling entity;
      (3)   The seller's gender and birth date;
      (4)   The make, model, color and license plate number of the motor
vehicle in which the property is delivered in a purchase transaction, along
with a clear digital still color photograph of the motor vehicle and any
trailer attached to the motor vehicle and a clear digital still color
photograph of the associated license plate(s);
      (5)   The time of the purchase transaction;
      (6)   An accurate description of the regulated material purchased and the
type of metal from which the regulated material is made, including the weight,
quantity or volume and a description, made in accordance with the custom of the
trade, of the regulated material purchased, along with a clear digital still
color photograph of the regulated material;
      (7)   The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for
regulated material; and
      (8)   A clear and legible thumbprint of the seller taken at the time of
the purchase transaction.
   (c)   All electronic submissions to the real-time electronic web-based
database must be completed within 24 hours of the purchase transaction.
   (d)   A metal recycling entity shall maintain on file the information
required by subsection (b) of this section for not less than two years after
the date of the purchase transaction.
   (e)   A seller shall comply with all requirements of Tex. Occupations Code
Chapter 1956 and in addition:
      (1)   Provide to the metal recycling entity the make, model, color and
license plate number of the trailer used to deliver the regulated material, and
the name of the state issuing the license plate; and
      (2)   Provide a clear and legible thumbprint taken at the time of the
purchase transaction.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-386 NOTICE TO SELLERS.
   (a)   In addition to the notice requirements contained in Tex. Occupations
Code § 1956.031(a)(1), a metal recycling entity shall at all times also
maintain in a prominent place in the metal recycling entity's place of
business, in open view to a seller, a notice in two-inch lettering that
includes the following clause or similar language approved by the chief of
police:
   "A PERSON ATTEMPTING TO SELL ANY REGULATED MATERIAL MUST PRESENT SUFFICIENT
IDENTIFICATION AND WRITTEN PROOF OF OWNERSHIP REQUIRED BY CITY OF FORT WORTH
ORDINANCE AND STATE LAW.”
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-387 FACSIMILE, ELECTRONIC MAIL OR SIMILAR EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A metal recycling entity shall maintain at its place of business, or
otherwise have immediate access to, electronic mail, a facsimile machine, or
other equipment of similar function on which notifications of stolen property
or other notifications relating to regulated material may be expeditiously
received from the Fort Worth police department. The equipment must be operable
at all times during the usual and customary business hours of the metal
recycling entity. The metal recycling entity shall maintain the facsimile
number, electronic mail address, or other access number of the equipment on
file with the chief of police (or designee) and shall notify the chief of
police (or designee) within 24 hours after any change in the number or
electronic mail address.
   (b)   The chief of police (or designee) may provide to metal recycling
entities notices of, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Photocopies of fraudulent or forged personal identification
documents provided by sellers under this article;
      (2)   Individuals convicted of theft of regulated material for offenses
arising in the City of Fort Worth; and
      (3)   Regulated materials reported or suspected stolen.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-388 RESTRICTIONS ON THE PURCHASE OF REGULATED MATERIAL.
   (a)   A metal recycling entity shall conduct all purchase transactions only
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (b)   A metal recycling entity shall not purchase regulated material from:
      (1)   A person who appears to be intoxicated, as defined by state law; or
      (2)   With the exception of the sale or transfer of aluminum cans, a
person who does not deliver the regulated material to the metal recycling
entity's place of business in a motor vehicle or in a trailer attached to a
motor vehicle.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-389 PENALTIES.
   All violations of
Chapter 20, Article XI, of the Fort Worth City Code, except violations of §§
20-388(a) and
20-390, by sellers and metal recycling entities, shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500 for each violation. Each day a violation occurs or continues
to occur is a separate violation. Violations of §§
20-388(a) and
20-390 shall be punishable under state law.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-390 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   In order to operate as a metal recycling entity in the City of Fort
Worth, the metal recycling entity must be issued a license by the city's
planning and development department.
   (b)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city's planning and development department.
   (c)   A person who wishes to purchase regulated material for resale or
salvage use must sign the application as applicant. If the person is a legal
entity, an individual with authority to bind the legal entity must sign the
application as applicant and identify each individual who has a 20% or greater
interest in the legal entity on the application for a license. An individual
who has a 20% or greater interest in a legal entity must satisfy the criteria
under §
20-391. Each applicant will be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-391 APPLICATION FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEES; POSTING.
   (a)   The city's planning and development department may issue a license to
an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application after the city's
police department has confirmed that all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The applicant is at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant is not overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant;
      (3)   The applicant has not refused to answer or has not falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form provided;
      (4)   The applicant has not been convicted of two or more offenses under
this article, other than the offense of conducting business as a metal
recycling entity without a license, within two years immediately preceding the
application;
      (5)   The applicant has obtained a certificate of occupancy for the
premises in which the applicant intends to do business, and the metal recycling
entity, or its location, would not otherwise be in violation of any applicable
city ordinance or state or federal law;
      (6)   The license fee required by this article has been paid;
      (7)   The applicant has obtained a certificate of registration from the
Texas Department of Public Safety, as required by Tex. Occupations Code §
1956.021;
      (8)   The applicant has not been convicted of any felony or a Class A
misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft,
robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices,
securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or
federal criminal offense, and three years has elapsed since the termination of
any sentence, parole, or probation. A pardon shall be given full legal effect.
If three years have elapsed, the city's police department shall, in accordance
with Tex. Occupations Code § 53.023 determine the present fitness of the
applicant to be licensed from the information and evidence presented with the
application; and
      (9)   The applicant has not been convicted of an offense under any
federal or state law providing recordkeeping or licensing requirements for
persons purchasing or selling regulated material, and three years have elapsed
since the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation for such offense.
   (b)   The applicant shall work with the city's planning and development
department and the city's police department to provide all paperwork or
information necessary to process an application and make a determination of
fitness to be licensed in accordance with §
20-391.
   (c)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the premises for
which the license is granted. A license issued pursuant to this article is
valid only for the location stated in the application and the person listed on
the license application. Should any licensee move its place of business from
the place stated on the license to a new location the licensee shall give the
city's planning and development department prior written notice and present the
license to the city's planning and development department to have the change of
location noted on the license. Should any licensee change ownership to where an
individual has a 20% or greater interest in the metal recycling entity, the
licensee shall give the city's planning and development department prior
written notice and present the license to the city's planning and development
department to confirm that the new owner satisfies the criteria outlined in §
20-391(a).
   (d)   The metal recycling entity shall pay an annual license fee in the
amount of $250 to the city's planning and development department.
   (e)   A license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the metal recycling entity so that it may be easily read at any
time.
   (f)   If the city's planning and development department determines that
issuance or renewal of a license should be denied based on a recommendation
from the city's police department, the city's planning and development
department shall send to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written statement of the reasons for the denial and of the
applicant's right to appeal.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-392 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   Each license will expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
20-391 of this article. Application for renewal must be made at least 45 days
before the expiration date.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-393 SUSPENSION.
   The chief of police shall recommend suspension of a license to the city's
planning and development department for a definite period of time, not
exceeding 30 days, if:
   (a)   The licensee, a corporate officer or an employee of the licensee has:
      (1)   Received, in the aggregate, two or more convictions under this
article within any six-month period; or
      (2)   Intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an
inspection by a peace officer, a representative of the City of Fort Worth, a
representative of a county, or a representative of the Texas Department of
Public Safety as authorized under this article.
   (b)   The city's planning and development department finds that there is
cause for a suspension based on a recommendation from the city's police
department, the licensee shall be notified in writing within ten days of the
department's decision, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice
shall include a written statement of the reasons for the suspension, the
duration of the suspension, and the licensee's right to appeal.
   (c)   A licensee whose license is suspended may not operate as a metal
recycling entity inside the city during the period of suspension.
   (d)   Only the city's planning and development department or the city
manager may suspend a license issued under this article.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-394 REVOCATION OR DENIAL.
   (a)   The city's planning and development department shall revoke or deny
the issuance or renewal of a license if, based on a recommendation from the
city's police department:
      (1)   A licensee has given a false statement in the submission of an
application under §
20-391(a) of this article;
      (2)   A licensee, a corporate officer, or an employee of the licensee has
been convicted within a two year period of two or more offenses under this
article. If a conviction is appealed and affirmed, the time period between
conviction and final disposition on appeal of the conviction is not included in
calculating the two year period;
      (3)   A cause for suspension occurs under §
20-393, and the license has been previously suspended in accordance with this
Article in the preceding 12 months; or
      (4)   The licensee does not qualify for a license under §
20-391(a).
   (b)   The city's planning and development department shall notify the
licensee within ten days of its decision to revoke or deny the issuance or
renewal of a license, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice
shall include a written statement of the reasons for the revocation or denial,
and of the licensee's right to appeal.
   (c)   Revocation of a license under this section shall continue for a
minimum of one year. A licensee may not be issued a new license for a period of
one year from the date revocation became final. If the license was revoked
under §
20-391(a)(4) of this article, an applicant may not be granted another license
within two years of the date of conviction. If the license was revoked under §§
20-391(a)(8) or
20-391(a)(9) of this article, an applicant may not be granted another license
within three years of the termination of any sentence, parole, or probation.
   (d)   Only the city's planning and development department or the city
manager may revoke or deny a license under this article.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-395 APPEAL.
   If the city's planning and development department suspends a license or
revokes or denies the issuance or renewal of a license, that decision is final,
unless the aggrieved party makes a timely appeal to the city manager. An appeal
shall be considered timely if it is filed with the city manager's office within
30 days of the suspension, revocation, or denial. The filing of an appeal stays
the action of the suspension, revocation, or denial until the city manager
makes a final decision. The decision of the city manager is final.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
§ 20-396 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A Licensee shall not:
   (a)   Transfer a license issued under this article to another person; or
   (b)   Operate a business engaged in the purchase of regulated material for
resale or salvage use under the authority of a license at any location other
than the address designated in the license application.
(Ord. 21615-01-2015, § 1, passed 1-27-2015)
ARTICLE XII: OUTDOOR EVENTS
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 20-401 SCOPE.
   This article is intended to be the framework within which all outdoor events
held in the city are approved and regulated. This article shall apply to all
outdoor events, as defined herein, located within the city, regardless of
whether the events are located on private or public property. This article does
not apply to events that are held exclusively indoors. Neighborhood events and
neighborhood parades, as defined herein, will be governed by
Division 9 of this article.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-402 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The city recognizes the need to encourage and promote events for the
greater good, cultural diversity and promotion of the city.
   (b)   The city finds that there are an increased number of demands upon city
resources and infrastructure from applications to hold outdoor events in the
city streets, sidewalks and parks and for large outdoor events on private
property. In order to conserve and allocate city resources and to adequately
protect the public safety of the event participants, neighboring property
owners, residents and businesses, it is necessary to regulate the use of the
city’s parks, streets and public areas by those desiring to hold outdoor events
on public property and to regulate large outdoor events on private property.
   (c)   The intent of this article is to ensure that the city will have
adequate advance notice of outdoor events and the ability to plan and allocate
the city services that will be needed while recouping the city’s costs
associated with outdoor events, such as personnel, equipment, utilities,
maintenance and administrative costs.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-403 RESPONSIBLE CITY DEPARTMENT.
   The public events department shall be responsible for overseeing the
issuance of all permits for special events, First Amendment events, parades,
neighborhood events, neighborhood parades and events in General Worth Square.
Unless otherwise provided, events occurring in the city’s public parks shall be
the responsibility of the park and recreation department; events in the Water
Gardens shall be the responsibility of the public events department; and events
in Burnett Park shall be the responsibility of Downtown Fort Worth, Inc., as
contracted with the city. Unless otherwise provided, the applicant shall submit
all information related to an event to the public events department. The
outdoor events manager, as designated by the public events department, shall be
responsible for processing the application, issuing the permit and assuring
compliance with the requirements of this article.
§ 20-404 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ANNUAL PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing an applicant
to hold a series of planned events for the next calendar year in the defined
outdoor events districts and in neighborhoods.
   APPEALS HEARING COMMITTEE. The committee composed of the director of public
events department, the director of transportation and public works department,
the fire chief, the police chief and a representative from the city manager’s
office designated by the city manager to hear appeals from the denial of the
events calendar committee to place a requested event on the events calendar or
the denial or revocation of a special event or parade permit. The city attorney
or his or her designee shall serve in a non-voting capacity to advise the
committee on any legal issues.
   APPLICANT. The person who has filed a written application for a special
event, parade, First Amendment event, neighborhood event or neighborhood parade
permit that is responsible for conducting the event and the responsible
organization, corporation or other group on whose behalf the individual is
requesting the permit.
   BLOCK. One side of a rectangular area surrounded by streets and usually
containing buildings, measured from corner to corner.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The individual designated to that position by the city
manager of the City of Fort Worth, Texas together with all deputy police chiefs
and such other individuals as may be designated by the chief of police.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER. The individual designated to that position by the
director of the department of transportation and public works.
   CULTURAL DISTRICT. That area between Montgomery Street, Camp Bowie
Boulevard, University Drive and Harley Street.
   DOWNTOWN OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (DOED). That area between Jones Street,
Henderson Street, Belknap Street and Lancaster Street.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND FIRE SAFETY PLAN. A plan submitted by the applicant
setting forth its plans for providing emergency services and evacuation,
including fire prevention and fire suppression on public and private property
used for the event, and emergency medical services to performers, entertainers,
exhibitors, speakers, attendees or other persons at the event, as defined
herein.
   ESTABLISHED EVENT. An event with an attendance of 1,000 or more that has
been permitted for the past five consecutive years.
   ESTABLISHED NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT. A neighborhood event sponsored by a
neighborhood association that has been held for two or more consecutive years
at the same location.
   ESTABLISHED NEIGHBORHOOD PARADE. A neighborhood parade sponsored by a
neighborhood association that has been held for two or more consecutive years
at the same location.
   EVENT. A special event or parade.
   EVENT AREA. The area or areas, not necessarily contiguous to each other,
which are central to the event and which are erected and/or utilized by the
applicant for the production of the event, including, but not limited to, areas
open to attendees, stages, barricades, parked vehicles, booths, tents or other
temporary or permanent structures and including the area immediately
surrounding those items or locations.
   EVENT SITE PLAN. The scaled schematic drawing indicating the placement of
stages, vendors, booths, seating, amplifiers, bleachers, tents, toilets,
generators, propane tanks, barricades, signage, dumpsters and other information
required by the outdoor events manager.
   EVENTS CALENDAR COMMITTEE. The necessary representatives from city staff as
determined by the city manager, two at-large members from residents of the City
of Fort Worth as designated by the director of public events and one
representative from each of the following organizations: the T, The Fort Worth
Convention and Visitors Bureau; Sundance Square; Downtown Fort Worth
Initiatives, Inc.; the Cultural District; Near Southside; and the Stockyards
that are consulted by the outdoor events manager when setting the calendar of
events in the city.
   FEES. Where the term is not specified as being a particular type of fee,
means the amount of money required to be paid to the city by an applicant
pursuant to this article for the issuance of a permit in order for the city to
recover the direct and indirect costs associated with the event.
   FIRE CHIEF. The individual designated by the city manager and confirmed to
that position by the city council of Fort Worth, Texas; together with all
deputy fire chiefs and such other individuals as may be designated by the fire
chief.
   FIRST AMENDMENT ACTIVITY. All expressive and associative activity on public
streets that is protected by the United States and Texas Constitutions,
including speech, press, assembly and the right to petition, but does not
include commercial advertising.
   FIRST AMENDMENT EVENT. An event where the sole or principal object is First
Amendment activity.
   FIRST AMENDMENT PARADE. A procession of pedestrians or vehicles or any
combination thereof, traveling in unison along or upon a street, road or
highway, organized and conducted for the purposes of First Amendment activity.
   FIRST AMENDMENT PARADE PERMIT. The written authorization from the city
allowing an applicant to hold a First Amendment parade on public rights-of-way,
but does not include sidewalks.
   GATED EVENT. An outdoor gathering that is gated, thereby closing a portion
of public property to the public and excluding members of the public.
   GOODS. Food, drinks, wares, personal property, merchandise or any other
similar item.
   INTERSECTION. For the purpose of a parade, mean the junction of any two
streets within the parade route, but shall not include any staging or
disbanding area.
   NATIONAL NIGHT OUT. The annual nationwide community-police awareness event
to promote neighborhood spirit and police-community partnerships to generate
support for, and participation in, local anticrime programs.
   NEAR SOUTHSIDE OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (NSOED). That area between Evans
Avenue and Kentucky Street on the east, FW&W RR and UP RR on the west, Vickery
Boulevard on the north and Morphy Street on the south.
   NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT. Outdoor gatherings or celebrations with less than 500
attendees at any one time on a residential street, as defined by the city’s
current master thoroughfare plan or as approved as a residential street by the
city traffic engineer or designee, that are sponsored by a neighborhood
association or by persons living on the block that requires the use, occupation
or full or partial closure of a street, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
Neighborhood tours, such as home or garden tours, shall not be considered a
NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT.
   NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing
an applicant to hold the neighborhood event as defined herein.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARADE. A procession of less than 500 pedestrians, vehicles or
animals or any combination thereof, traveling in unison along or upon a
residential street, as defined by the city’s current master thoroughfare plan,
and organized, conducted and sponsored by a neighborhood association or by
persons living on the block.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARADE PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing
an applicant to hold the neighborhood parade as defined herein.
   NON-INCOMING PRODUCING EVENTS. Those events held on private property in the
Stockyards Outdoor Events District and the Near Southside Outdoor Events
District that are not fenced and do not charge admission.
   OUTDOOR EVENTS MANAGER. The person designated by the public events
department director to implement, administer and enforce this article.
   PARADE. A procession of pedestrians, vehicles or animals or any combination
thereof, traveling in unison along or upon a street, road or highway.
   PARADE PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing an applicant
to hold a parade as defined herein.
   PARKING PLAN. A written proposal for the operation and regulation of parking
on private and public property.
   PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing an applicant to
hold an event as defined herein or perform the function for which he or she
filed an application.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, organization, contractor, subcontractor, affiliate,
agent, representative, association or other legal entity of any kind, any
lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee, heir or personal
representative, but shall not mean the city.
   POLICE SERVICES PLAN. A plan to provide traffic, crowd and parking control,
public security and service calls, including not only the street or streets to
be closed but any other streets or public areas in the close proximity that may
be utilized for alternative routes or for parking of vehicles of persons
attending the event.
   PRE-EVENT COMMITTEE. The necessary representatives from city staff as
determined by the city manager, and one representative from each of the
following organizations: The T; Med Star; Texas alcoholic beverage commission;
and the Fort Worth Convention and Visitors Bureau that will conduct the pre-
event meetings for compliance with this article. The designated representative
to the event calendar committee from Sundance Square, Downtown Fort Worth,
Inc., the Cultural District, Near Southside District and the Stockyards shall
attend as a committee member only when the proposed event is in that
representative’s designated event district or area.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property that is located within the boundaries of the
city, except for property that is owned by the city, public property, as
defined herein, or by another governmental entity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any dedicated or undedicated public land, outdoor park and
outdoor recreational facilities, streets, highways, municipal parking lots,
parkways or alleys, public spaces and rights-of-way within the city.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Private property utilized on a regular basis, but in
no case less than a weekly basis, for conducting religious classes and/or
worship services.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A single temporary daily outdoor gathering or a temporary
celebration or series of related consecutive outdoor daily gatherings or
celebrations, sponsored by a person that is expected to draw 500 or more
attendees at any one time held on public property or private property that
includes one or more of the following:
      (1)   Partial or full closure of a public street;
      (2)   Blocking or restricting access to public property;
      (3)   Blocking or restricting access to private property of others;
      (4)   Use of pyrotechnics or special effects;
      (5)   Use of open flame, explosions or other potentially dangerous
displays or actions as outlined in the city’s fire code;
      (6)   Sale or distribution of merchandise, food or beverages on public
property or on private property;
      (7)   Erection of a tent on public property, or on private property;
      (8)   Installation of a stage, band shell, truck, trailer, van, portable
building, booth, grandstand or bleachers on public property or private
property;
      (9)   Placement of portable toilets on public property or on private
property; or
      (10)   Placement of temporary no-parking, directional, oversize or
identification signs or banners in or over a public right-of-way, or on private
property where otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
   SPECIAL EVENT HOLIDAY. Any holiday proclaimed by the mayor as a special
community celebration.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. The written authorization from the city allowing an
applicant to hold the special event as defined herein or perform the function
for which he or she filed an application.
   STOCKYARDS OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (SOED). That area between Packers Street,
North Main Street, Stockyards Boulevard and 23rd Street.
   SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES FEE. Actual costs incurred by the city to provide city
services to the event, to include the salaries of the responding police, fire
and emergency officers and city employees, at the salary then in effect for
each classification of each individual officer, for the amount of time actually
spent in responding to or remaining at the event; appropriate overhead; the
actual costs of any medical treatment to injured officers or employees; and the
cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN. A written proposal for the operation and regulation of
traffic-control devices used to facilitate vehicular and pedestrian traffic
safely and efficiently through a temporary traffic control zone.
   WALKS, RUNS and RACES. Their usual and customary usage and shall be treated
as a special event for purposes of review of the application unless otherwise
stated in this article.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 1, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012, § 1, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-405 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, sponsor or cause to be
held an event without first having obtained the applicable permit from the
public events department or park and recreation department. All events in
public parks shall be subject to
Division 6 of this article.
   (b)   This section shall apply to all aspects of permitting events in the
city.
      (1)   No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less
favorable treatment as to time, manner or place based upon race, color, creed,
religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual
orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression, national origin
or political affiliation of the applicant and/or the participants of the event.
      (2)   No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less
favorable treatment as to time, manner or place based upon the message of the
event, nor based on the identity or associational relationships of the
applicant and/or participants.
      (3)   No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less
favorable treatment as to time, manner or place based upon any assumption or
predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by
the content of speech or message conveyed by the event, provided that
reasonable accommodation as to time, manner and place may be required in order
for the city to provide the resources necessary for police, fire and emergency
services protection.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued until a completed application, together with
any additional information requested, is received by the outdoor events
manager. The application must be in compliance with the regulations and
requirements of this article.
   (d)   The closure of any rights-of-way shall require a street closure permit
from the transportation and public works department.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-406 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article do not apply to:
   (a)   An event conducted entirely on the property of a religious
institution, educational institution, college or university campus. City
streets or parking lots for multi-tenant buildings, regardless of location,
shall not be considered part of a religious institution, educational
institution, college or university campus;
   (b)   Property owned or controlled by the city subject to a contract, lease
or management/operating agreement with a private party where the agreement
addresses outdoor events on the property;
   (c)   Events conducted entirely on property containing an occupied private
residence;
   (d)   Processions of vehicles operated in compliance with ordinary traffic
laws or a procession of pedestrians along or upon public sidewalks, public
parks or private property;
   (e)   Sports facilities located on city property (including, but not limited
to, ball fields, golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools);
   (f)   An activity conducted in compliance with the zoning of the property
and in accordance with its certificate of occupancy and if applicable, the city
council has approved the partial or full closure of a street, road or highway;
   (g)   Events held at Texas Motor Speedway;
   (h)   Events held for National Night Out;
   (i)   Neighborhood tours, such as home or garden tours;
   (j)   Special event holidays;
   (k)   First Amendment activity conducted entirely on sidewalks, in public
parks or on private property; or
   (l)   Events conducted under the supervision of or with the permission of a
governmental entity on property owned, leased or operated by a governmental
entity other than the city, if the event does not require the closing or
rerouting of a public street, the entity employs certified peace officers to
provide security for the event, and the entity adopts and provides to the city,
a written plan addressing emergency services, crowd, traffic and parking
control.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 2, passed 9-28-2010)
§ 20-407 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Additional event operating guidelines, policies and procedures may be
developed and adopted administratively by the city manager, which may include
but not be limited to, processes, cost recovery for public safety, sanitation
and transportation personnel, resources, surety and insurance requirements.
Such rules and regulations shall be based on due regard for public health,
safety and welfare of citizens and event attendees.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-408 FEES.
   (a)   Fees for permits shall be adopted by the city council. No permit fees
shall be charged for a political march or rally conducted on public sidewalks
or in city parks or plazas, or for other noncommercial exercise of rights
guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States and the Texas
Constitution.
   (b)   An applicant shall be required to pay all fees for permits and
licenses required by other city ordinances to conduct specific activities in
conjunction with or as part of an event.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-409 TIMEFRAMES.
   Where a timeframe or deadline established in this article results in an item
being due on a weekend, holiday or a day the city is closed for business, the
item shall be due on the business day immediately following said weekend,
holiday or closed business day.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 2: SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
§ 20-410 EVENTS CALENDAR.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager shall create an events calendar for each
fiscal year beginning in October for the purpose of setting the city’s calendar
for upcoming special events and parades in the city.
   (b)   A written application to hold a special event or parade shall be
submitted to the outdoor events manager to be placed on the city’s yearly
events calendar no earlier than 365 days prior to a special event or parade.
The outdoor events manager may reduce the time frame required for an applicant
to submit an application as authorized by the director of public events or his
or her designee.
   (c)   The outdoor events manager may deny the application if the applicant
fails to submit a completed application to hold a special event or parade to be
placed on the events calendar as required by this ordinance.
   (d)   First Amendment events and First Amendment parades shall be exempt
from this division.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 3, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012, § 2, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-411 EVENTS CALENDAR COMMITTEE.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager shall be responsible for notifying and
requesting comments of the events calendar committee members of the
applications for events before placing the event on the yearly events calendar.
   (b)   The events calendar committee shall provide comments within 15 days of
notification by the outdoor events manager for the purpose of setting the
city’s events calendar for upcoming special events and parades in the city. In
setting the yearly events calendar, the events calendar committee shall
consider the current submitted applications to hold an event, other activities
being held in the city and any conflicts related to dates, times and location,
established events, city resources and space capacity for the requested special
event or parade.
   (c)   All applicants requesting a permit for a special event or parade must
submit an application to the outdoor events manager. Applications for a special
event or parade with an expected attendance of greater than 2,500 persons
located in the downtown outdoor events district must submit an application no
later than 210 days before the date of the proposed event. All other special
event or parade applications must submit an application no later than 120 days
before the date of the proposed event. An application for a parade with a
procession of less than 500 pedestrians or attendees must be submitted no later
than 60 days before the date of the proposed event. The outdoor events manager,
may reduce the time frame required for an applicant to submit an application
for a permit for a special event or parade as authorized by the director of
public events or his or her designee.
   (d)   In determining whether to place the applicant’s application for a
permit for a special event or parade on the yearly events calendar for the
requested dates and times, the committee shall consider:
      (1)   Whether there are competing applications or other activities that
are substantially for the same time and place where both cannot logistically
occur together;
      (2)   Whether there are competing applications that are substantially for
the same time and/or place, each of which requires police, emergency services
or fire protection over and above what would normally be provided in that
location and the chief of police or fire chief has determined that there is not
a sufficient quantity of personnel to provide adequate coverage for each of the
events; and
      (3)   The written comments received from property owners as shown by the
current tax roll and residents along all the block faces of the proposed event
as required to be noticed by §
20-413 and all religious institutions, schools and registered neighborhood
associations within one-fourth mile surrounding the proposed event. The events
calendar committee shall consider the failure of a property owner to return
written comments as non-opposition to the proposed special event or parade.
   (e)   In a case of competing events for the same time and place, priority
shall be given to an established event, unless the location requested has been
used in the three preceding years by a non-established event. For a non-
established event, priority shall be given to the order in which the written
application to hold an event or parade is received by outdoor events manager.
   (f)   The events calendar committee shall have the authority to deny the
applicant a specific date and time based on subsection (e) above, provided
however, they shall offer alternative dates, times and/or location for the
requested special event or parade. An applicant desiring to accept the
alternative permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the
outdoor events manager, file a written acceptance with the outdoor events
manager. If the applicant refuses the alternate date, time or location offered
by the events calendar committee, the committee shall recommend that the
outdoor events manager deny the application for a permit to hold a special
event or parade.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 3, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-412 PRE-EVENT MEETING.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager shall be responsible for establishing the
dates, times and location of the pre-event meeting and notifying the committee
members and the applicants of the meetings.
   (b)   The pre-event meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the
application and all required permits for compliance with this article and all
other applicable ordinances and any applicable policies approved by the city
manager.
   (c)   No pre-event meeting shall be scheduled until a complete application
is received by the outdoor events manager.
   (d)   All applicants requesting a special event or parade permit in which
the attendance is expected to be greater than 2,500 must attend the pre-event
meeting no later than 120 days before the date of event to review the
application. All other applicants requesting a special event or parade permit
must attend the pre-event meeting no later than 60 days before the date of the
event to review the application.
   (e)   Failure of the applicant to attend the scheduled pre-event meeting
shall be grounds for denial of the permit.
   (f)   The pre-event committee shall recommend that the outdoor events
manager deny the application if the applicant is unwilling or unable to comply
with all the requirements of the ordinance or any other applicable ordinances.
   (g)   First Amendment event and First Amendment parade applicants are not
required to attend a pre-event meeting.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 4, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-413 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Events outside the downtown outdoor events district; notification.
      (1)   Special events, parades, runs or walks. No later than five days
after the filing of an application for a special event, parade, walk, run or
race permit, the applicant shall provide written notice, at applicant’s
expense, to all registered neighborhood associations, religious institutions
and schools within one-quarter mile surrounding the event, and all owners of
property, as shown by the current tax roll, along all the block faces of the
event or walk, run or race. Notice shall also be sent to the outdoor events
manager. Notice may be provided by U.S. mail or by electronic mail. Notice
shall include language indicating that failure of a property owner to return
written comments to the outdoor events manager within ten days shall be
considered as non-opposition to the proposed special event or parade. The
notice must state the date, time and location of event, the type of event, the
dates(s) of event, the specific street closures and the time the streets will
be closed.
      (2)   Notice for condominiums, hotels or high rise residential buildings.
For condominiums, hotels or high rise residential buildings, notice may be
provided to the property manager or the homeowner’s association. Notice shall
include language indicating that failure of a property manager or homeowner’s
association to return written comments within ten days shall be considered as
non-opposition to the proposed special event or parade.
   (b)   Events inside the downtown outdoor events district; notification.
      (1)   Special events, parades, runs and walks. At least five days after
filing an application for a special event, parade, walk, run or race permit,
the applicant shall provide written notice, at applicant’s expense, to all
registered neighborhood associations, religious institutions and schools within
one-quarter mile surrounding the event or the walk, run or race, The T, the
Convention and Visitors Bureau, Sundance Square, Downtown Fort Worth, Inc. and
all owners of property, as shown by the current tax roll, along all the block
faces of the event. Notice may be provided by U.S. mail or electronic mail. The
notice must state the date, time and location of event, the type of event, the
dates(s) of event, the specific street closures and the time the streets will
be closed.
      (2)   Notice for condominiums, hotels or high rise residential buildings.
For condominiums, hotels or high-rise residential buildings, notice may be
provided to the property manager or the homeowner’s association.
   (c)   Posting on the city’s web page. The dates and times of the events
calendar meeting, the pre-event meeting, special events and parades shall be
posted on the city’s designated web page by the outdoor events manager at least
20 days, but no more than 30 days, prior to the date of the meeting or event.
   (d)   Compliance and response.
      (1)   The applicant shall file an affidavit with the outdoor events
manager within five days following the filing of the application and no later
than 30 days prior to the event showing that notice has been provided as
required above. Submittal of the affidavit to the outdoor events manager shall
be proof of notification required in this article and the outdoor events
manager shall not be responsible for verifying the information submitted by the
applicant.
      (2)   At the request of the outdoor events manager, any questions or
concerns from residents, business or property owners shall be addressed by the
applicant prior to issuance of a permit.
      (3)   The outdoor events manager shall notify the mayor and the council
member for the district in which the event is being held no later than one week
before the event.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 5, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-414 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT PROCESS.
   (a)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, sponsor
or cause to be held a special event without first having obtained a special
event or parade permit from the outdoor events manager.
   (b)   Mandatory requirements for the issuance of a special event permit.
Compliance with the following shall be required before the outdoor events
manager may issue a permit:
      (1)   Submission of a completed application:
         a.   Two hundred ten days prior to a special event in the downtown
outdoor events district with anticipated attendance over 2,500;
         b.   One hundred twenty days prior to a special event outside of the
downtown outdoor events district or for events inside the downtown outdoor
events district with anticipated attendance of over 500 but less than 2,500;
and
         c.   Sixty days prior to a walk, run or race with anticipated
attendance of less than 500.
      (2)   Payment of all fees at the time of submission of the completed
application;
      (3)   Attendance of the applicant at the pre-event meeting;
      (4)   Submission of all required plans;
      (5)   Notice to the surrounding property owners for meetings as required
by this article;
      (6)   Execution of a user agreement; and
      (7)   Submission of all insurance and other requirements under this
article.
   (c)   Application process.
      (1)   A person seeking to hold a special event shall apply for a special
event permit by filing with the outdoor events manager a written application
upon a form provided by the city. Each application must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee as adopted by the city council.
      (2)   An application must be filed no less than:
         a.   Two hundred ten days prior to a special event in the downtown
outdoor events district with anticipated attendance of over 2,500;
         b.   One hundred twenty days prior to a special event outside of the
downtown outdoor events district or for events inside the downtown outdoor
events district with anticipated attendance more than 500 but less than 2,500;
and
         c.   Sixty days prior to a walk, run or race for events with
anticipated attendance less than 500.
      (3)   An application must contain at a minimum the following information:
         a.   The name, address and 24-hour telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the special event and who will be responsible for its
conduct;
         b.   Estimated projected attendance affidavit;
         c.   Execution of user agreement;
         d.   If the special event is to be held for, on the behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and the name and address of the authorized responsible
representatives of the organization;
         e.   A description of the special event, including any historical and
promotional information, and requested dates and hours for operation of the
event;
         f.   The dates and times when the special event is to be conducted,
including set up and removal;
         g.   A noise mitigation plan that addresses noise impacts on
surrounding businesses and residences if the special event includes amplified
music;
         h.   Proof that the applicant possesses or is able to obtain all
licenses and permits required by the city or by state law for the special
event;
         i.   The time and type of any entertainment and whether amplification
will be used;
         j.   The use of any pyrotechnics display;
         k.   The time streets or sidewalks are to be blocked or closed;
         l.   The number of persons proposed or required to monitor or
facilitate the event and provide spectator or participant control;
         m.   Event site plan indicating location of generators, tents, stages,
booths, utility poles, stands, disbanding areas, signs, banners, vendors,
portable toilets, orientation of amplifiers and loudspeakers, lighting,
disability access, viewing stands, the name and location of streets or
sidewalks to be blocked or closed and the location of any barricades and
bleachers;
         n.   If any alcohol is going to be sold or distributed, the vendors
and application for license for sale issued by the Texas alcoholic beverage
commission;
         o.   Emergency services and fire safety plans;
         p.   Police service plans;
         q.   Traffic control plan, parking plans and trash/recycling plans;
         r.   Compliance with all city plumbing and electrical code
requirements, and sanitation and sewage disposal facilities requirements;
         s.   Details of how the applicant will clean up the area after the
special event, if on public property;
         t.   Any additional information related to health and safety which the
city finds reasonably necessary to make a determination as to whether a permit
should be issued; and
         u.   Provide a copy of events calendar and pre-event meetings
notification letters and distribution list to all affected businesses, property
owners and/or residents as required by this article.
      (4)   After submission of the application, the outdoor events manager may
request supplemental information.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 6, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-415 PARADE PERMIT PROCESS.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any number of persons, delegations or
associations of persons, or for any company, circus or group to conduct a
parade along or upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a permit.
No permit shall be required for the use of the sidewalks of the city for any
procession or parade.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any number of persons, delegations or
associations of persons, or for any company, circus or group to conduct a
parade upon any median, median strip or traffic island designed for the purpose
of separating or directing vehicular traffic.
      (3)   a.   Only one parade shall be allowed on the same calendar day in
the following areas:
            1.   The DOED;
            2.   The Cultural District;
            3.   The NSOED; or
            4.   The SOED.
         b.   Outside these locations, permits may be issued for parades to be
conducted on the same calendar day at the same time by the outdoor events
manager in consultation with the chief of police and the fire chief, or their
designees in regard to the respective department’s available resources. Times
shall be conflicting if the parade starting times are less than four hours
apart.
      (4)   No permit shall be issued if:
         a.   The parade would conflict with previously planned events or
programs in the area scheduled for the same time and place;
         b.   The parade would present an unreasonable danger to the health or
safety of the applicant, participants or citizens of the city;
         c.   The parade would duly interfere with proper fire and police
protection or ambulance service to the area contiguous to the parade route and
alternative means of service acceptable to the city is not available;
         d.   The parade will place such a burden on the police, fire or
emergency services that they would be unable to provide normal services to the
remainder of the city; or
         e.   The parade would interfere with events scheduled at the Fort
Worth Convention Center or the Will Rogers Memorial Center.
   (b)   Mandatory requirements for issuance of a parade permit.
      (1)   Submission of a completed application no later than:
         a.   Two hundred ten days prior to a parade in the downtown outdoor
events district with participation or attendance anticipated over 2,500;
         b.   One hundred twenty days prior to a parade outside of the downtown
outdoor events district or inside the downtown outdoor events district with
anticipated attendance of over 500 but less than 2,500; or
         c.   Sixty days prior to a parade with participation or attendance
anticipated to be less than 500.
      (2)   Payment of all fees at the time of the submission of the completed
application;
      (3)   Attendance by the applicant at the pre-event meeting;
      (4)   Submission of all the required plans;
      (5)   Notice to surrounding property owners for the events calendar and
the pre-event meetings as required by this article;
      (6)   Execution of a user agreement; and
      (7)   Submission of all insurance and other requirements under this
article.
   (c)   Application process.
      (1)   A person seeking a permit for a parade shall file an application in
writing on a form to be provided by the outdoor events manager. An application
for a parade permit with participation or attendance anticipated to be greater
than 500 persons shall be filed with the outdoor events manager no less than
120 calendar days before the date of the proposed parade except for exempt
parades and events in the downtown outdoor events district with participation
or attendance more than 2,500 as provided above. An application for a parade
permit for a parade with anticipated attendance or participation of less than
500 persons shall be filed with the outdoor events manager no less than 60 days
before the date of the proposed parade.
      (2)   The contents of the application shall include:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct a parade;
         b.   If the parade is to be held for or by an organization, the name,
address, telephone number of the headquarters of such organization and the
names and numbers of authorized and responsible heads of the organization;
         c.   The name, address and all telephone numbers of the applicant
responsible for the conduct of the parade;
         d.   Location, date and time of the parade;
         e.   A written description of the proposed route to be traveled, the
starting point and the termination point of the parade, including a map
illustrating the exact route of the parade;
         f.   If the parade will be held in the DOED, then the applicant shall
choose a designated route provided by the outdoor events manager in
consultation with the city traffic engineer;
         g.   The estimated number of any riders, animals, animal drawn
vehicles, floats, motor vehicles, motorized displays and marching units or
organizations, such as bands, color guards and drill teams that will constitute
the parade;
         h.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be used;
         i.   The streets that will be partially or completely closed during
the parade;
         j.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the proposed
parade;
         k.   The time at which units of the parade will arrive at the assembly
area;
         l.   Event site plan indicating location of generators, tents,
vendors, portable toilets, amplifiers, viewing stands and bleachers, if any;
         m.   Emergency services and fire safety and traffic control plans;
         n.   The estimated attendance at the event;
         o.   Details of how the applicant will clean up the area after the
parade, if on public property;
         p.   Any additional information related to health and safety which the
outdoor events manager finds reasonably necessary to make a determination as to
whether a permit should be issued; and
         q.   No later than 30 days prior to the parade, provide a notification
letter to all affected businesses and/or residents. For condominiums, hotels or
high-rise residential buildings, notice may be provided to the property manager
or the homeowner’s association. A copy of the notification letter and
distribution list shall be provided to the outdoor events manager prior to
sending the notification letter.
   (d)   Issuance of parade permit.
      (1)   The place, duration and manner of use of the public streets and
other public ways and places for parades shall be subordinate to the public
safety, comfort and convenience, the maintenance of order and the avoidance of
congestion.
      (2)   The outdoor events manager shall issue a permit upon finding:
         a.   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the safe and
orderly movement of traffic near the parade route;
         b.   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination without unreasonable delays;
         c.   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment or fire protection activities;
         d.   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of a
number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and areas
near the parade so as to prevent normal police protection to other areas of the
city;
         e.   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of a
number of ambulances so as to prevent normal ambulance service to other
portions of the city; or
         f.   The movement of the parade will not conflict in time and location
with another parade or event for which a permit has been granted.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 4, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012, § 7, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-416 PARADES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   All parade routes held in the DOED must be on a designated route provided by
the outdoor events manager. Except for parade of lights, all parades must not
start any earlier than 10:00 a.m. and must end no later than 2:00 p.m. All
streets must be cleaned and reopened no later than 3:00 p.m.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 3: FIRST AMENDMENT EVENTS AND FIRST AMENDMENT PARADES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19373-09-2010, § 5, adopted September 28, 2010, amended the title of
Div. 3 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 3
was entitled, “First Amendment Events.” See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 20-417 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (a)   First Amendment events and parades. First Amendment events and First
Amendment parades shall be governed exclusively by this division.
   (b)   Fees.
      (1)   No permit fees shall be charged for a political march or rally
conducted on public sidewalks or in city parks or plazas, or for other
noncommercial exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the
United States and the Texas Constitution.
      (2)   An applicant for a First Amendment event or a First Amendment
parade shall be required to pay all fees for street closures to conduct
specific activities in conjunction with or as part of a First Amendment event
or First Amendment parade. Fees for First Amendment events or First Amendment
parades on public streets shall not be in excess of the city’s cost to close
the street(s) for traffic control.
   (c)   Permit required.
      (1)   An application for a First Amendment event or First Amendment
parade shall be filed with the outdoor events manager not more than 365 days
before the proposed event.
      (2)   If an organization plans a First Amendment event or First Amendment
parade within 30 calendar days of the proposed event, an application for a
First Amendment event or First Amendment parade permit shall be filed with the
outdoor events manager within three calendar days of the date on which the
event begins but not less than two calendar days before the proposed event. The
outdoor events manager and the applicant shall communicate with the police and
fire departments prior to the First Amendment event or First Amendment parade.
      (3)   The outdoor events manager may issue a First Amendment event or
First Amendment parade permit for an application filed less than 30 calendar
days provided there is adequate time for the city to process the application
and to assure that there are adequate traffic measures in place for the orderly
movement of the event participants and traffic near the route.
   (d)   Service plans.
      (1)   The applicant must submit an emergency services plan that complies
with the Fort Worth Fire Code and the Fire Department’s street closure
guidelines and maintains adequate fire lanes within each closure area.
      (2)   The applicant must submit a traffic control plan which shall
provide traffic controls for the First Amendment event or First Amendment
parade including the street(s) to be closed and all other streets or public
areas in close proximity that may be utilized for alternative routes or for
parking of vehicles of persons attending the First Amendment event or First
Amendment parade.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 5, passed 9-28-2010)
DIVISION 4: PUBLIC PARK EVENTS
§ 20-418 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   General. All events with one person or greater that require the use
of a park outdoor facility, such as a park pavilion, shall file a facility
reservation application with the park and recreation department; provided
however the following locations shall be administered by other city departments
or contractors, they are as follows. General Worth Square shall be administered
by the public events department and Burnett Park shall be administered by
Downtown Fort Worth, Inc. Park reservation applications are not required to be
submitted to the public events department and all processing of the application
will be administered by the park and recreation department.
      (2)   Trinity Park.
         a.   Events with an expected attendance of 500 or more persons shall
be required to comply with the provisions of this article, including placement
of the event on the events calendar and attendance at the pre-event meeting.
The pre-event committee review shall be limited to the impact of the event
outside the park system. The park and recreation department shall coordinate
all permitting with the outdoor events manager, and the applicant. Issuance of
the permit shall be by the park and recreation department.
         b.   Events with an expected attendance of less than 500 persons that
are contained within Trinity Park and associated park system, including Trinity
Trails, and do not require a closure of a street exterior to the park shall
also be administered and permit issued by the park and recreation department.
      (3)   Public parks other than Trinity Park.
         a.   Events with an expected attendance of 1,000 or more persons shall
be required to comply with the provisions of this article, including placement
of the event on the events calendar and attendance at the pre-event meeting.
The pre-event committee review shall be limited to the impact of the event
outside the park system. The park and recreation department shall coordinate
all permitting of the event with the outdoor events manager, and the applicant.
Issuance of the permit shall be by the park and recreation department.
         b.   Events with an expected attendance of less than 1,000 persons
that are contained within the park system, including Trinity Trails, and do not
require closure of a street shall also be administered and permit issued by the
park and recreation department.
   (b)   Any event requiring a street closure external to the park or park
system shall be administered and permitted by the outdoor events manager in
coordination with the park and recreation department.
   (c)   This article shall not apply to Mayfest or concerts in the garden.
   (d)   The park and recreation department shall maintain written procedures
for obtaining a park facility reservation permit, and said procedures shall be
placed in the department’s policies and procedures manual, a copy thereof to be
provided to the outdoor events manager, and able to be provided to the public
upon request.
   (e)   All gated events located in a city park shall be regulated by the
department of park and recreation in consultation with the chief of police and
the fire chief. No gated event in a public park shall be approved until the
applicant certifies that admission will not be denied based on race, color,
creed, religion, gender, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation,
national origin, political affiliation or gender identity.
   (f)   After a facility reservation application has been processed by the
park and recreation department, the department shall forward the processed
application and permit, if any, to the outdoor events manager for informational
and calendaring purposes and the outdoor events manager shall maintain the file
on such event.
   (g)   Other than events requiring a street closure external to the park or
park system, the decision of whether to grant or deny a park permit shall be
made by the director of park and recreation department, which shall be final.
The denial or revocation of a permit for events requiring a street closure
external to the park or park system may be appealed pursuant to §
20-437.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 8, passed 7-17-2012)
DIVISION 5: OUTDOOR EVENT DISTRICTS
§ 20-419 DOWNTOWN OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (DOED).
   (a)   In addition to the regulations set out in this section, all events in
the DOED shall be required to comply with this article and all city policies
and procedures.
   (b)   There shall be increased fees for all events in the DOED which will be
approved annually by the city council. A security deposit, as determined by the
city manager, shall be required for all events in the DOED due to the need to
protect enhanced amenities in the downtown area.
   (c)   The owners of the Sundance Flying Saucer Lot, Gateway Lot and the
Sundance Square Chisholm Trail Lot shall be allowed to submit an application
for the next calendar year and receive an annual permit for all planned events
that do not involve a street closure
   (d)   All events in the DOED shall be placed on the events calendar and
applicants shall be required to attend all pre-event meetings as required by
this article. The pre-event committee may require an enhanced parking plan and
traffic control plan for events held on Friday or Saturday nights.
   (e)   Other than events contained entirely on private property, and water
and food distributed at the end of walks, runs and races, and to remedy
emergency situations, no food or beverage shall be sold, served or distributed,
for any event with an estimated attendance of less than 5,000 attendees per
day. Actual attendance at a prior event will be used to determine the
attendance number.
   (f)   Where a street closure is required for the event, no more than two
events with an estimated attendance of less than 5,000 attendees shall be
allowed within the same two block radius within a three-week period.
   (g)   No business delivery parking shall be blocked at any time before,
during or after an event.
   (h)   For special events and parades occurring in the DOED, no traffic-
control devices, including signs, barricades, cones or other traffic management
elements, may be delivered or stored on public property prior to the date
specified on the special event or parade permit.
   (i)   No set up shall be allowed prior to 24 hours before the start of the
event for special events or parades with an expected attendance of less than
100,000 attendees. For special events or parades with an expected attendance of
more than 100,000, no set shall be allowed prior to 48 hours before the start
of the event without the approval of the outdoor events manager.
   (j)   Barricades must be staffed at all times with a minimum of one person
at least 18 years of age who is wearing a reflective safety vest.
   (k)   Other than the parade of lights, parades must not start any earlier
than 10:00 a.m. and must end no later than 2:00 p.m. All streets must be
cleaned and reopened no later than 3:00 p.m.
   (l)   In addition to the requirements of the outdoor events ordinance and
all polices and procedures adopted by the city, all events in the DOED shall
submit and obtain approval from the pre-event committee for the following
plans:
      (1)   Attendee parking,
      (2)   Support vehicle parking;
      (3)   Trash disposal and nightly pick up; and
      (4)   Noise mitigation (bands, amplifiers, etc.).
   (m)   All parade routes held in the DOED must be on a designated route
provided by the outdoor events manager. Except for parade of lights, all
parades must not start any earlier than 10:00 a.m. and must end no later than
2:00 p.m. All streets must be cleaned and reopened no later than 3:00 p.m.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-420 NEAR SOUTHSIDE OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (NSOED).
   (a)   Except for the permitting exception of non-income producing events on
private property in this section, the NSOED shall be required to comply with
all the regulations of this article and all city policies and procedures.
   (b)   Non-income producing events held on private property in the NSOED that
do not involve a street closure shall be allowed to submit an application for
all planned events for the next calendar year and receive an annual permit.
   (c)   All events shall be placed on the events calendar as required by §
20-410, but the applicant for a non-income producing event that has obtained an
annual permit shall not be required to attend an events calendar or pre-event
meeting.
   (d)   No later than 72 hours prior to a non-income producing event on
private property, the event holder shall be required to provide email notice to
the outdoor events manager and to the police and fire department.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-421 STOCKYARDS OUTDOOR EVENTS DISTRICT (SOED).
   (a)   Except for the permitting exception of non-income producing events on
private property in this section the SOED, events shall be required to comply
with all the regulations of the outdoor event ordinance and all city policies
and procedures.
   (b)   Non-income producing events held on private property in the SOED that
do not involve a street closure shall be allowed to submit an application for
all planned events for the next calendar year and receive an annual permit.
   (c)   All events shall be placed on the events calendar as required by §
20-410, but the applicant for a non-income producing event that has obtained an
annual permit shall not be required to attend an events calendar or pre-event
meeting.
   (d)   No later than 72 hours prior to a non-income producing event on
private property, the event holder shall be required to provide email notice to
the outdoor events manager and to the police and fire department.
   (e)   No event shall be allowed to barricade full closure of a street within
the SOED for more than four hours in any 48-hour period. Barricades must be
staffed at all times with a person at least 18 years of age who is wearing a
reflective safety vest.
   (f)   In addition to the requirements of this article and all policies and
procedures adopted by the city, all income producing or gated events or events
requiring a street closure in the SOED shall submit and obtain approval from
the pre-event committee for the following plans:
      (1)   Parking plan for attendees;
      (2)   Support vehicle parking;
      (3)   Trash disposal and nightly pick up; and
      (4)   Noise mitigation (location of bands, amplifiers, etc.).
   (g)   The Fort Worth Herd Cattle Drive is excluded from the requirements of
the SOED and this article.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 6: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19373-09-2010, § 6, adopted September 28, 2010, amended the title of
Div. 6 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 6
was entitled, “General Provisions for Special Events, Parades and First
Amendment Events.” See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 20-422 ADDITIONAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Portable restrooms.
      (1)   All events that provide portable restrooms must indicate on the
special event or parade site plan the exact location where the portable
restroom(s) shall be placed.
      (2)   If the portable restrooms are not placed at the location designated
on the event site plan, the outdoor events manager or his or her designee shall
give the applicant oral or written notice to move the portable restroom(s) to
the proper location. The applicant must have the portable restroom(s) moved
immediately, but in no case later than four hours after notice. Should the
applicant fail to meet this requirement, the applicant shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in this article.
      (3)   The event site plan shall state the time that the portable restroom
(s) shall be removed. In the event that the portable restrooms are not removed
by the time set forth in events plan, the applicant shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in this article. Where the applicant provides evidence of a
good faith effort to have the portable restroom owner remove the portable
restrooms in a timely manner, the city shall not subject the applicant to the
penalties, but shall instead provide written notice to the portable restroom
owner requiring removal of the portable restrooms within 24 hours of receiving
the city’s written notice. Should the owner fail to meet this requirement, the
owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this article.
      (4)   If portable restrooms are placed on public property for an event
that is not permitted, the outdoor events manager shall require the owner of
the portable restrooms to remove the portable restrooms within 24 hours of
receiving the written notice. Should the owner fail to meet this requirement,
the owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this article.
      (5)   The provisions of this subsection (a) shall not apply to events
held entirely on private property, providing placement and use of the portable
restrooms are not affecting adjacent property owners or tenants and it meets
the requirements of the city code.
   (b)   Alcohol permit. No alcohol may be served and/or sold at any event
unless the applicant receives an alcohol permit as required by the Texas
alcoholic beverage commission. Permits must be posted and visible to the
public.
   (c)   Food permit. It will be responsibility of the applicant to contact the
Fort Worth code compliance department, consumer health division, to obtain
necessary permits and information on proper dispensing and handling procedures
for any food that is being provided or served at the event.
   (d)   Barricades. Each barricade must be staffed at all times during the
event with at least one person at least 18 years of age who is wearing a
reflective safety vest.
   (e)   Recycling. Recycling at events is strongly encouraged, but is not
mandatory.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-423 PROJECTED ATTENDANCE ESTIMATES.
   For purposes of this article, attendance estimates by the applicant shall be
accompanied by an affidavit stating the basis of the estimate. Each estimate
shall be based upon all the relevant factors known at the time, including,
without limitation, past attendance at similar functions having the same and
similar performers, both in the city and comparable communities, the price of
admission, if applicable, and the extent of advertising and promotion planned.
The city may accept the applicant’s affidavit if it appears to be based on
realistic and appropriate information. If the city rejects the attendance
estimates, the city shall substitute a reasonably determined estimate for the
applicant and the applicant shall be responsible for all attendant costs and
requirements associated with the revised estimate. If, for unforeseen reasons,
an estimate did not in fact reflect the actual and necessary resources for the
event, the city may seek cost recovery from the applicant as determined by the
city.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-424 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND FIRE SAFETY, TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PARKING PLANS.
   (a)   Plans.
      (1)   The applicant for any special event or parade is required to
provide an emergency services and fire safety plan, police services plan,
traffic control and parking plans, as defined, for the event, and shall be
required to provide and pay for firefighter, emergency medical technician,
emergency medical personnel and/or ambulance service(s) for such emergency
medical and firefighting services. The contents of the emergency services and
fire safety plan, police services plan and traffic control and parking plans
shall be determined by the anticipated number of attendees at the event per §
20-423.
      (2)   Applicants shall submit their plans to the outdoor events manager
30 days before the applicant’s scheduled pre-event meeting.
      (3)   The emergency services plan must comply with the Fort Worth fire
code and the fire department’s street closure guidelines and maintain adequate
fire lanes within each closure area.
      (4)   The traffic control and parking plans shall provide traffic and
parking controls for the event including the street(s) to be closed and all
other streets or public areas in close proximity that may be utilized for
alternative routes or for parking of vehicles of persons attending the event.
      (5)   The outdoor events manager, in consultation with the city’s police,
fire and transportation and public works departments shall be responsible for
determining whether to approve, modify or deny the respective plan. In
evaluating the plans, the outdoor events manager shall not take into account
any of the factors set forth in §
20-405(b).
   (b)   Compliance with the emergency services and fire safety plan and police
services plan.
      (1)   If the outdoor events manager, the chief of police or the fire
chief, or their designees determine that the services being provided at the
event do not comply with the approved plans and should this determination be
the event’s first violation of its approved plans, the outdoor events manager
shall contact the applicant or his or her designee and shall provide him or her
with one hour in which to bring the emergency services into full compliance
with the approved plans. The outdoor events manager, if approved by the chief
of police or the fire chief, or their designees, may allow additional time for
compliance provided health and safety is not compromised. As soon as possible
after this contact, the outdoor events manager shall prepare written detailed
documentation of the name of the event contact, the time of the conversation
and the corrective action required of the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant does not comply in a timely manner, the city shall
provide the necessary services and will include the full cost of providing
these services in a supplemental services fee.
      (3)   If the violation is event’s second or greater violation of its
approved plan, the city may provide the necessary services without giving the
applicant an opportunity to take corrective action, and the city will include
the full cost of providing these services in a supplemental services fee. As
soon as possible after finding the violation, the outdoor events manager shall
prepare written detailed documentation of the nature of the violation and the
corrective action taken by the city.
      (4)   If the chief of police or the fire chief, or their designees,
determine that the emergency services being provided at the event are not
sufficient, given the actual circumstances of the event, the applicant or his
or her designee shall be notified of such determination. The chief of police,
or the fire chief, or their designees, using their sole judgment regarding the
immediacy of the need to have additional emergency services, shall determine
whether to allow the applicant to provide additional emergency services or
whether to have the city provide additional emergency services. As soon as
possible after the contact with the applicant or his or her designee, the chief
of police or the fire chief, or their designees, shall prepare written detailed
documentation of the name of the event contact, the time of the conversation,
the findings of the chief of police or the fire chief, or their designees
regarding the need for additional emergency services, the corrective action
required, and who will provide the corrective action. This written
documentation shall be provided to the outdoor events manager within five
business days after the conclusion of the event. Where the city provides the
additional emergency services, the city will include the full cost of providing
these services in a supplemental services fee.
      (5)   Should the violator or applicant not comply in a timely manner with
the corrective action plan required by the fire inspector, a stop work or stop
operating order shall be given to the violator and applicant or his or her
designee. The stop work or stop operating order shall stay in effect until the
violator or applicant comes into full compliance.
   (c)   The emergency services and fire safety plan and police services plan
for events with 1,000 or greater anticipated attendees.
      (1)   Pursuant to Homeland Security, a detailed site plan indicating
proposed vehicle ingress and egress, medical treatment areas, public areas
including fences and gates, all temporary structures, management offices,
cooking areas, locations of all fuels that will be used and/or stored,
including without limitation gas, and whether pyrotechnics or other special
effects are planned; and
      (2)   The staffing plan for emergency medical personnel and fire
inspectors, to include the number of each that the applicant plans to have at
the event.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 6, passed 9-28-2010)
§ 20-425 GATING AND FENCING OF EVENTS.
   No event, except gated events located in a city park shall be fenced with
perimeter fencing or gated. No fencing shall be allowed on any street or
sidewalk. Fencing of VIP areas, private property and at the start and finish
lines during walks, runs and races shall be allowed, but the square footage of
the fenced area shall be subject to occupancy loads as determined by the fire
chief and shall be limited to 10% of the event area. The percentage of fenced
area may be increased based on the size and location of the event with the
approval of the director of public events after consultation with the outdoor
events manger, the chief of police and the fire chief.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-426 PROHIBITED CONDUCT DURING EVENTS.
   For all events, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the
following acts, or to permit a minor child in his or her custody to do any of
the following acts in the event area:
   (a)   (1)   Ride, drive or operate golf carts, bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds
or any other motor vehicles, or ride skateboards or skates, unless part of the
event. Bicycles, skateboards and mopeds may be carried into or walked through
the event area. At no time will any event approved vehicle, golf cart, fork
lift or other motor vehicle be driven on city sidewalks; and
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to emergency medical personnel,
officials or employees of the city acting in their official capacity, vendors
restocking their merchandise, vendors providing sanitation services for the
event or to the event workers.
   (b)   Bring in, carry or in any way possess, play or operate any bull horns,
radio, musical instrument or similar device which is producing or reproducing
sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible to other persons in the event
area, other than the operator of the device. This provision shall not apply to
persons performing in the event. All radios and musical devices with earphones
are permitted;
   (c)   Bring in, carry or in any way possess glass bottles, glass jars or
glass containers of any kind, unless such glass container in a vial is required
to hold medication needed and utilized by an event participant where the
medication is customarily stored in a glass vial or unless specifically
authorized by the outdoor events manager for authorized event vendors;
   (d)   Carry or possess spray paint cans unless specifically authorized in
writing by the outdoor events manager for authorized event vendors;
   (e)   Engage in the sale or distribution of goods. This provision shall not
apply to authorized event vendors;
   (f)   Engage in the act of performing unless the performer is an authorized
event vendor;
   (g)   Engage in outdoor cooking in any area except an area designated for
grilling by the city or an approved event site plan. This provision shall not
apply to authorized event vendors;
   (h)   Be in possession of any alcoholic beverage at an event located on
public property, unless the alcoholic beverage was purchased or otherwise
obtained from an authorized vendor of the event; and
   (i)   If the applicant has previously advertised the prohibition of dogs or
animals at the event, no dogs or other animals, other than service animals,
shall be allowed in the event area. All dogs or other animals must be licensed,
have current rabies vaccination tags, remain on leash while in the event area
and under voice control of their owners at all times. At the request of the
applicant, the outdoor events manager or his or her designee, any dog or animal
exhibiting aggressive behavior must be removed immediately from the event area.
Owners shall be liable for damage or injury inflicted by their animals.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 19373-09-2010,
§ 7, passed 9-28-2010)
§ 20-427 RETENTION OF PERMIT.
   The applicant or his or her designee shall be present during the entire
event, and shall produce the permit upon demand during the event, including
set-up and break-down. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
outdoor events manager or any other city employee the permit upon request and
the contact number of the person carrying the permit if other than the
applicant.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-428 SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   (a)   An applicant for a special event or parade shall pay a security
deposit fee to insure compliance with all permit requirements upon submission
of the application. The deposit shall be used to recover any costs that are
incurred by the city. The city has sole discretion over the determination of
the condition of the site. Neighborhood event, neighborhood parade or First
Amendment event permits are exempted from this provision.
   (b)   The holder of the permit shall reimburse the city for additional
direct costs in excess of the security deposit that are incurred by the city in
providing services at the event; direct costs include but are not limited to,
the reasonable costs of setup, cleanup, electrical services, construction and
other related services beyond what the city would provide to the general public
in the ordinary course of its daily operations that exceed the security
deposit.
   (c)   The deposit will be refunded in full by the outdoor events manager not
later than 30-calendar days after the event if the site is left in as good or
better condition than before the event. The city has the sole discretion
regarding the determination of the condition of the site.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-429 SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICE FEES.
   (a)   If a police officer is required to respond to an event and while at
the scene determines that there is a threat to public peace, health, safety or
general welfare, the applicant responsible for the event shall be liable for
supplemental service fees.
   (b)   If the city is required to respond to an event due to lack of traffic-
control devices as established by the traffic control plan or as required by
the city’s police department, the applicant shall be responsible for all
related costs. Such charge constitutes a debt of the responsible person and is
collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation
under a contract.
   (c)   The costs of a response shall be waived if the applicant initiates a
request for police response and cooperates with the police.
   (d)   Costs imposed under this provision are due and payable in accordance
with the user agreement as described in this article.
   (e)   The applicant can appeal the costs by filing an appeal pursuant to the
provisions of this article. Failure of the applicant to file an appeal shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal under this article or to
challenge the validity or amount of the costs imposed.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-430 TENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Tents, canopies and membrane structures shall be regulated by
Chapter 24 of the city’s adopted fire code.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-431 USE OF CITY LOGO OR NAME.
   An applicant may not use or allow its event to use the words “City of Fort
Worth,” “The City of Fort Worth” or the city’s logo or a combination thereof in
any manner that would imply an official endorsement of the event by the city
without written authorization from the city manager.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-432 USER AGREEMENT.
   (a)   The applicant shall enter into a user agreement with the city prior to
the event, in which the applicant agrees to bear all costs of clean up and
restoration of the public property upon the conclusion of the event and to
reimburse the city for costs related to any damage or use beyond normal wear
and tear on the public property. The user agreement shall require the applicant
to provide full reimbursement to the city within 60 calendar days of the
conclusion of the permitted event. The assessed reimbursement amount shall be
subject to the procedures for appeal contained in this article.
   (b)   The user agreement shall include the following:
      (1)   Indemnification. Applicant shall assume full responsibility and
liability for and indemnifies, defends and holds the city harmless against:
         a.   All liability, claims for damages and suits for or by reason of
any injury to any person, including death, and damage to any property for every
cause in any way connected with the holding of the event, including the
preparation, set-up, teardown and cleanup; and
         b.   All expenses incurred by the city for public safety, sanitation
and transportation personnel and resources required to preserve public order
and protect public health, safety and welfare, together with any other expenses
or costs that may be incurred by the city as a result of the event. The
applicant shall indemnify the city against all charges, expenses and costs,
including the city’s legal department services incurred on account of or by
reason of any such injuries, damages, liability, claims, suits or losses and
all damages growing out of the same.
      (2)   Insurance.
         a.   When required by the city, an applicant must provide to the
outdoor events manager, a certificate of commercial general liability insurance
listing the City of Fort Worth as an additional named insured in the amounts
prescribed by the risk manager or designee.
         b.   An applicant for a permit to hold an event where alcohol is to be
sold must provide to the outdoor events manager a certificate of insurance in
the amount of $1,000,000 as liquor liability insurance, in addition to the
general liability insurance requirements.
         c.   Federal, state and local government agencies may submit a
statement of self-insurance which shall be acceptable in place of insurance
requirements of this section.
   (c)   Execution of a user agreement shall be waived for First Amendment
events that do not involve the use of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 7: APPROVAL, ISSUANCE, MODIFICATION, DENIAL OR REVOCATION
OF A SPECIAL EVENT OR PARADE PERMIT
§ 20-433 APPROVAL.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the outdoor events
manager shall be charged with the responsibility and authority to determine
whether a particular applicant shall be granted a permit in the time, manner
and place proposed.
   (b)   After reviewing the comments and/or decisions from the events calendar
committee, the pre-event committee, all of the city officials, employees,
departments and/or bureaus from whom this article requires such feedback, the
outdoor events manager shall approve the permit, deny the permit or approve the
event application with modifications or upon conditions, as set forth in this
article. If the application is approved, the outdoor events manager, in
consultation with the heads of affected departments, or their designees, shall
impose restrictions or conditions as to time, manner and place, if the outdoor
events manager deems such restrictions are necessary. These modifications shall
be made when the outdoor events manager and the affected departments, based
upon review of the application, find compelling reasons related only to public
safety, health or the environment, or to scheduling conflicts with other
permitted uses at the time or place requested. The modifications shall not be
based on any of the factors set forth in §
20-405(b).
   (c)   After consideration of the application and other information as may be
otherwise required, an event application will be approved and a permit issued
if, upon review, the outdoor events manager finds that:
      (1)   The applicant, where applicable, has participated in the events
calendar committee meeting and the pre-event meeting as required by this
article;
      (2)   The applicant has complied with all the requests of the outdoor
events manager and the pre-event committee;
      (3)   The event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic near the event location or route;
      (4)   The event will not require the diversion of a number of city fire
protection or emergency medical services so as to interfere with the provision
of these services to other areas of the city;
      (5)   The event will not require the diversion of a number of police
officers to properly police the event location or line of movement and the
adjacent areas so as to interfere with the normal protection of the city;
      (6)   There will be adequate sanitation and other required health
facilities made available in or adjacent to the event;
      (7)   The applicant has submitted an emergency service and fire safety
and traffic control plan;
      (8)   The applicant has acknowledged on the event application that
structures on sidewalks are prohibited;
      (9)   A plan detailing how the applicant will prevent consumption of
alcohol by minors and promote responsibility in consumption and sales. The plan
shall include signage at the point of sale; approved alcohol retail awareness
training or seller server certification provided to persons involved in the
sales/distribution of alcoholic beverages; and designated driver program; and
      (10)   The applicant has complied with any other special conditions
related to health and safety imposed by the city or other authorized official,
for issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-434 ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager shall issue either a permit or a denial of
a special event or parade application within 45 calendar days of a completed
application subject to all requirements being met. The outdoor events manager
may extend the period of review for an additional 15 calendar days upon a
written notice of extension.
   (b)   Advertising a special event or parade prior to the permit being issued
shall not entitle the applicant to hold the event without a valid event permit.
The outdoor events manager shall not issue a special event permit or parade
permit based on prior advertising unless a valid permit may be issued under
this article.
   (c)   The applicant must have the permit, and all other required permits and
approvals, if any, present at the event during the entire duration of the
event, including but not limited to set-up, teardown and clean up. Failure to
abide by this provision may result in the revocation of the event permit.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 9, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-435 MODIFICATION OR DENIAL OF AN EVENTS PERMIT.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager may modify, deny or revoke a special event
or parade permit when, due to the scope of the event, and the number of police
personnel required to provide protection and traffic control for the event, and
due to the need for police personnel elsewhere in the city, the event would
require the diversion of such a number of police personnel that it will be more
likely than not that normal police protection elsewhere in the city cannot be
provided continuously and safely for the duration of the event. If the
application for a permit is denied by the outdoor events manager, the denial
shall state the reasons for the denial of the application. All notices required
under this section shall be in writing and sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, through the United States postal service.
   (b)   The outdoor events manager may deny a special event or parade permit
for failure of the applicant to comply with the requirements set forth in this
article. In no event shall a permit be denied be based on any of the factors
set forth in §
20-405(b).
   (c)   The outdoor events manager may deny a special event or parade permit
when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the
outdoor events manager, in consultation with the police chief and/or fire
chief, determines that the health and safety of the public or property requires
revocation or denial, provided that the outdoor events manager shall not deny a
special event or parade permit based on any of the factors set forth in §
20-405(b).
   (d)   The outdoor events manager shall deny a permit if:
      (1)   An applicant has an outstanding debt with the city, or if the event
is done on behalf of or in the name of a person, organization, corporation or
other group that has an outstanding debt with the city, until such time as
payment is received in full;
      (2)   An applicant has failed or is unwilling to comply with all the
requirements of the pre-event committee;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to complete payment of any sums required
for a previously permitted event, until such time as payment is received. In
the alternative, the outdoor events manager may condition the granting of a new
permit on the payment of amounts in arrears in connection with the previous
event. The outdoor events manager may not require the payment of arrears for
previous events unless the outdoor events manager or his or her designee had
mailed or delivered to the applicant a demand for such payment within 60 days
after the ending date of such previous event;
      (4)   The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be
sued;
      (5)   An applicant who caused significant damage to city streets,
sidewalks, parks and/or other city real or personal property and, at the time
of submitting an application for a new event, failed to adequately repair the
damage or failed to pay a bill for restoration services in full, provided that
the outdoor events manager or his or her designee, mailed or delivered to the
applicant a demand for such repair or restoration fees within 60 days after the
ending date of such previous event;
      (6)   The applicant has, in this city, violated a material condition and/
or restriction of a permit, or if the applicant’s conduct regarding the event
was in violation of law or local ordinance;
      (7)   It appears by competent evidence that the applicant has made a
material misrepresentation or given incorrect material information on the
application. Prior to such denial or revocation, the outdoor events manager
shall notify the applicant of the evidence and provide the applicant with three
business days in which to rebut said evidence in writing;
      (8)   The applicant fails to submit a complete application, including an
acceptable emergency services and fire safety plan and traffic control plan;
      (9)   The applicant fails to attend and participate in the scheduled
events calendar committee meeting, if required, and the pre-event meeting;
      (10)   The applicant does not have all the necessary permits required to
carry out the event, or does not fulfill any or all of the other event
requirements, as established in this article;
      (11)   The applicant is unable or unwilling to provide any required
insurance;
      (12)   The applicant has failed to pay all application and permitting
fees;
      (13)   The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional costs
related to health and safety as may be required;
      (14)   The applicant has failed to execute a user fee agreement;
      (15)   A prior application for a permit for the same time and place has
been received and the permit has been or will be granted and the applicant did
not accept alternative dates, times and location offered by the events calendar
committee;
      (16)   The use of activity intended by the application would conflict
with previously planned programs conducted by the city at the same time and
place as determined by the events calendar committee;
      (17)   The applicant fails to provide any additional information that has
been requested by the outdoor events manager; or
      (18)   At any time, the event is being held for an unlawful purpose, and/
or violates a federal, state or local law or ordinance.
   (e)   When the outdoor events manager denies a permit, he or she shall set
forth in writing the reasons for such denial in as much detail as possible.
When the outdoor events manager modifies a permit application, he or she shall,
if requested by the applicant, state in writing on the permit the reasons for
the modification in reasonable detail. A modification, denial or revocation
based upon inadequate police resources shall state with specificity the reasons
for the outdoor events manager’s opinion, giving as much detail as is possible.
In denying the permit, or in granting the permit with modifications, the
outdoor events manager shall abide by the provisions of this article. Where a
permit for an event is denied or modified, the outdoor events manager or his or
her designee shall forward a copy of the written determination to the city
manager and the council member(s) of the affected district.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-436 REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   (a)   The outdoor events manager may revoke a special event or parade permit
if:
      (1)   The applicant violates the rules set forth in this article after
the applicant has received the permit;
      (2)   The event poses an immediate threat to health or safety; or
      (3)   The applicant has failed to obtain any other permit required by
this article, state law or the city code.
   (b)   The outdoor events manager, in consultation with the chief of police
or fire chief may deny or revoke a special event or parade permit when by
reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, it is determined
that the safety of the public or property requires revocation or denial. The
outdoor events manager shall not revoke a special event or parade permit based
on any of the factors set forth in §
20-405(b).
   (c)   If the United States Department of Homeland Security issues a level
orange or a level red alert, the city, in its sole discretion, may close or
postpone the opening of the event in the interest of public safety.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 8: APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION
OF A SPECIAL EVENT OR PARADE PERMIT
§ 20-437 APPEAL.
   (a)   applicant may appeal a denial of placement of an event on the events
calendar or a denial or revocation of a special event or parade permit, by
submitting in writing to the appeals hearing committee no later than ten days
after notice of denial or revocation, a letter requesting an appeal of the
decision. The appeal shall specifically state the grounds upon which it is
asserted and why the determination should be modified or reversed.
   (b)   The applicant shall include in the appeal copies of the application
for permit, the written notice of determination of the events calendar
committee or the outdoor events manager and any other information material to
the determination.
   (c)   The appeals hearing committee shall act as the appeals hearing officer
under this section. The appeals hearing committee shall act upon the appeal
within 15 calendar days from the date on which the appeal was received. Notice
of the hearing date shall be provided to the applicant in writing.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the outdoor events manager to defend the
decision to revoke or deny the decision of the events calendar committee or the
special event or parade permit. The appeals hearing committee shall then give
the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make an argument in
his or her behalf. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply to an appeal
heard under this section, and the hearing officer shall make a ruling on the
basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (e)   The appeals hearing committee may affirm, modify or reverse all or
part of the decision of the events calendar committee or the outdoor events
manager being appealed. The decision of the appeals hearing committee is final.
   (f)   All notices required under this section shall be in writing and sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, through the United States postal
service.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 9: NEIGHBORHOOD EVENTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD PARADES
§ 20-438 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to hold, sponsor or cause to be
held a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade without first having obtained
a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit from the outdoor events
manager.
      (2)   All neighborhood events or neighborhood parades must be sponsored
by a neighborhood association or by persons living on the block.
      (3)   A neighborhood parade must be located on a residential street as
defined by the city’s current master thoroughfare plan or as approved as a
residential street by the city traffic engineer and take no longer than two
hours to complete.
      (4)   Traffic movement will be the primary determining factor in the
approval or denial of a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade. Street
closures will be reviewed and may be approved by the city’s traffic engineer or
designee. No interference with public safety vehicles will be permitted.
      (5)   Any neighborhood event or neighborhood parade with an expected
attendance of 500 or more at any one time shall be treated as a special event
or parade and must meet the requirements of a special event or parade permit.
   (b)   Petition, application and notice requirements.
      (1)   Neighborhood event.
         a.   At least 50% plus one of the residents on the street affected by
the neighborhood event must sign a petition on the city’s approved application
form granting permission for the neighborhood event to be held. All petitions
must be signed no earlier than 60 days before the proposed neighborhood event
and submitted to the outdoor events manager no later than 15 days prior to the
proposed neighborhood event.
         b.   A person seeking to hold a neighborhood event shall apply for a
neighborhood event permit by filing with the outdoor events manager a written
application upon a form provided by the city. The application shall comply with
the regulations for a neighborhood event permit outlined in this division.
         c.   An application must be filed no later than 15 days before the
date on which the proposed neighborhood event shall occur.
         d.   Notice of the neighborhood event must be provided to all
residents no later than 15 days before the event by the United States mail,
electronic mail, hand delivery, the neighborhood newsletter, signs posted on
private property or through the normal and customary method of communicating
with that particular neighborhood.
      (2)   Established neighborhood event.
         a.   Only established neighborhood events shall be considered for an
annual permit.
         b.   A neighborhood association shall be allowed to submit an
application to the outdoor events manager requesting an annual permit for all
planned established neighborhood events for the next calendar year.
         c.   A person seeking an annual permit shall apply by filing with the
outdoor events manager a written application upon a form provided by the city.
The application shall comply with the regulations for a neighborhood event
permit outlined in this subsection (b)(2).
         d.   At least 50% plus one of the residents on the street(s) affected
by the established neighborhood events must sign a petition on the city’s
approved application form granting permission for the established neighborhood
events to be held. Petitions must be signed no earlier than 60 days before the
application for the annual permit is submitted to the outdoor events manager.
         e.   Notice of the established neighborhood events approved in the
annual permit must be provided to all residents no later than 15 days before
the event by the United States mail, electronic mail, hand delivery, the
neighborhood newsletter, signs posted on private property or through the normal
and customary method of communicating with that particular neighborhood.
      (3)   Neighborhood parades.
         a.   A person seeking to hold a neighborhood parade shall apply for a
neighborhood parade permit by filing with the outdoor events manager a written
application upon a form provided by the city. The application shall comply with
the regulations for a neighborhood parade permit outlined in this division.
         b.   An application must be filed no later than 15 days before the
date on which the proposed neighborhood parade shall occur.
         c.   Notice of the event must be provided to all residents on the
street affected by the event no later than 15 days before the event. Notice may
be provided by United States mail, electronic mail, hand delivery, the
neighborhood newsletter, signs posted on private property or through the normal
and customary method of communicating with that particular neighborhood.
      (4)   Established neighborhood parade.
         a.   Only established neighborhood parades shall be considered for an
annual permit.
         b.   A neighborhood association shall be allowed to submit an
application to the outdoor events manager requesting an annual permit for all
planned established neighborhood parades for the next calendar year.
         c.   A person seeking an annual permit shall apply by filing with the
outdoor events manager a written application upon a form provided by the city.
The application shall comply with the regulations for a neighborhood parade
permit outlined in this division.
         d.   Notice of the established neighborhood events approved in the
annual permit must be provided to all residents no later than 15 days before
the event by the United States mail, electronic mail, hand delivery, the
neighborhood newsletter, signs posted on private property or through the normal
and customary method of communicating with that particular neighborhood.
   (c)   Mandatory requirements for the issuance of a neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit. Compliance with the following shall be required
before the outdoor events manager may issue a neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit.
      (1)   Neighborhood event applications. Applications must include the
name, address and 24 hour telephone number of at least one person belonging to
the neighborhood association or living on the block where the neighborhood
event is to be conducted who will serve as a liaison with the outdoor events
manager and the city’s police department to address any problems during the
neighborhood event. The telephone number must be answered at all times.
      (2)   Neighborhood parade application. Applications must include the
following information:
         a.   The name, address and 24 hour telephone number of the applicant
seeking to conduct the neighborhood parade who will serve as a liaison with the
outdoor events manager and police department to address any problems during the
neighborhood parade;
         b.   If the neighborhood parade is to be held for or by an
organization, the name, address, telephone number of the headquarters of such
organization and the names and numbers of authorized and responsible heads of
the organization;
         c.   Location, date and time, including start and termination times
requested for the neighborhood parade;
         d.   A written description of the proposed route to be traveled, the
starting point and the termination point of the neighborhood parade, including
a map illustrating the exact route of the neighborhood parade;
         e.   The estimated number of any riders, animals, animal drawn
vehicles, floats, motor vehicles, motorized displays and marching units or
organizations, such as bands, color guards and drill teams that will constitute
the neighborhood parade;
         f.   A statement as to whether the neighborhood parade will occupy all
or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be used;
         g.   A list of the streets that will be partially or completely closed
during the neighborhood parade;
         h.   The location of any assembly areas by street names for the
proposed neighborhood parade;
         i.   Details of how the applicant will clean up any public property
after the neighborhood parade; and
         j.   Any additional information related to health and safety which the
outdoor events manager finds reasonably necessary to make a determination as to
whether a neighborhood parade permit should be issued.
      (3)   User agreement. Applicants must sign a user agreement accepting
responsibility for any costs for establishing detours, handling traffic
direction, clean up or repair of public right-of-way used or damaged by the
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade and holding the city, its officers
and employees, whether elected or appointed, harmless from any and all
liability arising from the street closure.
      (4)   Review. The outdoor events manager, in consultation with the chief
of police and fire chief, or designees, shall review each application and
determine the requirements for the safety and welfare of the participants and
general public. After submission of the application, the outdoor events manager
may request supplemental information and may impose conditions on the
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit to ensure that the event
complies with these rules and regulations or to address health and safety
conditions. The applicant shall be responsible for any additional costs
incurred by the city to provide additional emergency services required for the
safety and welfare of the participants and the general public at the
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade. The applicant shall be responsible
for any supplemental services fees.
      (5)   Insurance. A certificate of insurance approved by the city shall be
required for neighborhood parades that include motor vehicles and neighborhood
events that place structures, such as bounce houses, stages or tents in the
public right-of-way.
      (6)   Alcohol permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to apply
for and receive any necessary alcohol permits from the Texas alcohol beverage
commission and food permits from the Fort Worth code compliance department,
consumer health division.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010; Ord. 20292-07-2012,
§ 10, passed 7-17-2012)
§ 20-439 NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD PARADE REGULATIONS.
   All neighborhood events and neighborhood parades must comply with the
following regulations.
   (a)   Neighborhood events and neighborhood parades may be held any day of
the week, but streets must be cleared and open to traffic no later than 11:00
p.m.
   (b)   The applicant must have the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade
permit, and all other required permits and approvals, if any, present at the
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade during the entire duration of the
event, including, but not limited to, set-up and clean up. Failure to abide by
this provision may result in the revocation of the neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit.
   (c)   Barricades. The portion of the public right-of-way to be used by the
neighborhood event shall be closed to vehicular traffic by an appropriate
number of Type 1 barricades. All barricades must be supplied by the applicant
and the applicant is responsible for putting barricades in place and removing
them. Barricades must be staffed at all times with at least one person 18 years
of age or older who is wearing a reflective safety vest. Once barricades are in
place, no vehicle traffic is allowed beyond the barricades except for emergency
vehicles. All barricades shall be removed within one-half hour after the ending
time of the event for which the street is closed. Barricades shall also be
immediately removed upon request of the outdoor events manager, any police
officer or employee of the city charged with enforcing this article. Vehicles
shall not be parked at the barricade locations so that access to the street is
blocked. The outdoor events manager, in consultation with the chief of police
and the director of transportation and public works, may approve an alternative
plan for the use of barricades.
   (d)   Unobstructed roadway. An unobstructed roadway width of 12 feet as
required by the most current fire code must be maintained along the closed
sections of the streets for neighborhood events. No structures, including
tents, stages and bounce houses are allowed in the unobstructed roadway width
detailed above or any sidewalk or parkway. Items such as chairs and tables are
allowed.
   (e)   No neighborhood event permit shall be granted when the street closure
would result in denying prompt access to an area or location for emergency
vehicles.
   (f)   No fire hydrants may be obstructed by neighborhood event activities. A
three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the fire hydrant.
   (g)   Applicants are responsible for collecting and disposing of all trash
and cleaning up at the conclusion of the neighborhood event. If the clean-up is
not to the satisfaction of the city, the clean-up will be performed by the city
and the applicant will be billed for the cost of the clean-up.
   (h)   No admission fees may be charged for any neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade, but requests for donations shall be permitted.
   (i)   The applicant shall be responsible for any significant damage to city
streets, sidewalks and/or other city real or personal property provided that
the outdoor events manager or his or her designee, mailed or delivered to the
applicant a demand for such repair within 60 days after the ending date of the
neighborhood event.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-440 APPROVAL, ISSUANCE, MODIFICATION, DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD EVENT OR NEIGHBORHOOD PARADE PERMIT.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the outdoor events
manager shall be charged with the responsibility and authority to determine
whether a particular applicant shall be granted a neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit in the time, manner and place proposed.
   (b)   After consideration of the application and other information as may be
otherwise required, a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade event
application will be approved and a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade
permit issued if, upon review, the outdoor events manager finds that the
application meets the requirements of this division.
   (c)   The advertisement of a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade prior
to the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit being issued shall not
entitle the applicant to hold the event without a valid neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit.
   (d)   The outdoor events manager shall issue either a neighborhood event or
neighborhood parade permit or denial of the neighborhood event or neighborhood
parade application within five calendar days of a completed application.
   (e)   Denial of a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit. The
outdoor events manager shall deny a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade
application if:
      (1)   An applicant has failed or is unwilling to comply with all the
requirements of this division;
      (2)   An applicant who caused significant damage to city streets,
sidewalks, parks and/or other city real or personal property and, at the time
of submitting an application for a new neighborhood event or neighborhood
parade, failed to adequately repair the damage or failed to pay a bill for
restoration services in full, provided that the outdoor events manager or his
or her designee, mailed or delivered to the applicant a demand for such repair
or restoration fees within 60 days after the ending date of such previous
neighborhood event or neighborhood parade;
      (3)   The applicant has violated a material condition and/or restriction
of a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit, or if the applicant’s
conduct regarding the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade was in
violation of law or local ordinance;
      (4)   It appears by competent evidence that the applicant has made a
material misrepresentation or given incorrect material information on the
application. Prior to such denial or revocation, the outdoor events manager
shall notify the applicant of the evidence and provide the applicant within
three business days in which to rebut said evidence in writing;
      (5)   The applicant is unable or unwilling to provide any required
insurance;
      (6)   The applicant has failed to execute a user agreement;
      (7)   The applicant fails to provide any additional information that has
been requested by the outdoor events manager; or
      (8)   At any time, the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade is being
held for an unlawful purpose, and/or violates a federal, state or local law or
ordinance.
   (f)   Revocation of a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit. The
outdoor events manager may revoke a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade
permit:
      (1)   Due to reasons of disaster, public calamity, riot or other
emergency;
      (2)   The applicant violates the rules set forth in this article after he
or she has received the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit;
      (3)   The neighborhood event or neighborhood parade poses an immediate
threat to health or safety; or
      (4)   The applicant has failed to obtain any other permits required by
this article, state law or the city code.
   (g)   If the United States Department of Homeland Security issues a level
orange or a level red alert, the city, in its sole discretion, may close or
postpone the opening of the neighborhood event or neighborhood parade in the
interest of public safety.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
§ 20-441 APPEAL.
   The applicant for a neighborhood event or neighborhood parade permit may
appeal the decision of the outdoor events manager to deny or revoke a permit no
later than five days after written or electronic notice of denial or revocation
by submitting in writing to the city manager or his or her designee notice of
the applicant’s decision to appeal. The appeal shall specifically state the
grounds upon which it is asserted and why the determination should be modified
or reversed. The city manager or his or her designee may affirm, modify or
reverse all or part of the decision of the outdoor events manager being
appealed. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee is final.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 10: OFFENSES
§ 20-442 OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she commences or conducts an
event:
      (1)   Without a permit;
      (2)   Knowingly makes a false statement in connection with an
application; or
      (3)   In violation of any provision of a permit, this article, additional
rules or regulations as promulgated by the city manager or any other city
ordinance or applicable law.
   (b)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this article.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
DIVISION 11: PENALTIES
§ 20-443 PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this article or a requirement of
a permit is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed or continued.
   (b)   Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   Two thousand dollars for a violation of a provision of this article
or a requirement of a permit governing fire safety, zoning or public health and
sanitation, including dumping or refuse; or
      (2)   Five hundred dollars for all other violations of this article or
requirements of a permit.
(Ord. 19255-08-2010, § 1, passed 8-3-2010, eff. 10-1-2010)
ARTICLE XIII: CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES
§ 20-450 SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   This article may be known and cited as "Credit Access Businesses
Regulation."
   (b)   The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens
of the city by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce
abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes
a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on
extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes
recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-451 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate of registration issued by
the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access
business.
   CONSUMER means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases
the services of a credit access business.
   CONSUMER'S LANGUAGE OF PREFERENCE is the language the consumer understands
best.
   CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS has the meaning given that term in Tex. Finance Code,
§ 393.601.
   DEFERRED PRESENTMENT TRANSACTION has the meaning given that term in Tex.
Finance Code, § 393.601.
   DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the city
council, city manager, or city councilor city manager's designee, to enforce
and administer this chapter.
   EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT has the meaning given that term in Tex. Finance
Code, § 393.001.
   MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOAN has the meaning given that term in Tex. Finance
Code, § 393.601.
   PERSON means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, financial institution, or any other legal entity.
   REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit
access business under this chapter and includes all owners and operators of the
credit access business identified in the registration application filed under
this chapter.
   STATE LICENSE means a license to operate a credit access business issued by
the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Tex. Finance Code, Chapter 393,
Subchapter G.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019; Ord. 24403-09-
2020, § 1, passed 9-15-2020, eff. 10-15-2020)
§ 20-452 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to
perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits an offense. A
person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an
extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is
committed, permitted, or continued.
   (b)   An offense under this chapter is punishable as provided in §
1-6 of this Code.
   (c)   A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an
offense under this article and need not be proved.
   (d)   The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any
other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-453 DEFENSES.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the
alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a
credit access business under Tex. Finance Code, Chapter 393, Subchapter G.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-454 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts
businesses as a credit access business without a valid certificate of
registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically
separate credit access business.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-455 REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business,
a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the
director. The application must contain the following:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and
telephone number of the applicant.
      (2)   The business or trade name, street address, mailing address,
facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business.
      (3)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone
numbers of all owners of the credit access business, and the nature and extent
of each person's interest in the credit access business.
      (4)   A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access
business pursuant to Tex. Finance Code, Chapter 393, Subchapter G.
      (5)   A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that
the credit access business is in compliance with the Fort Worth Building Code.
      (6)   A non-refundable application fee for the amount established.
   (b)   An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within 45 days
after any material change in the information contained in the application for a
certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of
address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant
or registrant.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-456 ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; PRESENTMENT UPON
REQUEST.
   (a)   The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration upon receiving a completed application under §
20-455.
   (b)   A certificate of registration issued under this section must be
conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The
certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or
any peace officer for examination.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-457 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of:
      (1)   One year after the date of issuance; or
      (2)   The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without
renewal, or other termination of the registrant's state license.
   (b)   A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in
accordance with §
20-455. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the registration.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-458 NON-TRANSFERABILITY.
   A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not
transferable.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-459 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (a)   A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of
all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit access
business, which must include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the consumer;
      (2)   The principal amount of cash actually advanced;
      (3)   The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the
number of installments and renewals;
      (4)   The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain
an extension of consumer credit; and
      (5)   The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under § 20-
460 of this article.
   (b)   A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written
agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an
extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing
or renewal granted to the consumer).
   (c)   A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly
reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Tex. Finance
Code, § 393.627.
   (d)   The records required to be maintained by a credit access business
under this section must be retained for at least three years and made available
for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and customary business
hours of the credit access business.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-460 RESTRICTION ON EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT.
   (a)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit
access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in
the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed 20% of the
consumer's gross monthly income.
   (b)   The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit
access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in
the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or
      (2)   Seventy percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle.
   (c)   A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation
establishing income to determine a consumer's income.
   (d)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains
for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for
repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments.
Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least 25% of the
principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer
credit that provides for repayment in installments many not be refinanced or
renewed.
   (e)   An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains
for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a
single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three
times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least
25% of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is
made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer
credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-461 REQUIREMENT OF CONSUMER UNDERSTANDING OF AGREEMENT.
   (a)   Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer
evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any
refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in the
consumer's language of preference. Every credit access business location must
maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in
the English and Spanish languages.
   (b)   For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit
access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit
(including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the
consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's
language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature.
   (c)   For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice
required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the consumer's
language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
§ 20-462 REFERRAL TO CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING.
   A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the
director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of
consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial
education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The
form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit and
must include the information required by §
20-459(a)(1)-(5) of this ordinance specific to the loan agreement with the
consumer. If the director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of
preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference.
(Ord. 23991-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 12-25-2019)
ARTICLE XIV: BOARDING HOMES
DIVISION 1: GENERAL
§ 20-470 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to implement the provisions of Tex.
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 260, entitled "Boarding Home Facilities", as
amended, which allows the city to establish regulations for the protection of
the health and safety of residents of boarding home facilities. It is the
intent and purpose of the city to administer and enforce this article to ensure
the health, safety and welfare of boarding home facility residents by
establishing standards for construction, maintenance, reporting, record-
keeping, education, and training for owners, operators and employees of
boarding home facilities. These standards are implemented pursuant to the
city's home-rule authority under Texas Constitution, Article XI, § 5 and the
authority to license or permit lawful businesses subject to the city's police
power granted by Tex. Local Government Code, §§ 54.004 and 215.075.
   (b)   The city intends that this article fully comply with the Federal Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 ("FHAA"), the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 ("ADA"), and the Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008, and
all other applicable state and federal legislation. It is the express intent of
the city that this article be construed in a manner consistent with the FHAA,
the ADA, and all other applicable state and federal legislation at all times.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-471 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, in this article:
   ABUSE.
      (1)   The negligent or willful infliction of injury, unreasonable
confinement, intimidation, or cruel punishment with resulting physical or
emotional harm or pain to a resident by the person's caretaker, family member,
or other individual who has an on-going relationship with the person; or
      (2)   Sexual abuse of a resident, including any involuntary or non-
consensual sexual conduct that would constitute an offense under Tex. Penal
Code, § 21.08 (indecent exposure), as amended, or Tex. Penal Code, Chapter 22
(assaultive offenses), as amended, committed by the person's caretaker, family
member or other individual who has an on-going relationship with the person.
   ASSISTANCE WITH SELF- ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION.
      (1)   Assisting a resident by reminding the resident to take medication;
      (2)   Opening and removing medications from a container;
      (3)   Placing medication in a resident's hand or in or on a clean surface
such as a medication reminder box; and
      (4)   Reminding a resident when a prescription medication needs to be
refilled.
   BOARDING HOME FACILITY. An establishment that:
      (1)   Furnishes, in one or more buildings, lodging to three or more
elderly and/or disabled persons who are unrelated to the owner of the
establishment by blood or marriage; and
      (2)   Provides community meals, light housework, meal preparation,
transportation, grocery shopping, money management, laundry services, or
assistance with self-administration of medication to persons/residents who are
capable of feeding, dressing, moving, self-evacuating, bathing and attending to
other personal needs or maintenance without assistance; and
      (3)   Does not provide personal care services to persons/residents.
   CONVICTION. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. CONVICTION includes disposition of
charges against a person by community supervision, including probation and
deferred adjudication.
   DEPARTMENT. The department designated by the city manager to enforce and
administer this article.
   DIRECT THREAT. A significant risk to the health or safety of others that
cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies, practices, or procedures,
or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the department designated by the city manager to
enforce and administer this article and includes representatives, agents, or
department employees designated by the director.
   DISABILITY. A disability as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 12102, as amended.
   ELDERLY. Sixty-five (65) years of age or older.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs caretaking duties or regularly works in a
boarding home facility.
   EXPLOITATION. The illegal or improper act or process of an owner, operator,
employee, caretaker, family member, or other individual who has an ongoing
relationship with the resident using the resources of a resident for monetary
or personal benefit, profit, or gain without the informed consent of the
resident.
   INJURY, INCIDENT, OR UNUSUAL ACCIDENT. An event that resulted in a change in
resident's physical or mental status that requires intervention by a private or
public entity responsible for medical or mental health services or an event
that requires the facility to take safety and protection measures for the
resident or others. This term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   An allegation of abuse, neglect, or exploitation.
      (2)   Death.
      (3)   A resident's unexplained absence from the boarding home facility.
      (4)   Fire.
      (5)   Criminal acts.
      (6)   Fights between residents.
   NEGLECT. The failure of a resident or permit holder to provide goods or
services, including medical services that are necessary to avoid physical or
emotional harm or pain.
   OPERATOR. The person in control of a boarding home facility.
   OWNER. An individual who has an ownership interest in a corporation or other
legal entity operating a boarding home facility or the owner of the real
property where a boarding home facility is located.
   PERMIT HOLDER.
      (1)   A person in whose name a boarding home facility permit has been
issued;
      (2)   Each individual listed as an owner or operator of the boarding home
facility on the application for a boarding home facility permit;
      (3)   Each individual who has an ownership interest in the corporation or
other legal entity owning or operating the boarding home facility, regardless
of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the boarding home
facility permit application; and
      (4)   Each officer of the corporation or other legal entity owning or
operating a boarding home facility, regardless of whether the individual's name
or signature appears on the boarding home facility permit application.
   PERSONAL CARE SERVICES.
      (1)   Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other
personal needs or maintenance;
      (2)   The administration of medication by a person licensed to administer
medication or the assistance with or supervision of medication; or
      (3)   General supervision or oversight of the physical and mental well-
being of a person who needs assistance to maintain a private and independent
residence in an assisted living facility or who needs assistance to manage the
person's personal life, regardless of whether a guardian has been appointed for
the person.
   RESIDENT. A person who is residing in a boarding home facility.
   SLEEPING ROOM. An area used by a resident for sleeping containing a bed and
does not include a bathroom, kitchen, living area or other open space area.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-472 AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.
   The director shall implement and enforce this article and may by written
order establish such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with
this article or other city ordinances, rules, or regulations, or any county,
state, or federal laws or regulations, as the director determines are necessary
to discharge any duty under or to affect the policy of this article.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
DIVISION 2: ADMINISTRATIVE
§ 20-473 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if they own or operate a boarding home
facility in the city without a valid permit issued under this article.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person operates
a facility listed in §
20-474 of this article.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-474 EXEMPTIONS.
   This article does not apply to the following:
   (a)   Home and community support services licensed under Tex. Health and
Safety Code, Chapter 142, as amended.
   (b)   Convalescent and nursing homes and related institutions licensed under
Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 242, as amended.
   (c)   Continuing care facilities licensed under Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 246, as amended.
   (d)   Assisted living facilities licensed under Tex. Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 247, as amended.
   (e)   Intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded licensed under
Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 252, as amended.
   (f)   A person that provides from home health, hospice, or personal
assistance services only to persons enrolled in a program funded wholly or
partly by a state agency with jurisdiction over mental health and mental
disability and monitored by that state agency or its designated local authority
in accordance with standards set by that agency as defined in Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 142.003(a)(19), as amended.
   (g)   An establishment conducted by or for the adherents of a well-
recognized church or religious denomination for the purpose of providing
facilities for the care and treatment of the sick who depend exclusively on
prayer or spiritual means for healing, without the use of any drug or material
remedy, if the establishment complies with safety, sanitary, and quarantine
laws and rules as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 242.003(3), as
amended.
   (h)   A facility that provides personal care services only to persons
enrolled in a program that is funded in whole or in part by a state department
or agency and that is monitored by a state department or agency or its
designated local mental retardation authority in accordance with standards set
by the state department or agency, as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, §
247.004(4), as amended.
   (i)   A hotel as defined by Tex. Tax Code, § 156.001, as amended.
   (j)   A retirement community as defined by Tex. Tax Code, § 11.18, as
amended.
   (k)   A monastery or convent.
   (l)   A childcare facility as defined by Tex. Human Resources Code, §
42.002, as amended.
   (m)   A family violence shelter center as defined by Tex. Human Resources
Code, § 51.002, as amended.
   (n)   A fraternity or sorority house, or other dormitory, associated with an
institution of higher education.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-475 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   To obtain a permit to operate a boarding home facility, a person must
submit an application to the director on a form provided for that purpose. The
applicant must be the owner or operator of the boarding home facility. If the
owner or operator is not an individual, an authorized officer or agent of the
owner or operator must file the form. The application must contain the
following information and be accompanied by the fee required under his article
before it is considered to be complete:
      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
telephone number, a legible copy of the driver's license or other official
state or federal identification card, and date of birth of the applicant. The
street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility unless the
applicant actually resides full-time at the boarding home facility.
      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address,
telephone number, a legible copy of the driver's license or other official
state or federal identification card, and position of the authorized officer or
agent filing the form on behalf of the applicant, if the applicant is not an
individual. The street address may not be the address of the boarding home
facility unless the authorized officer or agent actually resides full-time at
the boarding home facility.
      (3)   The form of business of the applicant; the name, street address,
mailing address, email address, telephone number, a legible copy of the
driver's license or other official state or federal identification card, and
date of birth of a high managerial agent of the business; and, if the business
is a legal entity, such as a corporation or association, a copy of the
documents establishing the business.
      (4)   If the operator of the boarding home is renting or leasing the home
or facility, then the operator must present a letter from the owner of the real
property authorizing the use of the rental property to operate a boarding home
and acknowledging the requirements for the property to be used as a boarding
home set out within this article.
      (5)   The street address and telephone number of the boarding home
facility.
      (6)   The name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, and
telephone number of a person or persons to contact in an emergency as required
by this article.
      (7)   Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes, fees, fines,
and penalties owed to the city in connection with the real property used to
operate the boarding home facility.
      (8)   The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, e-mail addresses,
telephone numbers, legible copies of the drivers' licenses or other official
state or federal identification cards, and dates of birth of any owners,
operators, or employees of the boarding home facility other than the applicant.
The street address may not be the address of the boarding home facility, unless
the owner, operator, or employee actually resides full-time at the boarding
home facility.
      (9)   Completed state or federal request and release forms authorizing
the city to obtain a criminal history report on each owner, operator and
employee of the boarding home facility.
      (10)   The maximum number of residents that will reside at the boarding
home facility.
      (11)   The services to be offered or provided to the residents of the
boarding home facility.
      (12)   A zoning verification letter stating that the proposed use of the
property complies with the city's Zoning Ordinance.
      (13)   If the boarding home facility has one or more residents with a
disability, a list of disabilities of the residents.
      (14)   A statement that, by filing the application, the applicant swears
or affirms under penalty of perjury that, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge, all information contained in the application is true and correct and
that the application is complete and includes all information required to be
disclosed under this section.
      (15)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include or
that the director deems necessary to aid in the determination of whether the
requested permit should be granted.
   (b)   The application will automatically expire if either the fee or the
information requested in subsection (a) is not provided to the director within
30 days of the date the applicant was notified of the request for additional
information.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-476 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   The permit holder shall notify the director within 10 days after any
material change in the information contained in the application for a permit to
operate a boarding home facility, including any change in ownership or
operation of the property and any new disabilities served by the boarding home
facility.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-477 FEES.
   (a)   The fee for a permit to operate a boarding home facility is $1,500.00.
   (b)   No refund of a permit fee will be made.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-478 ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Upon payment of all required fees and the submission of a complete
application, the director may issue a permit to operate a boarding home
facility to the applicant if the director determines that:
      (1)   The applicant has complied with all requirements for issuance of
the permit;
      (2)   The applicant, owners, operators, and employees of the boarding
home facility meet the criminal history qualifications of this article;
      (3)   The applicant, owners, operators, or employees of the boarding home
facility do not own or operate another permitted boarding home facility in the
city for which the permit is currently suspended or has been revoked;
      (4)   The applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application for a permit;
      (5)   The condition and use of the boarding home facility complies with
zoning regulations, and all other standards in this article applicable to the
property; and
      (6)   The applicant, owners, and operators do not owe the city any ad
valorem taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
   (b)   If the director determines that the requirements of subsection (a)
have not been met, the director shall deny the permit.
   (c)   If the director determines that an applicant should be denied a
permit, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that the application
is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement
informing the applicant of the right of appeal.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-479 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT; PROHIBITION OF NEW RESIDENTS.
   (a)   The director may suspend a boarding home facility permit for a period
not to exceed 90 days if the director finds that the permit holder or an
employee of the boarding home facility has:
      (1)   Failed to comply with any provision of this article, any other
ordinance, or any state or federal law applicable to the operation of a
boarding home facility; or
      (2)   Intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an
inspection by the director authorized under this article.
   (b)   A boarding home facility for which the permit has been suspended may
not admit any new residents during the time the permit is suspended.
   (c)   In lieu of suspending a permit for a boarding home facility, the
director, at their sole discretion, may enter into a compliance agreement with
a permit holder if the director determines that the compliance agreement would
eliminate the noncompliance that would otherwise justify a suspension, result
in prompt future inspections, and elevate one or more conditions at the
boarding home facility to a standard above the requirements of this article.
   (d)   The director shall send a written statement of the reasons for the
suspension, the date the suspension is to begin, the duration of the
suspension, and the permit holder's right to appeal by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   (e)   A permit holder whose permit is suspended may not be granted a permit
to operate additional boarding home facilities during the period of suspension.
   (f)   A permit holder commits an offense if they operate or own a boarding
home facility that admits new residents during the time that the suspension of
the permit is in effect.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-480 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), the director shall revoke any
permit issued to operate a boarding home facility if the director determines
that:
      (1)   The permit holder fails to meet the criminal history qualifications
of this article or employs a person at the facility who fails to meet the
criminal history qualifications.
      (2)   The permit holder intentionally made a false statement as to a
material matter in the application or in a hearing concerning the permit;
      (3)   The permit holder failed to pay a fee required by this article at
the time it was due; or
      (4)   A cause for suspension under §
20-480 has occurred and the permit has already been suspended at least once
within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   In lieu of revoking a permit for a boarding home facility, the
director, at their sole discretion may enter into a compliance agreement with a
permit holder if the director determines that the compliance agreement would
eliminate the noncompliance that would otherwise justify a revocation, result
in prompt future inspections, and elevate one or more conditions at the
boarding home facility to a standard above the requirements of this article.
   (c)   Before revoking a license under subsection (a), the director shall
notify the permit holder in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that the permit is being considered for revocation. The notice must
include the reason for the proposed revocation, action the permit holder must
take to prevent the revocation, and a statement that the permit holder has ten
calendar days to comply with the notice.
   (d)   If, after ten calendar days from the date of the notice required in
subsection (c) was sent or delivered (whichever is later), the permit holder
has not complied with required actions listed in the notice, the director shall
revoke the permit and notify the permit holder in writing of the revocation.
The notice must include the reason for the revocation, and a statement
informing the permit holder of the right to appeal.
   (e)   If a permit has been revoked, the permit holder has ten calendar days
from the date the notice was sent or delivered (whichever is later), to
relocate the residents of the facility and cease operations. An appeal of the
revocation does not suspend or toll this deadline.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-481 APPEALS.
   If the director denies issuance or renewal of a permit or suspends or
revokes a permit issued under this article, the action is final unless the
permit holder files a written appeal within ten business days with the office
of the city manager.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-482 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   (a)   A permit to operate a boarding home facility expires one year after
the date of issuance.
   (b)   A permit holder shall apply for renewal at least 30 calendar days
before the expiration of the permit on a form provided by the director. The
permit holder shall update the information contained in the original permit
application required under §
20-475 of this article or any subsequent renewals under this section, if any of
the information has changed. The permit holder shall sign a statement affirming
that there is either no change in the information contained on the original
permit application and any subsequent renewal applications, or that any
information that has been updated is accurate and complete.
   (c)   The director shall follow the procedures set forth in this article
when determining whether to renew a permit.
   (d)   The fee for the renewal of a permit to operate a boarding home
facility is $1,000.00.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-483 NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   A permit to operate a boarding home facility is not transferable to another
owner, operator, or location.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-484 POSTING REQUIREMENTS.
   The permit holder shall prominently and conspicuously post for display in a
public area inside the boarding home facility that is readily available to
residents, the operator, employees, and visitors the following:
   (a)   The permit issued under this article to operate the boarding home
facility. The permit must be presented upon request to the director, director's
designee or to a peace officer for examination.
   (b)   A sign prescribed by the director specifying how complaint may be
registered with the city.
   (c)   A notice in a form prescribed by the director stating that inspection
and related reports are available at the facility for public inspection and
providing a telephone number that may be used to obtain information concerning
the facility.
   (d)   A copy of the most recent inspection report relating to the facility
by the city or a concise and accurate summary of that inspection report.
   (e)   A notice in a form prescribed by the director that lists the name,
location, and contact information for:
      (1)   The closest local public health services agency in the proximity of
the facility; and
      (2)   A local organization or entity that represents, advocates, or
serves elderly persons or persons with disabilities, including any related
toll-free contact information for reporting emergencies to the organization or
entity.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-485 INSPECTIONS; FEES.
   (a)   Required inspections.
      (1)   A boarding home facility must pass all required inspections.
      (2)   The permit holder shall keep a current file of reports and other
documentation on site that is needed to demonstrate compliance with applicable
ordinances, laws, and regulations, including, but not limited to, documentation
of those requirements set out in §§
20-491,
20-494,
20-496,
20-497 and
20-498 of this article. Inspection records must be signed and dated by the
appropriate authority and there must be no pending corrective actions.
      (3)   The following inspections are required:
         a.   Permitting inspection.
         b.   Annual permit renewal inspection.
         c.   Annual fire inspection.
         d.   Annual kitchen inspection for a boarding home facility that
provides meal preparation.
   (b)   Other inspections. The director may inspect any boarding home facility
for the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article or any other
city ordinances exist. The director is authorized at a reasonable time to
inspect:
      (1)   The exterior of a structure and the surrounding premises; and
      (2)   The interior of a structure if the permission of the owner,
occupant, or person in control is given or a search warrant is obtained.
   (c)   Consequences of refusal to inspect. If the owner, occupant, or person
in control denies permission to search any part of the interior or exterior of
the structure or the surrounding premises, the director may suspend the permit
to operate a boarding home facility in accordance with Section
20-480.
   (d)   Reinspections. Whenever a boarding home facility is inspected by the
director and a violation of this article or any other city ordinances is found,
the building or premises will, after the expiration of any time limit for
compliance given in the notice or order issued because of the violation, be
reinspected by the director to determine that the violation has been
eliminated.
   (e)   Reinspection fee. The permit holder shall pay:
      (1)   To the director, $500.00, for each reinspection after the first
inspection by that department that must be conducted before the violation is
determined to be eliminated; and
      (2)   To the director of any other city department the fee required (if
any) by the applicable code for each reinspection by that department that must
be conducted before the violation is determined to be eliminated.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-486 REPORTS TO THE TEXAS HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION.
   As required by Tex. Health and Safety Code, Chapter 260, before September
30th of each year, the director shall submit a report to the Texas Health and
Human Services Commission. The report must contain the following information:
   (a)   The total number of boarding home facilities issued permits by the
city during the preceding state fiscal year.
   (b)   The total number of boarding home facility applications for which
permits were denied, including a summary of the causes for denial.
   (c)   The total number of boarding home facility permits that were active on
August 31st of the preceding state fiscal year.
   (d)   The total number of residents housed in each boarding home facility
reported.
   (e)   The total number of inspections conducted by the city at each boarding
home facility.
   (f)   The total number of permits suspended or revoked as a result of an
inspection.
   (g)   A summary of the outcome for any residents displaced by suspension or
revocation of a permit.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
DIVISION 3: STRUCTURE AND MAINTENANCE
§ 20-487 CONSTRUCTION, REMODELING, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   In general. Each permit holder shall ensure the residents' health,
safety, comfort, and protection through the standards contained in this section
that address the construction, remodeling, and maintenance of a boarding home
facility.
   (b)   Applicable regulations. Each boarding home facility must comply with
the following codes and regulations:
      (1)   Local zoning, building and property maintenance codes.
      (2)   Federal, state, or local adopted fire codes and standards.
      (3)   Federal, state, and local health and safety codes.
      (4)   Federal and state accessibility regulations.
   (c)   Public pathways and stairways. A public pathway or stairway in a
building must maintain a minimum unobstructed width in accordance with the
local fire code, as amended, and must be provided with a convenient light
switch controlling an adequate light system.
   (d)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The permit holder shall maintain the dwelling and premises in a
clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   The permit holder shall keep a boarding home facility in good
repair and maintenance in a manner that will promote the health, comfort,
safety, and well-being of residents.
      (3)   The permit holder shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests in the rooms occupied by residents, storage
areas, attics, or on the premises or yard.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-488 SLEEPING ROOMS.
   (a)   Sleeping space per person. Each room occupied for sleeping purposes by
one occupant must contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person must contain at
least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant.
   (b)   Emergency exit. Each sleeping room must provide access to an emergency
exit without passing through another sleeping room.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-489 TELEPHONE.
   A telephone that is connected to a land line must be available 24 hours a
day, be easily accessible, and afford privacy for use by residents. A list of
emergency telephone numbers, including the numbers of the local police
department, local fire department, ambulance, the City department that issued
the boarding home permit, the Texas Department of Family and Protective
Services (DFPS), the local mental health authority, and the Texas Information
and Referral Network, must be placed in plain view on or next to the telephone
and made accessible to persons who are visually or hearing impaired, as needed.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-490 KITCHEN.
   (a)   A kitchen must be accessible to each resident without going through a
sleeping room of another resident;
   (b)   A kitchen must have a food preparation area of at least six square
feet that is smooth, impermeable, free of cracks, and easily cleanable.
   (c)   If a boarding home facility has a kitchen it must contain a minimum
floor space of sixty square feet for dining area. A kitchen with an attached
dining area must be at least 100 square feet in area.
   (d)   A kitchen must contain a sink with for manual dishwashing.
   (e)   A kitchen must contain an operational cooking stove with at least two
burners fueled by gas or electricity.
   (f)   A kitchen must contain at least one cabinet with a minimum of five
cubic feet of storage space per resident, suitable for storage of food and
utensils.
   (g)   The permit holder shall keep the kitchen in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
DIVISION 4: RESIDENT HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 20-491 EMERGENCY PRECAUTIONS.
   (a)   The permit holder shall provide fire escapes and exits that are kept
in good repair and accessible at all times in accordance with applicable fire
codes, as amended.
   (b)   The permit holder shall implement a written fire and evacuation plan
that sets forth the responsibilities and steps to be taken by staff and
residents in the event of a fire or other emergency. If a boarding home
facility has a resident who has a mobility-impairment, the permit holder shall
submit the written plan to the local fire department and obtain its approval of
the plan.
   (c)   The permit holder shall post an emergency evacuation plan in each
sleeping room and the kitchen of the facility.
   (d)   The permit holder shall ensure that each resident receives training on
the emergency evacuation plan at least two timer per year and shall maintain
documentation of such training.
   (e)   Flammable supplies and gasoline-operated maintenance equipment and
lawn care equipment must be stored in the garage of the facility or in a
detached storage shed.
   (f)   The permit holder shall ensure that all residents are shown how to use
all emergency exits from the boarding home facility within 24 hours after
arrival at the boarding home facility. The permit holder shall maintain
documentation of such training.
   (g)   First aid supplies.
      (1)   The permit holder shall provide first aid supplies as recommended
by the American Red Cross.
      (2)   The permit holder shall ensure that the first aid supplies are
readily accessible to all the residents and inform the residents of the
location of the supplies.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-492 POISONOUS, TOXIC, AND FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   (a)   The permit holder shall ensure that poisonous, toxic, and flammable
materials:
      (1)   Are stored and maintained away from bed linens, towels, food items,
and kitchen equipment; and
      (2)   Are not used in a way that contaminates food equipment or utensils
or constitutes a hazard to employees or residents.
   (b)   The permit holder shall prominently and distinctly label poisonous,
toxic, and flammable materials for easy identification of contents.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-493 FOOD AND DRINK; MEALS.
   (a)   In general. If a boarding home facility serves meals to one or more
residents, the permit holder shall ensure the following:
      (1)   All food and drink are clean and free from spoilage, pathogenic
organisms, toxic chemicals, and other harmful substances.
      (2)   All food and drink are prepared, stored, handled, and served so as
to be safe for human consumption.
      (3)   All food or drink subject to spoilage is maintained at a
temperature of 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below.
      (4)   Hot foods that are ready to be served are maintained at 135 degrees
Fahrenheit or above at all times.
      (5)   All food or drink stored in the freezer is maintained at a
temperature of no higher than 0 degrees Fahrenheit.
      (6)   All food stored in food containers shall be appropriately labeled,
dated, and protected from flies, insects, rodents, dust and moisture.
   (b)   Animals prohibited. With the exception of Service animals for persons
with disabilities, birds, cats, dogs, or other animals are not permitted in
areas where food is prepared or stored, or where utensils are washed or stored.
   (c)   Food handling.
      (1)   An owner, operator, employee, or resident engaged in food handling
shall:
         a.   Observe sanitary methods, including hand washing; and
         b.   Not be assigned to preparing foods for others at the facility if
carrying a disease that can be transmitted to others.
      (2)   If preparing meals for residents, staff must obtain a valid food
handler's permit in accordance with Chapter 16 of the city code.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-494 REPORTING AND INVESTIGATION OF INJURIES, INCIDENTS AND UNUSUAL
ACCIDENTS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE RESIDENT
HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   (a)   Each permit holder of a boarding home facility must ensure that there
is on-site supervision of its boarding home facility during any time that a
resident is present at the facility.
   (b)   Each permit holder of a boarding home facility must develop and
implement policies and procedures for investigating and documenting injuries,
incidents and unusual accidents that involve residents. Permit holders must
also establish policies and procedures necessary to ensure resident health and
safety.
      (1)   Minimum requirements for the documentation of injuries, incidents
or unusual accidents should include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Date and time of the injury, incident or unusual accident
occurred.
         b.   Description of the injury, incident or unusual accident.
         c.   Description of any medical or mental health treatment the
resident received.
         d.   Steps taken by the permit holder to prevent future injuries,
incidents or unusual accidents if a problem at the room and board facility
resulted in the injury, incident or unusual accident.
         e.   When the resident's legal guardian or legally authorized
representative was notified about the injury, incident or unusual accident.
      (2)   Residents, the resident's guardian, or legally authorized
representatives should be given access to records within 48 hours of requesting
the records from the permit holder.
   (c)   In addition to investigating and documenting injuries, incidents or
unusual accidents, a permit holder must report any allegations of abuse,
neglect or exploitation of an adult age 65 or older or an adult with a
disability to the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services. Failure
to report suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of an elderly adult or adult
with a disability is a Class A misdemeanor.
      (1)   Each permit holder should ensure that each resident has access to a
telephone 24 hours per day that is easily accessible and affords privacy for
use by residents.
      (2)   The permit holder shall ensure that no resident is harassed,
threatened or intimidated at any time for making a report of abuse, neglect or
exploitation.
      (3)   Permit holders will provide each resident with a copy of the
definitions of abuse, neglect or exploitation as outlined in Tex. Human
Resources Code, Chapter 48.
      (4)   Permit holders will allow law enforcement personnel, emergency
medical and fire personnel access to the room and board facility when these
professionals are responding to a call at the permit holder's room and board
facility.
   (d)   No operator or other employee of a boarding home facility shall
provide services or engage in behavior that constitutes a financial conflict of
interest including:
      (1)   Borrowing from or loaning money to residents;
      (2)   Witnessing wills in which the operator or employee is a
beneficiary;
      (3)   Co-mingling the resident's funds with the operator's or other
residents' funds; or
      (4)   Becoming the guardian, conservator or power of attorney for a
resident.
   (e)   If a permit holder becomes the representative payee for a resident or
assists a resident with general money management, the permit holder shall:
      (1)   Maintain separate financial records for each resident for which the
permit holder is the representative payee for the entire period of time the
permit holder is the resident's representative payee and continue to maintain
the resident's records for one year past the last calendar day the permit
holder is the resident's representative payee;
      (2)   Include in the records an itemized list of expenditures that the
permit holder has made on behalf of the resident, including the charges that
are assessed by the permit holder;
      (3)   Maintain receipts for all expenditures in addition to the itemized
documentation;
      (4)   Develop a budget with the resident outlining routine expenditures
and ensure that expenditures that are not routine are discussed with the
resident before the resident's funds are expended; and
      (5)   The permit holder will allow the resident, the resident's guardian,
or legally authorized representative access to the resident's financial records
that are maintained by the permit holder within forty-eight hours of receiving
a request.
   (f)   A permit holder of a boarding home facility shall develop a service
agreement with each resident and maintain a copy of the agreement signed by the
resident.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-495 ASSISTANCE WITH SELF-ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION.
   (a)   Assistance with self-administration of medication may be provided to
an adult resident who can identify his or her medication and knows when the
medication should be taken but requires assistance with self-administration.
Assistance with self-administration of medication may not be provided to a
minor.
   (b)   Assistance with self-administration of medication is limited to:
      (1)   Reminding the resident to take medication;
      (2)   Opening a container, removing medication from a container, and
placing medication in a resident's hand or in or on a clean surface, such as a
pill cup or medication reminder box, for the resident's self-administration;
and
      (3)   Reminding the resident when a prescription needs to be refilled.
   (c)   The permit holder shall store all residents' medication in a locked
area. The permit holder shall provide a central locked storage area or
individual locked storage areas at the boarding home facility for each
resident's medication.
      (1)   If the boarding home facility uses a central medication storage
area, a boarding home employee must be available to provide access at all times
and each resident's medication must be stored separately from other residents'
medications within the storage area.
      (2)   If a resident's medication requires refrigeration, the permit
holder shall provide a refrigerator with a designated and locked storage area
or a refrigerator inside a locked medication room.
      (3)   The permit holder shall store medications labeled "for external use
only" separately within the locked area.
   (d)   The permit holder shall ensure that poisonous substances are labeled
and safely stored within a locked area.
   (e)   If a boarding home facility stores controlled substances, the permit
holders shall adopt and enforce a written policy for preventing the diversion
of the controlled substances.
   (f)   After a resident ceases to reside in the boarding home facility, the
permit holder shall properly dispose of any of the resident's remaining
medication in accordance with applicable laws.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-496 REQUIREMENTS FOR IN-SERVICE EDUCATION OF BOARDING HOME FACILITY STAFF.
   (a)   Each permit holder, employee and staff member of a boarding home
facility must be trained on the following subjects prior to contact with
residents:
      (1)   Employer rules and policies.
      (2)   Preventing, recognizing, and reporting abuse, neglect, and
exploitation of residents.
      (3)   Residents' rights, including all applicable rights from the folio
wing:
         a.   Tex. Human Resource Code, Chapter 102 (Rights of the Elderly), as
amended.
         b.   Tex. Human Resource Code, Chapter 112 (Developmental
Disabilities), as amended.
         c.   Tex. Property Code, Chapter 301 (Fair Housing Practices), as
amended.
         d.   Tex. Property Code, Chapter 92 (Residential Tenancies), as
amended.
      (4)   Policies and procedures for contacting emergency personnel when
health or safety of a resident or another individual is at risk.
      (5)   Complaint process specific to the city and the boarding home
facility.
      (6)   Assisting residents with self-administration of medication.
      (7)   Prevention, recognition, and reporting of injuries, incidents, and
unusual accidents to residents and others in the boarding home facility.
      (8)   Emergency, evacuation and disaster plans.
      (9)   Assisting residents with obtaining health and social services.
      (10)   Services provided by the boarding home facility, including:
         a.   Nutrition, meal preparation, and dietary needs, if the boarding
home facility provides meal preparation;
         b.   Sanitation;
         c.   Laundry, if the boarding home facility provides laundry services;
and
         d.   House work, if the boarding home facility provides house work.
   (b)   Each permit holder and employee of a boarding home facility is subject
to the following ongoing training requirements:
      (1)   Updates and changes in any policies and procedures within ten days
after the permit holder or employee becomes aware of the change.
      (2)   Orientation specific to the needs of each new resident within one
business day of the resident moving into the facility.
      (3)   Orientation specific to the needs of a resident whose needs have
changed due to injury, illness, hospitalization, or other circumstances that
affect the resident's needs within one day after permit holder or employee
becoming aware of the change.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-497 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND HISTORY CHECKS.
   (a)   A boarding home facility permit holder's permit to operate a boarding
home may be denied, revoked, suspended, or denied for renewal if the permit
holder has been convicted of a criminal offense listed in subsections (c) or
(d) of this section or if the permit holder has in its employ any person
convicted of a criminal offense listed in subsection (c) or (d).
   (b)   The permit holder must complete any state or federal request and
release forms that are required to obtain a criminal history report for the
permit holder. In addition to the permit fee, the permit holder will provide
funding to the county/municipality in a manner specified by the county/
municipality to cover any fees imposed by state or federal agencies for the
report.
   (c)   The following histories will disqualify a permit holder from obtaining
a permit to operate a boarding home or will serve as a bar to being employed by
a boarding home facility:
      (1)   Tex. Penal Code, Chapter 19 (criminal homicide);
      (2)   Tex. Penal Code, Chapter 20 (kidnapping and unlawful restraint);
      (3)   Tex. Penal Code, § 21.02 (continuous sexual abuse of young child or
children);
      (4)   Tex. Penal Code, § 21.08 (indecent exposure);
      (5)   Tex. Penal Code, § 21.11 (indecency with a child);
      (6)   Tex. Penal Code, § 21.12 (improper relationship between educator
and student);
      (7)   Tex. Penal Code, § 21.15 (improper photography or visual
recording);
      (8)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.011 (sexual assault);
      (9)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.02 (aggravated assault);
      (10)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.021 (aggravated sexual assault);
      (11)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.04 (injury to a child, elderly individual or
disabled individual);
      (12)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.041 (abandoning or endangering child);
      (13)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.05 (deadly conduct);
      (14)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.07 (terroristic threat);
      (15)   Tex. Penal Code, § 22.08 (aiding suicide);
      (16)   Tex. Penal Code, § 25.031 (agreement to abduct from custody);
      (17)   Tex. Penal Code, § 25.08 (sale or purchase of a child);
      (18)   Tex. Penal Code, § 28.02 (arson);
      (19)   Tex. Penal Code, § 29.02 (robbery);
      (20)   Tex. Penal Code, § 29.03 (aggravated robbery);
      (21)   Tex. Penal Code, § 30.02 (burglary);
      (22)   Tex. Penal Code, Chapter 31 (theft) that is punishable as a
felony;
      (23)   Tex. Penal Code, § 33.021 (online solicitation of a minor);
      (24)   Tex. Penal Code, § 34.02 (money laundering);
      (25)   Tex. Penal Code, § 35A.02 (Medicaid fraud);
      (26)   Tex. Penal Code, § 42.09 (cruelty to animals); or
      (27)   A conviction under the laws of another state, federal law, or the
Uniform Code of Military Justice for an offense containing elements that are
substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed in this subsection.
   (d)   A person may not own a boarding home or be employed in a position the
duties of which involve direct contact with a resident in a boarding home
before the fifth anniversary of the date the person is convicted of any felony
offense not listed in subsection (c) or any of the following non-felony
offenses:
      (1)   An offense under Tex. Penal Code, § 22.01 (assault), that is
punishable as a Class A misdemeanor;
      (2)   An offense under Tex. Penal Code, § 32.45 (misapplication of
fiduciary property or property of a financial institution), that is punishable
as a Class A misdemeanor or a felony;
      (3)   An offense under Tex. Penal Code, § 32.46 (securing execution of a
document by deception), that is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor or a
felony;
      (4)   An offense under Tex. Penal Code, § 37.12 (false identification as
peace officer);
      (5)   An offense under Tex. Penal Code, § 42.01(a)(7), (8), or (9)
(disorderly conduct); or
      (6)   A conviction under the laws of another state, federal law, or the
Uniform Code of Military Justice for an offense containing elements that are
substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed in this subsection.
   (e)   The permit holder must ensure that all employees, including volunteers
who are not residents, have had a background check of conviction records,
pending charges and disciplinary board decisions completed within the past two
years, and is repeated every year thereafter, and that the individual is not
disqualified under the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
The permit holder will immediately discharge any employee or volunteer whose
criminal history check reveals conviction of a crime that bars employment or
volunteer service.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
§ 20-498 ASSESSMENT AND PERIODIC MONITORING OF RESIDENTS.
   (a)   The permit holder, or a designee of the permit holder, shall:
      (1)   Complete and document an initial assessment of a resident within
ten days after the date the resident begins residing at the facility, and
conduct periodic monitoring thereafter, to ensure that the resident is capable
of self-administering medication and completing basic elements of personal care
as listed in subsections (b) and (c). The initial assessment will be used as a
tool to determine if the needs of the resident can be provided by a boarding
home facility or if the resident needs personal care services or medication
administration that cannot be provided by the boarding home facility.
      (2)   Complete and document an annual assessment and conduct periodic
monitoring to ensure that each resident is capable of self-administering
medication and completing basic elements of personal care as listed in
subsection (b) and (c). The annual assessment will be used as a tool to
determine if the needs of the resident can continue to be provided by a
boarding home facility or if the resident needs personal care services or
medication administration that cannot be provided by the boarding home
facility.
   (b)   Elements of the self-administration of medication to be assessed
include the ability to perform each of the following tasks with little
assistance:
      (1)   Identifying the name of the medication.
      (2)   Providing a reason for the medication (the owner or operator cannot
force the resident to disclose a health condition that is the basis for the
medication if the resident refuses).
      (3)   Distinguishing color or shape.
      (4)   Preparing the correct number of pills (dosage).
      (5)   Confirming the time to take medications.
      (6)   Reading labels.
   (c)   Elements of personal care to be assessed by the permit holder include
but are not limited to the resident's ability to do the following:
      (1)   Eat independently.
      (2)   Bathe without assistance.
      (3)   Dress without assistance.
      (4)   Move and transfer independently.
   (d)   As a result of the initial assessment, or a subsequent annual
assessment, if a permit holder finds that a resident is unable to perform basic
elements of personal care as listed in subsection (c), or is in a state of
self-neglect, and believes that a higher level of care is needed, the owner or
operator shall:
      (1)   Contact the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services by
phoning the state-wide intake division at 1-800-252-5400;
      (2)   Notify the resident's guardian or legally authorized
representative;
      (3)   Notify a family member designated by the resident, the legal
guardian, or the legally authorized representative; and
      (4)   Contact the appropriate health or human services authority to
advise that the resident requires services beyond what can be provided by the
boarding home facility.
   (e)   A state of self-neglect does not exist if the resident receives
outside professional services that meet the resident's need for personal care
or self-administration of medication. In these cases, the resident can remain
in the boarding home facility provided that all needs for personal care and
self-administration of medication are met.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
DIVISION 5: ENFORCEMENT
§ 20-499 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (a)   Regardless of a boarding home facility's status, a person who violates
any provision of this article, or who fails to perform a duty required by this
article, commits an offense.
   (b)   An owner, operator, employee, or other person in control of a permi
tted or unpermitted boarding home commits an offense if he or she knowingly
operates an unsafe facility that represents an immediate threat to the health
or safety of a resident, including a situation that has caused, or is likely to
cause, serious injury, harm, impairment, or death to a resident.
   (c)   An owner, operator, employee, or volunteer shall not operate a
boarding home facility in a manner that results in illegal or nuisance
activities including, but not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal
drug activity, harassment of passers-by, public urination, theft, assault,
vandalism, littering, illegal parking, loud noise, disorderly conduct, lewd
conduct, or police detention or arrests.
   (d)   An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   Two thousand dollars ($2,000) and/or up to 180 days in jail in
accordance with Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 260.0051, as amended, if a
person operates a boarding home facility in the city without a valid permit in
violation of this article;
      (2)   Two thousand dollars ($2,000) if the provision violated governs
fire safety, public health, or sanitation; or
      (3)   Five hundred dollars ($500) for all other offenses.
   (e)   A separate offense occurs each day or part of a day the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted.
   (f)   Emergency closing order.
      (1)   If the director finds a boarding home facility operating in
violation of the standards prescribed by this article and the violations create
an immediate threat to the health and safety of a resident in the facility, the
director may order immediate closing of all or part of the facility.
      (2)   The order of immediate closure under §
20-499(d)(1) is effective immediately on providing written notice of the order
to the owner or operator by facsimile, email or hand-delivery.
      (3)   The order of closure of all or part of a boarding home facility is
valid for ten days after its effective date.
      (4)   If the permit holder does not promptly relocate the residents of
the boarding home facility upon receiving the order of closure for that
facility, the city shall provide for the relocation of those residents. If
possible, the city will relocate those residents to a boarding home facility in
the city for which there is a current valid permit. The relocation may not be
to a facility with a more restrictive environment unless all other reasonable
alternatives are exhausted. The director is authorized to seek to recover the
cost of relocating the residents from the owner and operator of the closed
facility.
      (5)   The director and the Office of the City Manager, or other
appropriate technical board or committee, shall expedite any hearing or
decision involving an emergency closing order issued under this section.
   (g)   The city attorney may petition a district court or a county court at
law for civil penalties and for injunctive relief to restrain a continuing
violation of the standards or permit requirements for a boarding home facility
under this article if the violations create an immediate threat to the health
or safety of the facility residents.
   (h)   The city attorney may petition a district court or a county court at
law for civil penalties and for injunctive relief to restrain the continuing
operation of a facility that is providing services inconsistent with those
prescribed by this article and state law until such time as said facility
becomes appropriately licensed by the State of Texas or meets the requirements
to obtain a permit under this article.
   (i)   The remedies and procedures in this section and in other laws are
cumulative law, and the use of any particular remedy or procedure does not
prevent the enforcement of any other law.
(Ord. 25952-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 4-15-2023)
CHAPTER 21: SMALL BUSINESS PROGRAM FOR PROCUREMENT OF GOODS, SERVICES, AND
CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
21-1   Purpose
   
21-2   Definitions
   
21-3   City manager authority
   
21-4   Small business preference
   
21-5   Small business goals
   
21-6   Tax abatement agreements; Chapter 380 Grant Agreements
   
21-7   Exceptions
§ 21-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to foster competition, expand the supplier
base, and promote and encourage the participation of small business firms in
the city's contracting opportunities.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-2 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. A facility that is fully operational and has
sufficient equipment, supplies and personnel to provide the product or service
of the business in question to clients without significant reliance on the
resources of another entity or affiliate, or of an auxiliary facility. A
location utilized solely as a post office box, mail drop or telephone message
center or any combination thereof, without no other substantial function, shall
not be construed as a principal place of business.
   SMALL BUSINESS. A business entity that is located in Tarrant, Wise, Johnson,
Parker or Denton County and that holds certification as a small business from
an organization approved by the city manager.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-3 CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY.
   The city manager shall implement and enforce this chapter and may establish
such rules, regulations, or procedures, not inconsistent with this chapter,
other city ordinances, and state and federal laws or regulations, as the city
manager determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to effect the
purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-4 SMALL BUSINESS PREFERENCE.
   (a)   For procurements for contracts of $100,000.00 or less, each small
business that has a principal place of business within the corporate limits of
the city and submits a bid will be evaluated as though its bid price were 5%
less than the amount bid, and will be scored based on that preference. The city
will award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder after preference
adjustments.
   (b)   The awarded contract will be in the amount actually bid and not based
upon any deduction used for evaluation purposes.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-5 SMALL BUSINESS GOALS.
   (a)   For contracts over $100,000.00, the city manager shall set a goal for
the percent of work to be performed by small businesses, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   (b)   The small business goal may be met by:
      (1)   Self -performance by a small business; or
      (2)   Documentation demonstrating the use of small business contractors.
   (c)   This section does not apply to contracts which the city determines
there are insufficient subcontracting opportunities available.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-6 TAX ABATEMENT AGREEMENTS; CHAPTER 380 GRANT AGREEMENTS.
   Small business requirements for tax abatement agreements and Chapter 380
grant agreements shall be made in accordance with the Tax Abatement Policy and
Chapter 380 Grant Agreement Policy as adopted or approved by the Fort Worth
city council.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
§ 21-7 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (a)   Contracts exempt from competitive procurement under Tex. Local
Government Code § 252.022;
   (b)   Professional services subject to procurement under Tex. Government
Code Chapter 2254;
   (c)   Community facilities agreements, infrastructure construction
agreements, and any other similar agreements relating to the construction of
public infrastructure or a public building by a developer if the city's
participation in the agreement is less than $1,000,000.00;
   (d)   Emergency contracts; or
   (e)   Contracts in which, due to the use of state or federal funding, the
state or federal government establishes participation requirements related to
the types of businesses performing work under the contract.
(Ord. 27832-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-5-2025, eff. 9-1-2025)
CHAPTER 22: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS AND SIGNALS
      
III.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES
      
IV.   TRUCK TRAFFIC
      
V.   ACCIDENTS
      
VI.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
VII.   BICYCLES
      
VIII.   PEDESTRIANS
      
IX.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
      
X.   EQUIPMENT
      
XI.   MOBILE VENDING VEHICLES
      
XII.   STREET RACING AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS
Charter reference:
   Authority of city to regulate and control use of streets and other public
places, see
Ch. II, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Airports and aircraft, see
Ch. 3
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
   General penalty for code violations, see §
1-6
   Motor vehicle junkyards, see §§
20-291 et seq.
   Movement and demolition of buildings and structures, see §§
7-216 et seq.
   Police, see
Ch. 27
   Regulations of vehicles at city-owned landing fields, see §§
3-96 et seq.
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Traffic regulations for parks and recreation areas restricted, see §
24-15
   Transportation and public works department, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
   Washing of vehicles in parks or recreation areas restricted, see §
24-11
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to adopt additional traffic regulations not in conflict
with the state law, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 26
   Powers of local authorities relative to the regulation of traffic generally,
see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 27
   Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch.
501 et seq.
Section
Article I: In General
   
22-1   Definitions
   
22-2   City traffic engineer—Office created
   
22-3   Same—Powers and duties relative to traffic generally
   
22-4   Direction of traffic
   
22-5   Authority of chief of police to adopt emergency regulations
   
22-6   Obedience to police
   
22-7   Application of chapter—Public employees
   
22-8   Same—Authorized emergency vehicles
   
22-9   Same—Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals or driving
animals
   
22-10   Sounding horn; unnecessary noise
   
22-11   Use of siren
   
22-12   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
   
22-13   Riding on motorcycles
   
22-14   Clinging to vehicles
   
22-15   Unlawful riding
   
22-16   Roller skates, coasters, etc., in streets
   
22-17   Repairing vehicles on streets
   
22-18   Permit required to park vehicle for sale or displaying advertising on
street; permit fee; conditions of issuance of permit
   
22-19   Intoxilizer test fee
   
22-20   General penalty; continuing violations
   
22-21   Cruising prohibited in designated areas
   
22-22—22-35   Reserved
Article II: Traffic-Control Devices, Signs and Signals
   
22-36   Existence of official traffic-control device prima facie evidence that
device was erected pursuant to proper and lawful authority
   
22-37   Obedience to and required traffic-control devices
   
22-38   Traffic-control signal legend
   
22-39   Intersections where stop required—To be designated by city traffic
engineer
   
22-40   Same—Signs to bear the word “Stop”
   
22-41   Yield signs—Authorized
   
22-42   Same—Requirements
   
22-43   Flashing signals
   
22-44   Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train
   
22-45   Pedestrian control signals
   
22-46   Emergency amber signal lights; operation of vehicles when lights on
   
22-47   Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings
   
22-48   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
22-49   Proof required in prosecution
   
22-50—22-65   Reserved
Article III: Operation of Vehicles
   
22-66   Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
22-67   Overtaking a vehicle on the left
   
22-68   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
22-69   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
22-70   Vehicles entering stop or yield intersections
   
22-71   Right turns from bus lanes
   
22-72   Right-of-way at intersections
   
22-73   U-turns
   
22-74   Limitations on backing—Generally
   
22-75   Same—Signal on backing
   
22-76   Emerging from alley, driveway or building
   
22-77   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
22-78   Starting and turning and signals on stopping and turning
   
22-79   Operation of vehicles and street cars on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles
   
22-80   Authorized emergency vehicles to have right-of-way
   
22-81   Interference with authorized emergency vehicles
   
22-82   Use restricted of freeways to automotive vehicles
   
22-83   Direction of travel on freeways; entrances and exits; crossing median
prohibited; parking prohibited
   
22-84   Operation of vehicles except certain buses and bicycles in bus lanes
prohibited; certain bus lanes designated
   
22-85   One-way streets
   
22-86   Speeding
   
22-87   Obstruction to driver’s view or driving mechanism
   
22-88   Following too closely
   
22-89   Driving on divided highways
   
22-90   Driving through processions; exceptions
   
22-91   Driving upon sidewalks
   
22-92   Reckless driving
   
22-93   Following fire apparatus or ambulance
   
22-94   Crossing fire hose
   
22-95   Safe passing of vulnerable road users
   
22-96—22-110   Reserved
Article IV: Truck Traffic
   
22-111   Use of truck routes required for through traffic; exceptions
   
22-112   Use of truck routes or commercial delivery routes required—Generally
   
22-113   Same—Defenses
   
22-114   Truck route streets designated
   
22-115   Commercial delivery route streets designated
   
22-116   Transportation of hazardous materials
   
22-117   Vehicle restrictions
   
22-118   Violations
   
22-119   Enforcement of violations by city; fine
   
22-120   Reserved
   
22-121—22-135   Reserved
Article V: Accidents
   
22-136   Leaving the scene of collision
   
22-137   Moving vehicle after collision
   
22-138   Report to be made
   
22-139—22-154   Reserved
Article VI: Stopping, Standing and Parking
Division 1: Generally
   
22-155   Some parking violations as civil offenses
   
22-156   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain bus lanes
   
22-157   Restricted where less than ten feet of roadway left available for
traffic
   
22-158   Passenger loading zones
   
22-158.1   Commercial loading zone
   
22-158.2   When provisions applicable
   
22-158.3   Valet parking zones
   
22-158.4   Pre-arranged motorbus zone
   
22-159   Storing of vehicles on public street prohibited
   
22-160   Parking of motor vehicles, trailers, boats and other vehicles in front
yards and side yards of areas zoned one-family and two-family
   
22-161   Parking in alley prohibited
   
22-162.1   Parking of oversize commercial vehicles on private property
   
22-162.2   Parking of large and oversize vehicles on streets
   
22-162.3   Parking of large recreational vehicles on private property
   
22-162.4   Parking of oversize recreational vehicles on private property
   
22-162.5   Violations; penalties
   
22-163   Manner of parking in designated zone for certain hours; exceptions
   
22-164   Manner of parking of vehicles with six or more wheels in certain zones
   
22-165   Parking passenger cars in certain zone
   
22-166   Parking or standing close to curb
   
22-167   Unattended motor vehicle
   
22-168   Ignition key to be removed from unattended parked cars
   
22-169   Owner prima facie responsible for illegal parking
   
22-170   Motorbus stops and manner of stopping
   
22-171   Parking restricted on certain private property
   
22-171.5   Parking restricted on certain public property
   
22-172   Traffic engineer to specify certain parking spaces
   
22-173   Map to be filed with city secretary; penalty for violation of
regulation
   
22-174   Private off-street disability parking
   
22-175   Head-in parking
   
22-176   Curb cuts and laid-down curb permit procedures
   
22-177   Loading and unloading facilities
   
22-178   Stopping, standing and parking prohibited in certain places
   
22-179   Solicitation between an occupant of a motor vehicle a pedestrian
   
22-180   Residential permitted parking program; Definitions
   
22-181   Areas designated
   
22-182   Issuance of permits and vendor permits
   
22-183   Visitor permits
   
22-184   Parking restrictions
   
22-185   Effect of permit; display; expiration; renewal; replacement
   
22-186   Offenses; denial or revocation of permit
   
22-187—22-190   Reserved
Division 2: Parking Meters
   
22-191   Establishment of zones and maximum parking time therein; establishment
of fees
   
22-192   Hours meters to operate; information to be shown on meters
   
22-193   Installation and operation
   
22-194   How parking meter and space to be used
   
22-195   Parking overtime—Unlawful
   
22-196   Same—Expired meter prima facie evidence
   
22-197   Manner of parking
   
22-198   Marking of spaces; parking within
   
22-199   Use of slugs, etc., in meters
   
22-200   Injuring or tampering with meters
   
22-201   Deposits to be used to defray costs of regulation
   
22-202—22-204   Reserved
   
22-205   Maximum parking time; extending time prohibited
   
22-205.1   Feeding meters
   
22-206   Same—When provisions applicable
   
22-207   Collection, etc., of deposits from meters
   
22-208   Proof of parking meter location and time limit
   
22-209   Display of permits
   
22-210—22-220   Reserved
Division 3: Parking Violations
   
22-221   Tow-away zones
   
22-222   Towing and impoundment of certain vehicles authorized
   
22-223—22-240   Reserved
Article VII: Bicycles
Division 1: Generally
   
22-241   Reflectors required
   
22-242   Riding on bicycles
   
22-243   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
22-244   Riding in reckless manner
   
22-245   Bicycle helmets
   
22-246—22-260   Reserved
Division 2: Reserved
   
22-261—22-280   Reserved
Article VIII: Pedestrians
   
22-281   Right-of-way in crosswalks
   
22-282   To use right half of crosswalk
   
22-283   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
22-284   Solicitations
   
22-285—22-300   Reserved
Article IX: Abandoned and Junked Vehicles
Division 1: Abandoned Vehicles
   
22-301   Disposition of abandoned vehicles
   
22-302   Additional requirements
Division 2: Junked Vehicles
   
22-303   Junked vehicles declared to be a public nuisance; adoption of
procedures for abatement and removal
   
22-303.1   Reserved
   
22-304   Notice
   
22-304.1   Relocation of junked vehicle after abatement proceeding has
commenced
   
22-305   Hearing
   
22-306   Abatement of nuisance; removal and disposal of vehicles
   
22-307   Junked vehicles not to be reconstructed or made operable after removal
   
22-308   Notice of removal to be given to Texas department of transportation
   
22-309   Inapplicability of this division
   
22-310   Administration
   
22-311   Criminal complaint
   
22-312   Order of abatement upon conviction
   
22-313   Reserved
Division 3: Generally
   
22-314   Authority to enforce
   
22-315   Effect of article on other ordinances or laws
   
22-316—22-320   Reserved
Article X: Equipment
   
22-321   Mufflers, prevention of noise
   
22-322   Brakes
   
22-323   Light requirements
   
22-324   Engine braking
   
22-325—22-340   Reserved
Article XI: Mobile Vending Vehicles
   
22-341   Definitions
   
22-342   Regulations and minimum equipment
   
22-343—22-360   Reserved
Article XII: Street Racing and Reckless Driving Exhibitions
Division 1: Definitions
   
22-361   Definitions
Division 2: Spectators Prohibited At Street Races and Reckless Driving
Exhibitions
   
22-362   Spectators prohibited at street races and reckless driving exhibitions
Division 3: Aiding Street Racing and Reckless Driving Exhibitions
   
22-363   Aiding street racing and reckless driving exhibitions
 
   
22-364   Penalty
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 22-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE or ABANDONED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is
inoperable and more than eight years old and left unattended on public property
for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on
public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has
remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in
control of the property for more than 48 hours.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, vehicles used by City of Fort Worth employees for abandoned
vehicle enforcement, vehicles used by City of Fort Worth employees for the
emergency management office, public and private ambulances for which permits
have been issued by the state board of health, emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the governing body of an incorporated city, and private vehicles operated by
volunteer firefighters or certified emergency medical services volunteers while
answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, and vehicles
operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws
of this state or the United States, while making emergency deliveries of blood,
drugs or medicines or organs.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201
   BUS LANE. That portion of roadway devoted primarily to the use by buses of
the public bus transportation system operating in the Fort Worth area, such
system being commonly known as “CITRAN.”
   COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTE. Any street or highway so designated by the city
council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer,
semi-trailer, or any combination thereof.
   COMMERCIAL LOADING ZONE. A space or section of the curb set aside for the
purpose of loading and unloading of persons or the purpose of loading,
unloading, delivery or pick up of supplies or merchandise.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used
primarily to transport property. The term includes a passenger car
reconstructed and used primarily for delivery purposes; and
      (2)   A motor vehicle displaying the registrant’s name and address
permanently affixed in characters at least three inches high on both sides of
the vehicle, with such display being in a color contrasting with that of the
vehicle and placed approximately midway vertically on doors or side panels.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing, by lines or other markings.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(3)
   FREEWAY. A divided, controlled access highway for through traffic.
Statutory reference:
   “Limited-access or controlled-access highway,” see Tex. Transportation Code
§ 541.302(8)
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(3)
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A street located next to a freeway and auxiliary thereto,
constructed so as to provide vehicular access to and from the freeway. The
following terms have the same definition as FRONTAGE ROAD and any one of these
terms may be substituted for the term FRONTAGE ROAD when used in this
Chapter 26: “access road,” “access street,” “frontage street,” “service road”
and “service street.”
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(5)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two or more highways which join one another at any angle, or the area within
which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any angle may come
in conflict;
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection; and
      (3)   The junction of any alley with a street or highway shall not
constitute an intersection.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.303
   JUNKED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
         a.   Does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired registration
insignia (sticker) and license plate; and
         b.   Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72
consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property, or for more than 20
consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property.
      (2)   A vehicle that is self-propelled and is wrecked, dismantled or
partially dismantled, and has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive
hours if the vehicle is on public property, or for more than 20 consecutive
days if the vehicle is on private property.
      (3)   The term JUNKED VEHICLE shall include any part of a junked vehicle
or tarps or covers thereon, that is visible at any time of the year from any
private lot, tract or parcel of land, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, other than the lot, tract or parcel of land on which the vehicle,
vehicle part, tarp or cover is located or from any public place or public-
right-of-way.
   LARGE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A recreational vehicle which exceeds 26 feet in length, but is less
than 40 feet in total length;
      (2)   A boat trailer or other trailer which exceeds 26 feet in length,
but is less than 40 feet in total length; or
      (3)   A converted or partially converted bus which exceeds 26 feet in
length, but is less than 40 feet in total length.
   MOBILE HOME. A living quarters equipped and used for sleeping and eating
which may be moved from one location to another over a public street by being
pulled behind a motor vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(11)
   MOTORBUS. Every vehicle which is used in transporting persons upon the
public streets of the City of Fort Worth for compensation or hire and has a
passenger carrying capacity of more than 16 persons except those operated by
muscular power or exclusively on stationary rails or tracks or owned by a
public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children
to and from school functions or privately owned and operated for the
transportation of children to and from school functions or those operated for
the transportation of persons to and from church functions.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(3), (15), (16)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to propel itself with not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(9)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal (including a traffic-
control signal), marking or device not inconsistent with state statute or this
chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.304
   OVERSIZE COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any vehicle designed for the transport of more than 15 passengers,
inclusive of the driver;
      (2)   Any trailer or semi-trailer that is more than 20 feet in length
from end to end, more than seven feet in width at their widest point, or more
than nine feet in height from the ground to its highest point; or
      (3)   Any motor vehicle with a gross weight, registered weight or gross
weight rating, as those terms are defined in state law, of more than 15,000
pounds, including but not limited to the following:
         a.   Dump truck;
         b.   Truck-tractor;
         c.   Concrete-mixing truck;
         d.   Stake-bed truck;
         e.   Flat-bed tow truck; or
         f.   Panel truck.
   OVERSIZE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A recreational vehicle which is 40 feet or greater in total length;
      (2)   A boat trailer or other trailer which is 40 feet or greater in
total length; or
      (3)   A converted or partially converted bus which is 40 feet or greater
in total length.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a
roadway, otherwise than temporarily in obedience to an official traffic-control
device or for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.401(6)
   PARKING METER. A device that registers the amount of time purchased for the
parking of a motor vehicle in a parking zone.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. A space or section of the curb set aside for the
exclusive use of loading and unloading of persons.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.001(3)
   PERMIT. A current and valid document issued by or through the department of
transportation and public works that allows on-street parking at metered or un-
metered locations for a specific period of time. A PERMIT may also be a
handicapped tag issued by a county or state administration.
   POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or
pole, or by being boomed, or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as
poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves
as beams between the supporting connections.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(13)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal police department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.002(4)
   PRE-ARRANGED MOTORBUS. A motorbus, that allows passengers to board and
dismount the motorbus at pre-arranged times at fixed pick-up and drop-off
locations. Passengers may schedule the pre-arranged appointments by telephone,
electronic communication, or other available means with the motorbus owner.
   PRIMA FACIE. The term PRIMA FACIE is to be defined according to the law of
the State of Texas, and, to the extent that there is no conflict with state
law, the following meaning shall apply:
      Such as will suffice to constitute proof of a fact unless and until it is
overcome, rebutted or contradicted by other evidence; no particular weight is
assigned to prima facie evidence by law except that the factfinder may find a
verdict based upon it; as in all criminal cases, the accused starts out with a
presumption of innocence that must be overcome by evidence beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Annotation: Prudence dictates that the judge define this term when he or she
uses it in his or her instructions to the jury. See Thomas v. State, 474 S. W.
2d 692 (Tex. Crim. 1972).
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner but not by other persons.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(9)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motor vehicle primarily designed as a temporary
living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. The term includes a
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.401(8)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(11)
   SEMI-TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(17)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(16)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.401(9)
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.401(10)
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.302(5)
   TEXAS LITTER ABATEMENT ACT. Tex. Health and Safety Code Ch. 365.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.301
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
permitted to proceed.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.304(3)
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(20)
   TRUCK ROUTE. Any street or highway so designated by the city council for use
by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or any
combination thereof.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than part of the
weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(22)
   VEHICLE. Every mechanical device, in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including
motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck tractors, trailers and semi-
trailers, severally, as hereinafter defined, but excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term
includes self-propelled off-road vehicles designed and intended to be operated
in places other than on public streets, including, but not limited to, race
cars, dirt track vehicles, all-terrain vehicles and golf carts.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.201(23)
(1964 Code, § 26-1) (Ord. 6920, § 1, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 7015, § 1, passed
6-3-1974; Ord. 8077, § 1, passed 4-1-1980; Ord. 9252, § 1, passed 11-13-1984;
Ord. 9852, § 1, passed 3-31-1987; Ord. 12938, § 1, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 15712,
§ 1, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. 16539, § 1, passed 8-9-2005; Ord. 17867, § 1,
passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 1, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 18441-01-2009,
§ 1, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 19947-10-2011, §§ 2A, 2B passed 10-25-2011; Ord.
20315-08-2012, § 1, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 21854-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-1-2015;
Ord. 23193-04-2018, § 1, passed 4-17-2018; Ord. 23478-12-2018, § 1, passed 12-
4-2018; Ord. 23767-08-2019, § 1, passed 8-27-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 22-2 CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER—OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of city traffic engineer within the department of transportation
and public works is hereby established.
(1964 Code, § 26-2) (Ord. 8658, § 2, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 23503-12-2018, § 3,
passed 12-11-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Human resources, see §§
2-176 et seq.
§ 22-3 SAME—POWERS AND DUTIES RELATIVE TO TRAFFIC GENERALLY.
   (a)   It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine
the installation and proper timing of official traffic-control devices, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and to
cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the
ordinances.
   (b)   The city traffic engineer, except as otherwise directed by this
chapter, and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city
council, shall have power and he or she is hereby authorized:
      (1)   To regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the city,
including private property used for public purposes, by the erection or placing
of official traffic-control devices to indicate prohibited or limited parking,
prima facie maximum and minimum reasonable and prudent speeds specified by
statute or established by ordinance or other lawful manner, restricted speed
areas, one-way streets, through or arterial streets, stop streets, “U” turns,
school zones, loading and unloading zones and the place and manner of operating
or parking vehicles;
      (2)   To regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and
sidewalks by the erection or placing of official traffic-control devices
indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic where, in his or her opinion, there
is a particular danger to pedestrians, and to maintain such devices, or cause
them to be maintained;
      (3)   To designate truck routes and to regulate the parking of vehicles
of various sizes and weights;
      (4)   To cause all such necessary official traffic-control devices to be
erected or placed on any street or part of a street when he or she deems such
action necessary;
      (5)   To mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets
indicating and directing the flow of traffic, when, in his or her judgment,
such action is necessary;
      (6)   To determine and designate the character or type of, and to place
and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all official traffic-
control devices, including all official traffic signs and signals;
      (7)   To determine and designate intersections where particular hazard
exists and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to
any such stop intersection, and to erect a stop sign at every such place where
a stop is required;
      (8)   To determine and designate intersections where particular hazard
exists and to designate whether vehicles on one of the intersecting streets
yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the other street and to erect a “yield”
sign at every place where need is determined for such a sign;
      (9)   To erect or place official traffic-control devices, including
appropriate signs and markings, to designate the truck routes and commercial
delivery routes described in this chapter;
      (10)   To designate, for such period as might be necessary, alternate
truck routes and commercial delivery routes whenever any street designated as a
truck route or commercial delivery route is being repaired or is otherwise
temporarily out of use;
      (11)   To determine and designate spaces and/or lanes for exclusive uses
as bus zones, bus lanes, taxicab stands and passenger and freight loading
zones, no parking zones and “one-way” traffic lanes in which driving is
prohibited in one direction and permitted in the opposite direction, and to
place or erect official traffic-control devices, indicating same, within any
areaway, parkway, traffic-way or parking space owned or controlled by any
public service concern, public service utility company, terminal company,
railroad or other quasi-public corporation or public concern, designed for the
temporary parking of patrons of such public concern, utility or corporation;
      (12)   To designate, upon any street or portion of any street, the
parking meter zones set forth in this chapter where it is determined, upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the installation of
parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control or
inspection of the parking of vehicles in the exercise of the police power of
regulating, operating or controlling the operation of vehicles using the public
streets, to install and maintain parking meters upon the curb immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces, in order to control and regulate
such parking meter zones, to designate the maximum parking time for each
parking meter, basing this designation upon the investigation above set forth;
to erect or place an official traffic-control device, including lines or marks
on the curb or on the street about or alongside each parking meter, in order to
designate the parking space for which such meter is to be used;
      (13)   To establish such loading zones as are necessary for the conduct
of business and to use official traffic-control devices to designate such
zones; and
      (14)   To designate some member of his or her department to make regular
collections of the money deposited in parking meters, which member shall remove
these coins from the meters, place the coins in sealed or locked containers,
and deliver such containers and funds to the place designated by the city
secretary.
(1964 Code, § 26-3) (Ord. 6920, § 2, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 7015, § 2, passed
6-3-1974; Ord. 9252, § 2, passed 11-13-1984)
§ 22-4 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC.
   Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signals, in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department and fire department may direct traffic, as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 25-4)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, see Tex.
Transportation Code § 542.202
§ 22-5 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE TO ADOPT EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
   The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations
necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and
enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(1964 Code, § 26-5)
§ 22-6 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.
(1964 Code, § 26-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.501
§ 22-7 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER— PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon
the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by
the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any other
political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are
set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 26-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.002
§ 22-8 SAME—AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (b)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and/or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (c)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals
meeting the requirements of Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6701d, § 124,
except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need
not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the
vehicle. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law
enforcement purposes may operate without using the emergency warning devices
required by this subsection (c) only when the driver is responding to an
emergency call or when he or she is in pursuit of a suspected violator of the
law and he or she has probable cause to believe that:
      (1)   Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to destroy
or lose evidence of a suspected felony;
      (2)   Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to cease a
suspected continuing felony before the driver has acquired sufficient evidence
to establish grounds for arrest;
      (3)   Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to evade
apprehension or identification of the suspect or his or her vehicle; or
      (4)   Traffic conditions on a multilaned roadway are such that movements
of motorists in response to the emergency warning devices may increase the
potential for a collision or may unreasonably extend the duration of the
pursuit.
   (d)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law
enforcement purposes may not operate without using the emergency warning
devices as provided above unless he or she has first notified a designated
office of his or her intention to operate without such devices. The designated
office to which such notification is made shall keep an accurate record of the
exact time notification is received.
   (e)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1964 Code, § 26-8)
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
Statutory reference:
   Operation of vehicles upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle, see
Tex. Transportation Code § 541.156
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 546
§ 22-9 SAME—PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS, RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS OR DRIVING
ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this chapter with reference to the equipment of vehicles and
except those which by their very nature can have no application.
(1964 Code, § 26-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 542.003
§ 22-10 SOUNDING HORN; UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor-driven vehicle
to sound the horn, gong or other device for giving warning upon same, in a
loud, unusual or unnecessary manner or to use same at any time or place except
as a warning of danger.
(1964 Code, § 26-19)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 547.501
§ 22-11 USE OF SIREN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except a person operating an authorized
emergency vehicle to use a siren on any vehicle; provided, that those who are
permitted to use a siren shall be required to use the same only when an
emergency call is being made.
(1964 Code, § 26-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 547.501
§ 22-12 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle
while such vehicle is in motion.
(1964 Code, § 26-21)
§ 22-13 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator.
(1964 Code, § 26-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 545.416
§ 22-14 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, sled,
roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or herself or
his or her vehicle to any streetcar or vehicle upon a roadway.
(1964 Code, § 26-23)
§ 22-15 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, or for the operator of a
vehicle to permit another person to ride, upon any portion of any vehicle not
designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion.
This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise.
(1964 Code, § 26-24)
§ 22-16 ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, ETC., IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk.
(1964 Code, § 26-25)
§ 22-17 REPAIRING VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any repair work upon any
vehicle on any street in the city.
   (b)   As used in this section, the term REPAIR WORK shall mean any nature of
work upon such vehicles, including, but not being limited to, motor repairs,
body repairs and greasing such vehicles, but such term, as used in this
chapter, shall not include such emergency repair work as may be necessary to
allow a damaged or stalled vehicle to be moved to a place other than the
streets of the city.
(1964 Code, § 26-27)
§ 22-18 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PARK VEHICLE FOR SALE OR DISPLAYING ADVERTISING ON
STREET; PERMIT FEE; CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle
displayed for sale or for the purpose of displaying advertising; provided, that
the city manager, or such official of the city as he or she might designate, is
hereby authorized to issue permits for the parking of automobiles, trucks,
vans, trailers or similar vehicles on a street for the purpose of displaying
advertising or products in connection with any lawful convention, charitable
event, civic event (not including political campaigns), or an event celebrating
the opening or dedication of a new enterprise, business, commercial or
industrial facility, subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Only metered parking spaces or such unmetered parking spaces as have
not been previously restricted as to use shall be utilized for this purpose;
   (b)   A fee of $5 per day for each metered parking space or a fee of $5 per
day for each 21 linear feet of curb space in nonmetered zones so utilized shall
be paid in advance of the issuance of a permit;
   (c)   The number of days for which each such permit is issued shall be shown
in writing on the face of the permit; and Sundays and legal holidays shall be
included for the purpose of computing the permit fee and the period of time for
which the permit is issued;
   (d)   The city manager or such official of the city as he or she shall
designate shall prescribe such conditions for the issuance of each permit as he
or she deems necessary in the public interest, and he or she shall approve,
prior to the issuance of a permit, the nature and content of all advertising
material to be displayed. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person holding a permit hereunder to display or permit to be displayed any
advertising material other than that which has been so approved;
   (e)   No automobile, truck, van, trailer or similar vehicle parked on a
public street under this section shall exceed 96 inches in width, including
load; and
   (f)   A permit issued under this section will not authorize the use of any
loudspeaker or public address system in the parking spaces permitted to be
used.
(1964 Code, § 26-28)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 22-19 INTOXILIZER TEST FEE.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meaning indicated:
      INTOXILIZER TEST. The same as breathalizer test.
      PERSON. Any individual or employee of a municipality, town or village
other than this city.
   (b)   Amount. Any person who shall request authorized city personnel to
conduct an intoxilizer test shall pay a fee of $75.
(Ord. 9453, § 1, passed 8-6-1985)
§ 22-20 GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this chapter the doing
of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in §
1-6 of this code; provided, however, if the maximum penalty provided by this
chapter for any such offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for
the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum
penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the maximum penalty
under this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 26-200) (Ord. 6920, § 9, passed 10-1-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 542
§ 22-21 CRUISING PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   (a)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“cruising ordinance.”
   (b)   Purposes and findings.
      (1)   Purposes. The purpose of this section is to increase emergency
vehicle and police access to certain areas (“no cruising zones”) by enhancing
the orderly and unobstructed flow of motor vehicle traffic throughout such
areas. This will be accomplished by:
         a.   Reducing traffic congestion caused by an increased volume of
motor vehicle traffic participating in repetitive transit throughout such
areas;
         b.   Reducing the likelihood of preventable mishaps and crises arising
from an inability of police and emergency personnel to respond to locations
within such areas due to excessive traffic congestion caused by cruising;
         c.   Enhancing police and emergency personnel response time to such
areas by reducing the excessive traffic congestion caused by cruising; and
         d.   Increasing access by members of the general public to such areas,
which access is currently restricted due to unnecessary traffic congestion
arising from cruising.
      (2)   Findings. In determining that a need exists for this section, the
city council finds and determines as follows.
         a.   Cruising and the resulting gridlock of traffic have created
significant problems in gaining access to certain areas, (“no cruising” zones),
not only for the general public, but more importantly for emergency vehicles.
         b.   Incidents have occurred in which the police department has been
delayed in responding to police incidents and emergencies because of the
traffic congestion resulting from cruising.
         c.   Incidents have occurred in which fire department and emergency
medical personnel have been delayed in responding to medical emergencies
because of traffic congestion resulting from cruising.
         d.   The inability of the police department to respond within a
reasonable time to police incidents and the inability of the fire department to
respond within a reasonable time to fire alarms or calls for medical help could
result in a great loss of life and property.
         e.   It is in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare to
resolve the cruising problem in order to provide freer access to such areas by
emergency vehicles and the general public.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the plural number include the singular; and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and
not merely directory. In this section:
      CRUISE or CRUISING. To operate a motor vehicle, or to permit the
operation of a motor vehicle under one’s care, custody or control, so as to
pass the same traffic control point within a no cruising zone three times
within any two-hour period.
      NO CRUISING ZONE. The area bounded by and including the following streets
or portions of streets, which area shall be known as the “Stockyards Historic
District No Cruising Zone.”
 
Street               Extent
23rd Street          Clinton Street to Packers Avenue
26th Street          Clinton Street to the St. Louis and Southwestern Railway
                     Tracks
Clinton Street       23rd Street to 26th Street
Packers Boulevard    23rd Street north in a line to Stockyards Boulevard
Stockyards Boulevard North Main Street to the St. Louis and Southwestern
                     Railway Tracks
 
      TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT. Any point established by the chief of police
within a no cruising zone for the purpose of monitoring cruising.
   (d)   Violations. A person commits an offense under this section, if:
      (1)   Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m., on any day of the
week;
      (2)   He or she cruises, as defined herein; and
      (3)   In a “no cruising zone” marked in accordance with subsection (h)
below.
   (e)   Enforcement. A citation shall be issued under this section any time
after a police officer has determined that the driver of a vehicle has passed a
traffic control point more than three times within a two-hour period.
   (f)   Penalties. A person determined to be in violation of this section
shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $50 and not more than $500.
   (g)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this section that the motor vehicle was:
      (1)   Owned by a municipality, a county, the State of Texas or the United
States government;
      (2)   An emergency or conspicuously marked public safety vehicle;
      (3)   A licensed public transportation vehicle; or
      (4)   A vehicle being used for business purposes and verification of this
business was provided.
   (h)   Demarcation of the “no cruising zone.”
      (1)   The City of Fort Worth traffic engineer shall mark a “no cruising
zone” by conspicuously posting appropriate signs at each entrance to the zone.
      (2)   A “no cruising zone” requiring demarcation shall consist of an area
described in subsection (c) above.
(Ord. 11131, § 1, passed 7-21-1992)
§§§ 22-22—22-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS AND SIGNALS
Cross-reference:
   Signs generally, see
Ch. 29
   Traffic-control devices on vehicles at city-owned landing fields, see §
3-97
Statutory reference:
   Authority of local authorities to place and maintain traffic-control
devices, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.002
   Erection and maintenance of traffic-control signals requiring traffic on a
state highway to stop before entering an intersection, see Tex. Transportation
Code § 544.002(c)
   Regulation of traffic by means of traffic-control devices, see Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 544
§ 22-36 EXISTENCE OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE THAT
DEVICE WAS ERECTED PURSUANT TO PROPER AND LAWFUL AUTHORITY.
   Proof of the existence within the city of an official traffic-control device
regulating any part of any street or highway, including any part of any
freeway, shall be prima facie evidence that such official traffic-control
device was erected or placed by and at the direction of personnel duly and
lawfully authorized to do so, in accordance with the applicable provisions of
state statute and this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 26-58) (Ord. 6920, § 6, passed 10-1-1973)
§ 22-37 OBEDIENCE TO AND REQUIRED TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle and the motorman of any streetcar shall obey
the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.
   (b)   No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices
are erected or in place.
(1964 Code, § 26-30) (Ord. 6920, § 4, passed 10-1-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.004
§ 22-38 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   (a)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and said lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
      (1)   Green indication.
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such
signal is exhibited.
         b.   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         c.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as
provided in §
22-45 pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is
a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
      (2)   Steady yellow indication.
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection.
         b.   Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in §
22-45, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
      (3)   Steady red indication.
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, and, unless prohibited by a traffic-control
sign, may then turn right or, if the intersecting streets are both one-way
streets and left turns are permissible, may turn left, after standing until the
intersection may be entered safely, yielding right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection. Traffic not so turning shall remain standing until an indication
to proceed is shown. The city, within its jurisdiction, may prohibit such turns
on a steady red signal by posting a notice that turns of that type are
prohibited. Such notice shall be erected at such intersection giving notice
thereof.
         b.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal,
pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
   (b)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (c)   The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the above signals as
applicable to vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 26-31) (Ord. 6891, § 1, passed 8-13-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.007
§ 22-39 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP REQUIRED—TO BE DESIGNATED BY CITY TRAFFIC
ENGINEER.
   The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists and to determine whether vehicles
shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall
erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required.
(1964 Code, § 26-32)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate stop streets, see Tex. Transportation Code
Ch. 544
§ 22-40 SAME—SIGNS TO BEAR THE WORD “STOP.”
   Every sign erected pursuant to the preceding section shall bear the word
“Stop” in letters not less than six inches in height and such sign shall at
nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or
by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient
reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located
as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
(1964 Code, § 26-33)
§ 22-41 YIELD SIGNS—AUTHORIZED.
   The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists and to determine whether
vehicles on one of the intersecting streets yield the right-of-way to vehicles
on the other street and to erect a “YIELD” sign at every place where need is
determined for such a sign.
(1964 Code, § 26-34) (Ord. 6891, § 2, passed 8-13-1973)
§ 22-42 SAME—REQUIREMENTS.
   Every sign erected pursuant to §
22-41 shall bear the message “YIELD.” Such signs shall at nighttime be rendered
luminous by steady or internal flashing illumination, or by a fixed floodlight
projected on the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements covering
the entire face of the sign.
(1964 Code, § 26-35) (Ord. 6891, § 3, passed 8-13-1973)
§ 22-43 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (a)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through an
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (b)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules as set forth in §
22-44 of this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 26-36) (Ord. 6891, § 4, passed 8-13-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.008
§ 22-44 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF RAILROAD TRAIN.
   (a)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      (3)   A railroad engine approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; and
      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(1964 Code, § 26-37)
§ 22-45 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “Walk,”
“Don’t Walk” or “Wait” are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (a)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (b)   Don’t walk or wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
island while the “Don’t Walk” or “Wait” signal is showing.
(1964 Code, § 26-38) (Ord. 6891, § 5, passed 8-13-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 552.002
§ 22-46 EMERGENCY AMBER SIGNAL LIGHTS; OPERATION OF VEHICLES WHEN LIGHTS ON.
   A steady amber traffic-control light of a duration in excess of five seconds
shall constitute an emergency signal. All drivers of motor vehicles approaching
an intersection where an emergency signal is being displayed shall immediately
drive such vehicles to a position as near as possible and parallel to the
right-hand edge or curb of the street before entering the intersection, and
shall remain in such a position until a green or “Go” signal is shown.
(1964 Code, § 26-57.1)
§ 22-47 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (a)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (b)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (c)   No person shall place or maintain a flashing light or flashing
electric sign of any kind or color within 1,000 feet of any intersection unless
a permit is granted by the state highway and public transportation commission
for such flashing light or electric sign.
   (d)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (e)   In addition to being a misdemeanor as set out in §
22-20 of this chapter, every such prohibited sign, signal, light or marking is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction
over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be
removed without notice.
(1964 Code, § 26-39)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.006
§ 22-48 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereof, or any
other part thereof.
(1964 Code, § 26-40)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 544.005
§ 22-49 PROOF REQUIRED IN PROSECUTION.
   In any prosecution for any violation of this chapter, it shall not be
necessary for the state to prove the installation or authority therefor, of any
sign or traffic-control device. Any person charged with a violation of this
chapter shall have the right to prove the sign, signal or traffic-control
device was not so installed or authorized as a defense.
(1964 Code, § 26-40.1) (Ord. 7110, § 1, passed 1-6-1975)
§§ 22-50—22-65 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 22-66 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
   (b)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However,
this subsection (c) shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
centerline in making a left turn into or out of an alley, private road or
driveway.
(1964 Code, § 26-41)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 545.051
§ 22-67 OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (b)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(1964 Code, § 26-42)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.053 through 545.055
§ 22-68 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; and
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction or movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the main-traveled portion of the
roadway except as provided in Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6701d, § 54A.
(1964 Code, § 26-43)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.056, 545.057
§ 22-69 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter and unless such
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   Where sight restriction is such that the section of highway being
traversed lies within a no passing zone as determined and marked in accordance
with Tex. Transportation Code, Title 7;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing;
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel;
and
      (4)   When awaiting access to a ferry operated by the state highway
commission.
   (c)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor
to any driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private roadway
or driveway.
   (d)   The state highway and public transportation commission shall post
signs along the approach to any ferry operated by it notifying motorists that
passing is prohibited when there is a standing line of vehicles awaiting access
to the ferry.
(1964 Code, § 26-44)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.056, 545.057
§ 22-70 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop as required by Tex. Transportation Code § 544.010 and
after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has
entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so
closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
when such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to
such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on
another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however,
that, if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his or her failure to yield right-of-
way.
(1964 Code, §§ 26-45, 26-46)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 545.153
§ 22-71 RIGHT TURNS FROM BUS LANES.
   Unless a different method of turning is prescribed by law or directed by an
official traffic-control device, in which event turning shall be made in
accordance with such law or with the directions of such device, the approach
for a right turn shall not be begun or made in a bus lane designated as such by
an official traffic-control device prior to the midway point of that block
preceding the corner at which such right turn is to be executed.
(1964 Code, § 26-47) (Ord. 5045, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 7015, § 3, passed 6-3-
1974; Ord. 9252, § 3, passed 11-13-1984)
Cross-reference:
   Buses generally, §§
34-16 et seq.
§ 22-72 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different
street or roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of
such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or
traffic-control device erected by public authority, and after so stopping, may
only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection
without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or
roadway.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle on a single lane street or roadway, or a
street or roadway consisting of only two traffic lanes, upon approaching the
intersection, not otherwise controlled by traffic signs or signals, of a
divided street or roadway, or of a street or roadway divided into three or more
marked traffic lanes, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate
use of such intersection to vehicles on such other street which are within the
intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to
constitute a hazard and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when such
driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with
traffic using such different street or roadway.
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle on an unpaved street or roadway approaching
the intersection of a paved roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege
of immediate use of such intersection to any vehicle on such paved roadway
which is within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such
proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping may only
proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without
interference or collision with traffic using such paved street or roadway.
   (d)   Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the driver of a
vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway, not
otherwise regulated herein, or controlled by traffic- control signs or signals,
shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection
to any other vehicle which has entered the intersection from such driver’s
right or is approaching such intersection from such driver’s right in such
proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard and after so stopping may only
proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter such intersection without
interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway.
   (e)   The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a street or
roadway from a street or roadway which terminates at the intersection, not
otherwise regulated in this section or controlled by traffic-control signs or
signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of the
intersection to another vehicle which has entered the intersection from the
other street or roadway or is approaching the intersection on the other street
or roadway in such proximity as to constitute a hazard and after stopping may
only proceed when the driver may safely enter the intersection without
interference or collision with the traffic using the other street or roadway.
   (f)   A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accord with
subsections (a) through (e) of this section who is involved in a collision or
interference with other traffic at such intersection is presumed not to have
yielded the right-of-way as required by this chapter.
   (g)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.151 through 545.153
§ 22-73 U-TURNS.
   (a)   When restricted. U-turns are restricted as follows.
      (1)   Midblock. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to
turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction or to make a 180-
degree turn on any street between street intersections, except on divided
roadways where median openings are provided for such movements.
      (2)   Signalized intersections. It shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction or
make a 180-degree turn at any intersection where traffic is controlled by
signal lights, except at intersections on divided roadways during the left-turn
signal phase.
   (b)   When prohibited. At no time shall U-turns be permitted, either at
intersections or median openings, where signs prohibiting such movements are
erected.
   (c)   Required conditions. At no time shall U-turns be made unless such
movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering
with other traffic.
(1964 Code, § 26-49) (Ord. 8949, § 1, passed 10-18-1983)
§ 22-74 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING— GENERALLY.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or
roadway of any controlled-access highway.
   (c)   In no event shall this section be construed in such a manner as to
permit the backing of a motor vehicle into or across an intersection of public
streets or to permit the backing of a motor vehicle so as to turn it from a
street into an intersecting street.
(1964 Code, § 26-50)
§ 22-75 SAME—SIGNAL ON BACKING.
   Before backing, ample warning shall be given, and while backing unceasing
vigilance shall be exercised by the driver not to injure those behind.
(1964 Code, § 26-51)
§ 22-76 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may
be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
(1964 Code, § 26-52)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 545.155
§ 22-77 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(1964 Code, § 26-53)
§ 22-78 STARTING AND TURNING AND SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING.
   (a)   Required position and method of turning at intersections. The driver
of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows.
      (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
      (2)   Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in
such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left
turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection.
      (3)   Placement of official traffic-control devices. The state highway
and public transportation commission and the city may cause official traffic-
control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby
require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section
be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when such devices are
so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such devices.
   (b)   Starting parked vehicle. No person shall start a vehicle which is
stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with
safety.
   (c)   Turning movements and required signals. Turning movements and required
signals shall be as follows.
      (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in subsection (a)
above, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with safety. Except under conditions set out in
Tex. Revised Civil Statutes Article 6701d, § 24(a), no person shall so turn any
vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.
      (2)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
      (4)   The signals provided for in subsection (d) of this section shall be
used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parked
position and shall not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled
vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators of other
vehicles approaching from the rear.
   (d)   Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps. Signals by hand and arm or
signal lamps shall be given as follows.
      (1)   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either
by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided
in subsection (d)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single
vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles.
   (e)   Method of giving hand-and-arm signals.
      (1)   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given
from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals
shall indicate as follows:
         a.   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
         b.   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
         c.   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
      (2)   The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand-and-arm, or by a signal lamp or signal device approved by the department.
(1964 Code, § 26-54)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.101 through 545.107
§ 22-79 OPERATION OF VEHICLES AND STREET CARS ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of Tex. Revised
Civil Statutes Article 6701d, § 124, or of a police vehicle properly and
lawfully making use of an audible signal only:
      (1)   The driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer; and
      (2)   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, as above
stated, the motorman of every streetcar shall immediately stop such car clear
of any intersection and keep it in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(1964 Code, § 26-55)
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 541.156
§ 22-80 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO HAVE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Police, fire department, public service companies, United States mail
vehicles, ambulances and other authorized emergency vehicles shall have the
right-of-way on any street and through any procession, when in the regular
course of their proper duty.
(1964 Code, § 26-56)
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
§ 22-81 INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Any person who shall interfere with any of the vehicles named in the
foregoing section, when the same are in the regular course of their proper
duties, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties
herein imposed.
(1964 Code, § 26-57)
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
§ 22-82 USE RESTRICTED OF FREEWAYS TO AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES.
   (a)   No vehicle except of the automotive type shall be driven upon or
operated upon any freeway.
   (b)   The use of any freeway by pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians is
prohibited. This restriction and prohibition shall apply to the shoulders and
median strips of the freeways, as well as to the pavement surface.
(1964 Code, § 26-59)
§ 22-83 DIRECTION OF TRAVEL ON FREEWAYS; ENTRANCES AND EXITS; CROSSING MEDIAN
PROHIBITED; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   The direction of travel of vehicles on each freeway shall be one way only as
determined and indicated by the city traffic engineer. It shall be unlawful for
the driver of any vehicle to enter a freeway at any place other than a
designated entrance or to leave a freeway at any place other than a designated
exit, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive same
across the median or center strip of any freeway. It shall be unlawful and a
violation hereof for the driver or owner of any vehicle to park his or her
vehicle or to permit the same to be parked, stand or remain on any portion of a
freeway.
(1964 Code, § 26-60)
§ 22-84 OPERATION OF VEHICLES EXCEPT CERTAIN BUSES AND BICYCLES IN BUS LANES
PROHIBITED; CERTAIN BUS LANES DESIGNATED.
   (a)   Except for turning as provided in §
22-71, a person commits an offense if he or she operates a vehicle which is not
a bus of the public bus transportation system or a bicycle in any portion of a
roadway designated as a bus lane by an official traffic-control device.
   (b)   Where a bus lane is designated in any portion of a roadway as a bus-
bicycle lane, bicycles may be operated within such lane.
   (c)   In addition to any bus lanes established by the city traffic engineer,
as authorized in this chapter, each of the following is designated as a bus
lane:
      Houston Street. The westernmost lane between the south curb line of
Belknap Street and the north curb line of West Lancaster Street.
      Throckmorton Street. The easternmost lane between the north curb line of
West Lancaster Street and the south curb line of West Belknap Street.
(1964 Code, § 26-61) (Ord. 7015, § 4, passed 6-3-1974; Ord. 9252, § 4, passed
11-13-1984; Ord. 19768-07-2011, § 1, passed 7-19-2011)
§ 22-85 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate any
street or portion of a street as a “one-way” street on which driving is
prohibited in one direction and permitted in the opposite direction, and to
place or erect official traffic-control devices indicating same.
(1964 Code, § 26-62) (Ord. 8242, § 1, passed 12-23-1980)
§ 22-86 SPEEDING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle on a
street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
circumstances then existing.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle at
such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law.
   (c)   Any speed is lawful which is less than the prima facie maximum
reasonable and prudent speed for the location, yet greater than any prima facie
minimum reasonable and prudent speed for the location, but any speed in excess
of such maximum or less than such minimum shall be prima facie evidence that
the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
   (d)   It shall be an exception to subsection (c) if a person operates a
vehicle at a speed slower than the prima facie minimum reasonable and prudent
speed for the location, in order to comply with Tex. Transportation Code §
545.351(c)(1) through (5), as amended, where there exists a hazard named
therein.
   (e)   If the prima facie maximum reasonable and prudent speeds specified by
Tex. Transportation Code § 545.352, as amended, have been superseded by prima
facie maximum or minimum reasonable and prudent speeds established by the city,
one or more appropriate signs giving notice of the city established speed must
be erected at the location(s).
   (f)   Where no prima facie maximum reasonable and prudent speed requiring
the erection of one or more appropriate signs giving notice has been
established for a public street or highway within the city urban district, the
prima facie maximum reasonable and prudent speed for such location shall be 30
mph as specified by Tex. Transportation Code § 545.352, as amended, unless a
slower speed is required by § 545.351, as amended, where there exists a special
hazard named therein.
   (g)   The prima facie maximum reasonable and prudent speed on any street,
highway, roadway, path, or parking area open to the public, whether dedicated
or not, contained within the following public parks shall be five miles per
hour in parking lots, and elsewhere in each park it shall be the speed, in
miles per hour, designated below, provided that in each case an appropriate
sign giving notice thereof shall be erected:
Park Maximum Speed (mph)
Park                                Maximum Speed (mph)
Botanic Gardens                     20
Buck Sansom Park                    20
Camp Joy Park Road                  20
Carter Park                         20
Casino Park                         20
Cobb Park                           20
Forest Park                         20
Fort Worth Nature Center and Refuge 20
Gateway Park                        20
Greenway Park                       20
Hatchery Road                       20
Hillside Park                       20
Lake Arlington Park                 20
Lake Como Park                      20
Longhorn Park                       20
Marion Sansom Park                  20
Oakland Lake Park                   20
Rockwood Park                       20
Rosemont Park                       20
Sycamore Park                       20
Trail Drivers Park                  20
Trinity Park                        20
Z. Boaz Park                        20
 
   (h)   On that portion of those streets or highways being designated as a
school zone, the prima facie maximum and reasonable and prudent speed in miles
per hour as posted Monday through Friday when school is in session, shall be
such speed as indicated below, provided that an appropriate sign giving notice
thereof is erected. Such sign will have posted time of operation or a sign
indicating the prima facie maximum speed when flashing, accompanied by a
flashing light. The times of operation of each school zone shall be set by the
city traffic engineer. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of
exceeding the prima facie maximum speed limit, established below, that the day
in question was a day when there were no classes in session at the nearest
school within 2,000 feet of the location of such alleged excessive speeding.
School Zones
Street Block Extent Maximum Speed (mph)
School Zones
                                                                              Maximum
Street       Block       Extent                                               Speed
                                                                              (mph)
6th Avenue   4200—4400 275 feet north of West Seminary Drive to 115 feet    20
                         north of West Gambrell Street
North                    52 feet south of Blue Bell Drive to 60 feet south of
Academy      400—600   Osprey Drive                                         20
Boulevard
Alston       1300—1500 South property line of 1326 Alston Avenue to north   20
Avenue                   property line of 1523 Alston Avenue
Alston       2200—2300 North property line of 2252 Alston Avenue to Page    20
Avenue                   Street
Alta Vista   4500—4600 300 feet west of Appletree Street to 975 feet south  20
Road                     of Birch Drive
Alta Vista   12100—1220320 feet north of Funnel Street to 300 feet south of 20
Road                     Funnel Street
Alta Vista   12800—1290250 feet north of Champions View Parkway to 250 feet 25
Road                     south of Champions View Parkway
Altamesa     1000—1800 300 feet east of Camelot Road to 745 feet east of    25
Boulevard                Crowley Road
Altamesa     1400—1900 300 feet east of Camelot Road to 700 feet east of    30
Boulevard                Crowley Road
Altamesa     4000—4200 365 feet west of Welch Avenue to 775 feet west of    25
Boulevard                Woodway Drive
American                 22 feet south of Fandor Street to 30 feet north of
Flyer        600—700   Deauville Drive                                      20
Boulevard
Angus Drive  4500        North property line of 4500 Angus Drive to           20
                         Cumberland Road
East Annie   900—920   Kentucky Avenue to 150 feet east of Kentucky Avenue  20
Street
Ashdale      500         Deer Trail to Blackforest Lane                       20
Drive
Aster Ridge  10200       Crawford Farms Drive to 130 feet north of Paintbrush 20
Drive                    Drive
Azle Avenue  2100—2300 35 feet northwest of McKinley Avenue to southeast    20
                         property line of 2313 Azle Avenue
Azle Avenue  2900—3100 Southeast property line 2910 Azle Avenue to          20
                         northwest property line at 3109 Azle Avenue
West Bailey  5500—6200 215 feet west of Centerboard Lane to 300 feet west   25
Boswell Road             of Bowman Roberts Road
Baird Road   7100-7200   160 feet south of Burmeister Road to south property  20
                         line of 1601 County Manor Road
Ballinger    1000—1100 Texas Street to W Lancaster Avenue                   20
Street
Bangor Drive 8400—8700 West property line of 8432 Bangor Drive to 120 feet  20
                         west of Paint Trail
Barbara Road 4400        220 feet east of Isbell Road west to City Limits     20
Barron Lane  1700—1900 South property line of 1716 Barron Lane to Ellis     20
                         Road
Basil Avenue 5600—5750 85 feet south of California Parkway, South to 100    20
                         feet south of Cairn Circle
Basswood     4800—4900 100 feet southwest of Los Padres Trail to 450 feet   25
Boulevard                west of Teal Drive
Baurline     700—800   North property line of 704 Baurline Street to 50     20
Street                   feet north of Finley Street
Bayberry     6600—6900 Hemlock Street to Longstraw Drive                    20
Drive
North Beach  4700        100 feet south of McLean Road to 150 feet south of   25
Street                   Clay Avenue
North Beach  9800—9900 250 feet north and 250 feet south of Alta Vista Road 20
Street
Beaty Street 7000—7100 Major Street to 245 feet east of the 2700 block of   20
                         Mims Street
Belden       4200—4250 Inverness Avenue to South Drive                      20
Avenue
Belle                    150 feet north of Spanish Needle Trail to 600 feet
Prairie      1100—1400 south of Spanish Needle Trail                        20
Trail
Benbrook     3900—4000 Kermit Avenue to 225 feet south of Garza Avenue      20
Road
Berkshire
Lake         10200—1040Halwin Drive to United States Highway 287            20
Boulevard
East Berry   3400—3500 240 feet east of Bishop Street to 30 feet west of    20
Street                   Campbell Street
West Berry   2200—2400 100 feet west of Frazier Avenue to 175 feet west of  20
Street                   Forest Park Boulevard
Bigham       2900—3200 135 feet north of Locke Avenue to south property     20
Boulevard                line of 329 Bigham Boulevard
Bilglade     2900—3200 130 feet west of Green Avenue to 80 feet west of     20
                         Odessa Avenue
Birchman     4100—4200 West property line of 4100 Birchman Avenue to east   20
Avenue                   property line of 4239 Birchman Avenue
Bishop       2000—2300 40 feet north of Avenue M to 40 feet south of Millet 20
Street                   Avenue
Bishop       2700—2900 27 feet north of Fitzhugh Avenue to 222 feet north   20
Street                   of Crenshaw Avenue
Bison Court  9800—9900 Wall Price Keller Road to Lori Valley Lane           20
Black Forest 10400       140 feet south of Fawn Meadow Drive to Ashdale Drive 20
Lane
Blackmore    5700—5800 315 feet East of Halloran Street to 290 feet West of 20
Avenue                   Halloran Street
Blue Haze    600—800   239 feet north of Westward Drive to 212 feet north   20
Drive                    of West Point Boulevard
Blue Haze    500—700   240 feet north of Westward Drive to Sunset View      20
Drive                    Drive
Blue Mound               365 feet +/- south of Texan Drive in Denton County
Road/ F.M.   15000—1600to 850 feet +/- north of Texan Drive in City of Fort 35
156                      Worth
Bob Hanger   6600—7000 Hereford Drive to Ravenya St.                        20
Street
Bolton       1400—1700 Primrose Avenue to Aster Avenue                      20
Street
West Bonds   3100—3800 1,650 feet west of Colonial Heights Lane to 1250     20
Ranch Road               feet east of Swiftcurrent Trail
Bowman       6400—6500 50 feet north of Redeagle Creek Drive to 250 feet    20
Roberts Road             south of Longhorn Lane
Bowman       8000—8600 Outrigger Road to West Bailey Boswell Road           20
Roberts Road
Bray Birch   11700—1200Briarcreek Drive to Dinette Street                   20
Drive
Brentwood    6900—7150 120 feet west of Mims Street to 80 feet west of Muse 20
Stair Road               Street
Bryce Avenue 4100—4200 Clover Lane to 180 feet west of Thomas Place         20
East Butler  400-600     30 feet east of South Jones Street to 140 feet west  20
Street                   of Interstate Highway 30 Frontage Road
Calmont      8100—8200 215 feet west of Mojave Drive to 334 feet east of    20
Avenue                   Mojave Drive
Calmont      8200—8500 380 feet east of Shenandoah Road to 540 feet east of 20
Avenue                   Las Vegas Trail
Calmont      8300—8400 420 feet east of Laredo Drive to 425 feet west of    20
Avenue                   Laredo Drive
Calumet      5000—5100 Vera Street to 80 feet east of Liberty Street        20
Street
Campbell     2700—2900 270 feet north of Forbes Street to 20 feet south of  20
Street                   Little John Avenue
Campus Drive 4300—4500 100 feet south of Regalridge Place to 275 feet south 25
                         of East Seminary Drive
Canchim      2000—2100 Horseman Road to 450 feet west of Horseman Road      20
Street
Cantey       3200—3300 Wabash Drive to Stadium Drive                        20
Street
Canton Drive 2000—2100 Yosemite Drive to Shelton Street                     20
Cantrell-    2200—2600 122 feet east of Deerfoot Trail to 200 feet east of  20
Sansom Road              Lionfish Way
Carlock      1100—1200 S. Henderson Street to 5th Avenue                    20
Street
West Central 800—900   Gould Avenue to Lagonda Avenue                       20
Avenue
Chapel Creek 400—500   20 feet north of Powderhorn Road to 60 feet north of 20
Boulevard                Blue Haze Drive
Chapin Road  10800—1100315 feet east of Desert Lily Lane to 310 feet west   20
                         of Rose Heath Lane
Chaplin Road 700—900   155 feet north of Blackhorse Trail to 18 feet south  20
                         of Kirkham Way
Cherry Lane  3000—3100 North property line of 3000 Cherry Lane to 100 feet  25
                         north of property line at 3020 Cherry Lane
Chesser-     3500—3700 10 feet west of Fairview Street to 400 feet east of  20
Boyer Road               Lakeland Street
Childress    3200        Foard Street to Wichita Street                       20
Street
Cimarron     3500—3700 Geronimo Trail to 205 feet north of Chapin Road      20
Trail
Clayton Road 3411—3437 Waverly Way to Camp Bowie Boulevard                  20
East
West                     94 feet south of Bridgestone Drive to 90 feet east
Cleburne     8250—8400 of South Hulen Street                                20
Road
Clinton      3100—3300 South property line of 3124 Clinton Avenue to north  20
Avenue                   property line of 3301 Clinton Avenue
Clover Lane  1900—2600 235 feet north of Bryce Avenue to Calmont Avenue     20
Cloverglen   7800—7900 Country Creek Lane to Dahlia Drive                   20
Lane
Cockrell     4800—4850 Bilgade Road to Martin Lydon Avenue                  20
Avenue
Coffeetree   5400—5600 50 feet east of Woodland Springs Drive to 435 feet   20
Drive                    east of Bluewood Drive
College      1400—1500 166 feet north of Morphy Street to 155 feet south of 20
Avenue                   West Myrtle Street
Collier      1000        250 feet south of Texas Street to 200 feet north of  20
Street                   Lancaster Avenue
Comanche                 200 feet south of Branding Iron Trail to 200 feet
Springs      7900—8100 north of Clear Sky Drive                             20
Drive
Conner       1200—1300 545 feet north of East Rosedale Street to East       20
Avenue                   Rosedale Street
Cooks Lane   2400—2600 216 feet north of Bermejo Road to 20 feet north of   20
                         Castanada Circle South
Country      2600—2800 28 feet west of Creekview Lane to 564 feet west of   20
Creek Lane               Harvest Moon Lane
Country      1400—1600 West property line of 1500 Country Manor Road to     20
Manor Road               Baird Drive
Cove Meadow  8500        Garden Springs Drive to 635 feet south of Garden     20
Lane                     Springs Drive
Cowbell      14200—1430From Sendera Ranch Boulevard to Zanna Grace Way      20
Ridge Drive
Cowboy Trail 16100—162020 feet south of Wild Horse Way to 175 feet south of 20
                         Stonehill Drive
Craig Street 5800—6050 70 feet east of Canton Drive to 390 feet east of     20
                         Putnam Street
Craig Street 5900—6050 220 feet west of Putnam Street to 295 feet east of   20
                         Putnam Street
Craig Street 6300—6500 Malcolm Street to 375 feet east of Forest Avenue     20
Crawford     9900—10000265 feet east of Aster Ridge Drive to 250 feet west  20
Farms Drive              of Aster Ridge Drive
Crenshaw     3400—3600 440 feet west of Campbell Avenue to 258 feet east of 20
Avenue                   Campbell Avenue
Cromwell                 495 feet east of Provinces Street to 32 feet west of
Marine Creek 5200—5600 Glen Knoll Drive                                     20
Road
North
Crowley-     2800        200 feet west of Charolais Drive to 300 feet east of 20
Cleburne                 Poynter Street
Road
North Crump  3500—3600 Northeast Thirty-fourth Street to north property     20
Street                   line of 3605 North Crump Street
Crystal Lake 6000—6200 Bailey Boswell Road to 500 feet south of Bailey      20
Drive                    Boswell Road
Cypress      1300—1800 200 feet east of Cypress Street to 15 feet north of  20
Street                   18th Street to 93 feet east of Luella Street
Dalton       3500—3800 200 feet west of Burts Drive to 80 feet east of      20
Street                   Oliver Drive
David                    115 feet east of Henderson Road to 70 feet east of
Strickland   4600—4700 Maple Terrace Drive, East                            20
Road
Deauville    600—700   379 feet west of Marklin Drive to 620 feet east of   20
Drive                    Marklin Drive
Decatur      3600—3700 Northeast 35th Street to 150 feet south of Northeast 20
Avenue                   35th Street
Deen Road    3400—3800 490 feet south of NE 36th Street to 200 feet north   20
                         of NE 37th Street
Deer Trail   10400—1070156 feet north of West Clover Park Drive to Fawn     20
                         Meadow Lane
Denver                   400 feet north of the intersection of West Central
Avenue       1400—1500 Avenue and Denver Avenue to the intersection of West 20
                         Central Avenue and Denver Avenue
Dewey Street 2000—2100 49 feet north of Oscar Avenue to Hale Avenue         20
Diamondback  400         Rancho Canyon Way to 420 feet south of Rancho Canyon 20
Lane                     Way
Diamondback  1100—1300 200 feet east of Trail Break Drive to 200 feet west  20
Lane                     of Trail Stone Lane
Dillard      2100—2400 Elgin Street to Ramey Avenue                         20
Street
Dillow       2200—2300 Avenue N to Ramey Avenue                             20
Street
Dilworth     4900        60 feet south of Lyndon Drive to 80 feet west of     20
Court                    Lyndon Drive
Dirks Road   6500        970 feet east of Benbrook Lake Drive/Lakeside Drive  25
                         to Lakeside Drive 360 feet northwest of Dirks Road
West Drew    2400—2600 200 feet west of Sandage Avenue to McCart Avenue     20
Street
Dryden Road  3100—6450 245 feet west of Winfield Avenue to 57 feet east of  20
                         Stadium Drive
Dutch Branch 7500        100 feet east of Tameron Trail to 705 feet west of   20
Road                     Harris Parkway
Eagle                    700 feet east of Willow Springs Road to 250 feet
Boulevard    1200—1220 west of the Roundabout at Eagle Boulevard and        20
                         Prairie Breeze Drive
                         450 feet south of Adams Middle School entrance
Eagle        1200—1300 closest to Roundabout on Eagle Boulevard and Prairie 20
Boulevard                Breeze Drive to 450 feet north of Adams Middle
                         School entrance closest to the same Roundabout
Eagle Drive  1500—1700 Gwynne Street to Bonnie Brae Avenue                  20
Eastland     4600—4800 120 feet east of Jennifer Court to Freshfield Road   20
Street
Ederville    1900—2200 56 feet north of Oakland Boulevard to 50 feet south  20
Road, South              of Normandy Drive
Eighth       1600—1800 West Allen Avenue to West Jefferson Avenue           20
Avenue
Elbe Trail   8800—9000 110 feet east of Leigh Drive to 165 feet west of     20
                         Sabinas Trail
El Campo     4100—4200 Clover Lane to 65 feet west of the 2400 block of     20
Avenue                   Thomas Place
El Campo     5100        Merrick Street to Camp Bowie Boulevard               20
Boulevard
Elizabeth    800—1000  40 feet west of Lipscomb Street to South Adams       20
Boulevard                Street
Elkins       7200        W.J. Boaz Road to Bob Hanger                         20
School Road
Ellis Road   7000—7100 125 feet east of Downey Drive to west property line  20
                         of 7113 Ellis Road
East Elmwood 1100—1300 Mississippi Avenue to Beverly Avenue                 20
Avenue
Estrella     5100—5500 40 feet southeast of Santos Drive to 25 feet         20
Street                   southeast of Orcas Street
Evans Avenue 2550—2650 East Mulkey Street to 125 feet north of Morningside  20
                         Drive
Evans Avenue 2600—2700 East Mulkey Street to 160 feet south of Morningside  20
                         Drive
Evening View 10200—1040125 feet north of Goldstone Lane to 810 feet south   20
Drive                    of Tierra Vista Way
Everman      1500—1600 750 feet northwest of Marleen Drive to 650 feet      25
Parkway                  southeast of Marlene Drive
West Everman 1300—1400 240 feet west of Butterwick Street to Whispering     20
Parkway                  Cove Trail
West Everman 1600—1700 440 feet east of Willow Vale Drive to 80 feet west   20
Parkway                  of Willow Park Drive
Fair Park    4350—4400 130 feet south of East Seminary Drive to 370 feet    20
Boulevard                north of Berke Road
Fairview     2800—3000 60 feet south of Kimbo Road to 300 feet north of NE  20
Street                   28th Street
Fifth Avenue 3200—3400 60 feet south of Lowe Street to West Bewick Street   20
Fitzhugh     3400—3500 Bishop Street to Campbell Avenue                     20
Avenue
Fitzhugh     5550—5821 Stalcup Road to Robert Hughs Street (formerly Cass   20
Avenue                   Street)
Foard Street 4100—4300 150 feet south of Childress Street to 150 feet north 20
                         of Hardeman Street
West Fogg    800—1000  115 feet east of Lipscomb Street to east property    20
Street                   line of 1009 West Fogg Street
Forest       2800—3100 280 feet north of Craig Street to 275 feet south of  20
Avenue                   Church Street
Forest Hill  7900—8100 North property line of 7901 Forest Hill Drive to     20
Drive                    1100 feet south of Royal Crest Drive
Forest Hill  15500       From McPherson Road to 1150 feet east of McPherson   20
Everman Road             Road
West Freeway
(I-30) North
Frontage     4400—4500 Ashland Avenue to Hulen Street                       25
Road Control
Section:
1068-01
West Freeway
(I-30) South
Frontage     4500—4400 Hulen Street to Ashland Avenue                       25
Road Control
Section:
1068-01
NE 14th      100—300   30 feet west of North Commerce Street to North Jones 20
Street                   Street
Frosted      2000—2100 200 feet southwest of Los Barros Trail to Winter     20
Willow Lane              Hawk Drive
Frosted      2100—2200 30 feet southwest of Winter Hawk Drive to 200 feet   20
Willow Lane              southwest to of Los Barros Trail
Garden                   West property line of 3628 Garden Springs Drive to
Springs      3600—3700 Cove Meadow Lane                                     20
Drive
Gary Lane    6900—7000 East property line 6912 Gary Lane to 60 feet west of 20
                         Barron Lane
General      9200—9500 120 feet south of Heritage Trace Parkway to Green    20
Worth Drive              Drive
Georgian     100—200   375 feet west of West Frontage Road, South Freeway,  20
Road                     to west property line of 201 Georgian Road
Glen Canyon  5100—5200 125 feet east of Park Ridge Drive to Park Ridge      20
Road                     Drive
Glen Garden  1300—1400 West property line of 1325 Glen Garden Avenue to 300 20
Avenue                   feet east of Yuma Avenue
Golden                   350 feet east of Los Barros Trail to 300 feet west
Triangle     2000—2200 of Los Barros Trail                                  25
Boulevard
Goodman      5700—5800 Horne Street to Littlepage Street                    20
Avenue
Gordon       5200        Southcrest Drive to 165' south of Southcrest Drive   20
Avenue
Gould Avenue 1400—1500 Central Avenue to NW 14th Street                     20
Grand                    200 feet east of Blue Ribbon Road to Old Decatur
National     1000—1100 Road                                                 20
Boulevard
Gwynne       1300—1400 Yucca Avenue to Eagle Drive                          20
Street
Hampshire    4400—4500 160 feet east of Griggs Avenue to Lloyd Avenue       20
Boulevard
Hampshire                325 feet east of Winnie Street to west property line
Boulevard,   5500—5700 of 5701 Hampshire Boulevard, South                   20
South
Hardeman     3200—3300 Wichita Street to west property line of 3325         20
Street                   Hardeman Street
Harlanwood   4400        S. Hulen St. to Overton Park W.                      20
Drive
East Harmon  1400—1700 158 feet east of Prairie Dawn Drive to 436 feet west 20
Road                     of Harmon Road
Harriet      1800—1900 50 feet west of Cowboy Trail to 238 feet southwest   20
Creek Drive              of Elementary Drive (Private Street)
Harris       7500—7600 315 feet north of Foxstem Lane to 400 feet south of  20
Parkway                  Foxstem Lane
Haslet       3800—3900 400 feet east of Horseshoe Canyon Road to 50 feet    25
Roanoke Road             west of Ridgetop Road
Haslet-      13700       Cattlebaron Drive/Haslet-Roanoke Road to 225 feet    20
Roanoke Road             south of Cattlebaron Drive/Haslet-Roanoke Road
East Hattie  800—900   45 feet east of Missouri Avenue to front of 921 East 20
Street                   Hattie Street
Haynie       2900—3100 Craig Street to 220 feet southwest of Church Street  20
Street
Hemphill     1300—1400 200 feet north of West Morphy Street to 310 feet     25
Street                   south of West Morphy Street
Hemphill     2200—2300 West Powell Avenue to 325 feet south of West         25
Street                   Jessamine Street
Hemphill     3300—3400 446 feet north of West Bewick Street to Woodland     25
Street                   Avenue
Hemphill     9700—9900 West Risinger Road to Dead End                       25
Street
South                    185 feet south of Lowe Street to 115 feet south of
Henderson    3200—3400 Orange Street                                        20
Street
Heritage                 50 feet east of Cogley Drive to 50 feet west of
Trace        3600—4000 Barksdale Drive                                      25
Parkway
Heritage                 210 feet west of Carrier Drive to 257 feet east of
Trace        2200—2500 Carrier Drive                                        25
Parkway
High Mesa    13700       Cattlebaron Drive/Haslet-Roanoke Road to 300 feet    20
Road                     north of Cattlebaron Drive/Haslet-Roanoke Road
Hollis       3100—3400 165 feet west of Williams Place to 130 feet west of  20
Street                   Barbell Lane
Horne Street 3900—4200 70 feet south of Kilpatrick Avenue to 140 feet north 20
                         of Humbert Avenue
Horseman     7500—7600 200 feet south of Canchim Street to 255 feet north   20
Road                     of Canchim Street
Horton Road  2900—3000 Alcannon Avenue to East Seminary Drive               20
North                    Northwest Twentieth Street to North property line of
Houston      2000        2021 North Houston Street                            20
Street
North                    North property line of 3116 North Houston Street to
Houston      3100—3300 north property line of 3303 North Houston Street     20
Street
Hudgins      700—800   South property line of 724 Hudgins Avenue to 100     20
Avenue                   feet south of East Belknap Street
Huffines     4700—4900 Castlerow Lane to 318 feet north of Seafield Lane    25
Boulevard
Hughes       600—700   170 feet south of Panola Avenue to Hampshire         20
Avenue                   Boulevard
Hulen Street 2800—3200 160 feet south of West Freeway east bound service    20
                         road to 65 feet north of Geddes Avenue
South Hulen  3800—4050 200 feet north of Arborlawn Drive to 250 feet south  20
Street                   of Briarhaven Road
South Hulen  3800—4000 200 feet north of Arborlawn Drive to 200 feet south  25
Street                   of Briarhaven Road
South Hulen  6200—6300 Whitman Avenue to 350 feet south of Wrigley Way      25
Street
South Hulen  7900—8200 200 feet north of Tollcross Lane to 240 feet north   25
Street                   of South River Trail
South Hulen  7900—8500 200 feet south of West Cleburne Road to 240 feet     25
Street                   north of Stone River Road
South Hulen  8900—9400 410 feet north of Nightingale Drive to 750 feet      20
Street                   north of McPherson Boulevard
Hunting      2500—2800 190 feet east of Dunlap Drive to 120 feet east of El 20
Drive                    Rancho Road
Isbell Road  500—700   190 feet north of Barbara Road to 200 feet south of  20
                         Poinsetta Drive
James Avenue 4300—4400 Seminary Drive to West Gambrell Street               20
James Avenue 4500—4700 Boyce Avenue to West Felix Avenue                    20
James Avenue 5600—5700 165 feet south of California Parkway to 300 feet     20
                         north of Edgecliff Road
East
Jefferson    1100—1200 Mississippi Avenue to Beverly Avenue                 20
Avenue
South                    95 feet south of West Magnolia Avenue to 200 feet
Jennings     1300—1400 north of West Myrtle Street                          20
Avenue
Jessamine    700—850   120 feet west of Lipscomb Street to Hemphill Street  20
Street
John T.      7200—7400 260 feet east of Sandy Lane to 450 feet east of      25
White Road               Williams Road
South Jones  3500—3700 South property line of 3528 South Jones Street to    20
                         south property line of 3709 South Jones Street
Keller-Hicks 3200—3600 465 feet west of Ridgeview Circle to 150 feet west   25
Road                     of Alta Vista Road
Keller-Hicks 3100—3600 160 feet west of Colonial Trace Road to 160 feet     25
Road                     west of Alta Vista Road
Kentucky     400—700   90 feet south of East Hattie Street to Bessie Street 20
Avenue
Kermit       7300—7500 250 feet west of Southwest Boulevard to 60 feet east 20
Avenue                   of Highway 377 Frontage Road
Kimbo Road   3400—3600 225 feet west of Fairview Street to 165 feet west of 20
                         Mesquite Road
Kings        1200—1300 North property line of 1208 Kings Highway to Parrish 20
Highway                  Road
Kingswood    6100—6300 135 feet south of Whitman Avenue to south property   20
Drive                    line of 6313 Kingswood Drive
Kroger Drive 5200—5400 20 feet east of Ray White Road to 1590 feet East of  20
                         Ray White Road
Lackland     3100—3200 300 feet north of Garland Avenue to 300 feet south   20
Road                     of Garland Avenue
Lake Country 7000—7200 110 feet west of Spring Road to 4040 feet west of    20
Drive                    Sandcastle Court
Lakeside     7000        360 feet northwest of Benbrook lake Drive/ Dirks     25
Drive                    Road to Dirks Road
Laredo Drive 2800—2900 225 feet south of Calmont Avenue to south property   20
                         line of 2909 Laredo Drive
Las Vegas    2800—3000 South property line of 2820 Las Vegas Trail to 525   20
Trail                    feet south of Mojave Trail
Legacy Drive 9600—9900 Clifford Street to N. Academy Boulevard              20
Lehigh Drive 2800        Elbe Trail to Tyne Trail                             20
Libbey       5700—5800 Horne Street to east property line of 5839 Libbey    20
Avenue                   Avenue
Lincoln      2000—2200 165 feet south of Northwest Twenty-first Street to   20
Avenue                   north property line of 2201 Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln      3100—3200 90 feet south of West Long Avenue to 520 feet south  20
Avenue                   of West Long Avenue
Little Fox   600—800   126 feet north of Little Valley Drive to 221 feet    20
Lane                     south of Peppertree Lane
Litsey Road  4500—4600 1800 feet east of Mallard Creek Street to City Limit 20
East Long    700—1000  East property line of 700 East Long to 50 feet west  20
Avenue                   of Nichols Street
West Long    200—400   215 feet west of Pearl Avenue to 200 feet east of    20
Avenue                   Pearl Avenue
West Long    800—1100  170 feet east of Lincoln Avenue to 85 feet west of   20
Avenue                   Chestnut Avenue
West Long    3100—3400 70 feet southwest of NW 31st Street to 300 feet      20
Avenue                   northeast of NW 33rd Street
Longstraw    4000—4200 225 feet east of Buttonwood Drive to 300 feet east   20
Drive                    of Whitewood Drive
Lori Valley  5400        Bison Court to 291 feet west of St. James Street     20
Lane
Lost Spurs   13700—1390Mountain Ranch Road to Bandera Ranch Road            20
Road
Lowery Road  7500—7700 20 feet west of the 6600 block of Cooks Lane to 700  20
                         feet west of the 6600 block Cooks Lane
Lubbock      4000—4100 Seminary Drive to Bolt Street                        20
Avenue
Madrid Drive 3700—3800 Campana Street to Woodway Drive                      20
North Main
Street (BU-
287P)        1400—1500 210 feet south of NE 14th Street to 250 feet north   20
Control                  of NE 14th Street
Section:
014-01
Marine Creek 4900—6000 245 feet south of Northwest College Drive to 400     20
Parkway                  feet north of Woodbine Cliff Drive
Marlow Lane  1000—1200 Running River Lane to 135 feet west of Delafield     20
                         Drive
Martin Lydon 3000—3300 26 feet west of Cockrell Avenue to 280 feet west of  20
Avenue                   Odessa Avenue
Mary’s Lane3000—3200 Locke Avenue to south property line of 3201 Mary’s 20
                         Lane
May Street   3900—4050 West Drew Street to West Bolt Street                 20
McCart       4000—4100 295 feet south of Bolt Street to 77 feet south of    20
Avenue                   West Pafford Street
McCart       6000—6100 130 feet southeast of Denbury Drive to Springleaf    20
Avenue                   Circle
McCart       6000—6100 110 feet southwest of Duringer Road to 445 feet      20
Avenue                   northeast of Westcreek Drive
McCart       10400—1050200 feet north of Mountain Meadow Road to 1,380 feet 20
Avenue                   south of Mountain Meadow Road
McKinley     2100—2200 250 feet north of NW 22nd Street to 102 feet south   20
Avenue                   of NW 22nd Street
McKinley     2500—2700 North property line of 2520 McKinley Avenue to north 20
Avenue                   property line of 2701 McKinley Avenue
McPherson    4500—4900 487 feet northwest of South Hulen Street to 360 feet 20
Road                     southeast of South Hulen Street
Meadowbrook  4200—4400 285 feet east of Oakland Boulevard to Provine Street 20
Drive
Mesa Crest   1200—1300 Prairie Breeze Drive to 275 feet east of Mesa        20
Drive                    Crossing Drive
Miller       2100—2200 120 feet south of Avenue M to 360 feet south of      20
Avenue                   Avenue N
Mims Street  2500—2700 145 feet south of Hightower Street to 255 feet north 20
                         of Beaty Street
Mississippi  2700—2800 Morningside Drive to 35 feet north of Glen Garden    20
Avenue                   Drive
Mitchell     3600—3900 Lowriemore Lane to 120 feet south of Moresby Street  20
Boulevard
Moberly      3500—3600 West property line of 3516 Moberly Street to west    20
Street                   property line of 3617 Moberly Street
Mojave Trail 8300—8400 135 feet east of Cortez Drive to Conejos Drive       20
Morley Drive 5700        135 feet south of Wren Avenue to Walton Avenue       20
Morningside  1000—1200 New York Avenue to Beverly Avenue                    20
Drive
Avenue N     3900—4100 225 feet west of Dilbow Street to Miller Avenue      20
Nashville    1000—1300 86 feet northwest of Avenue B to 63 feet northwest   20
Street                   of Avenue E
NE 37th      1700        Weber Street to Schwartz Avenue                      20
Street
Norma Street 7100        15 feet east of Mims Street to 50 feet west of       20
                         Warren Lane
Northwest                250 feet east of Athletic Drive to 180 feet west of
College      2500—2900 Education Drive                                      20
Drive
North
Normandale   9600        Saints Circle to 645 feet east of Saints Circle      20
Street
West
Northside    700—900   100 feet east of Gould Avenue to Lagonda Avenue      25
Drive
New York     2550—2650 East Mulkey Street to Morningside Drive              20
Avenue
NW 14th      800—900   Denver Avenue to Gould Avenue                        20
Street
Oak Grove    8900—9200 1466 feet north of Forum Way to 350 feet south of    25
Road                     Forum Way
Oak Hill     2100—2200 180 feet north of Meadowbrook Drive to 200 feet      20
Road                     north of Shelton Street
Oakhurst     1300—1900 136 feet north of East Northside Drive/Yucca Avenue  20
Scenic Drive             to 200 feet south of Bluebird Avenue
Oakland      100         520 feet southwest of East First Street to East      20
Boulevard                First Street
Oakland      600—900   South property line of 622 Oakland Boulevard to      20
Boulevard                Hawlet Street
Oakland      1800—2200 200 feet north of the 4100 block of Normandy Road to 20
Boulevard                75 feet south of Ederville Road
Oakmont      6600—6700 328 feet north of Canyon Springs Road to 448 feet    20
Trail                    south of Canyon Springs Road
Old Benbrook 3900—4000 23 feet south of Kermit Avenue to 229 feet south of  20
Road                     Garza Avenue
Old Decatur  5800—6200 615 feet south of Longhorn Avenue to 150 feet north  20
Road                     of Paluxy Sands Trail
Old Denton   10200—1030240 feet north of Crawford Farms Drive to 200 feet   30
Road                     south of Prestige Road
Old                      200 feet to the east property line of 14700 Old
Weatherford  14700—1625Weatherford Road to 200 feet west of the east        20
Road                     property line of 1625 Old Weatherford Road
Oscar Avenue 2800—3000 North property line of 2802 Oscar Avenue to Dewey    20
                         Street
Oscar Avenue 3000—3100 10 feet north of Dewey Street to 22 feet south of NE 20
                         30th Street
Overton Park 3025—3100 Glenwood Drive to south property line of 3117        20
East                     Overton Park East
Overton Park 3000—3200 North property line of 3016 Overton Park West to 310 20
West                     feet north of Bellaire Drive South
East Pafford 100—200   South Main Street to Bryan Avenue                    20
Street
West Pafford 100—300   South Main Street to May Street                      20
Street
West Pafford 2400—2500 15 feet east of Merida Avenue to McCart Avenue       20
Street
Park Place   1900—2100 80 feet east of Warner Road to west property line of 20
Avenue                   2125 Park Place Avenue
Park Ridge               From the west property line of 3628 Park Ridge
Boulevard    3600        Boulevard to the west property line of 3624 Park     20
                         Ridge Boulevard
Park Vista   7800—8000 270 feet north of Redwood Trail to 470 feet south of 20
Boulevard                Glen Canyon Road
Parkwood                 100 feet south of the 5600 block of Redwood Trail to
Hill         8100—8400 100 feet north of the 5500 block of Milford Drive    20
Boulevard
Parker                   415 feet north of David Strickland Road to 450 feet
Henderson    5100—5400 south of David Strickland Road                       20
Road
Pecos Street 3400—3700 East property line of 3532 Pecos Street to 500 feet  20
                         east of Shackleford Street
Pershing     6100        130 feet west of Winthrop Avenue to 30 feet east of  20
Avenue                   Westridge Avenue
Pine Grove   4600        Viridian Lane to 280 feet east of Tangleridge Drive  20
Lane
South
Pipeline     12400—1206Sunny Creek Lane to 315 feet west of Simmons Drive   20
Road
Poynter      9100—9200 Nevis Drive to North Crowley Cleburne Road           20
Street
Prairie      11500       Mesa Crest Drive to 60 feet north of Crest Meadow    20
Breeze Drive             Drive
Precinct     2400—2600 Riverfalls Drive to Trammel Davis Road               20
Line Road
Primrose     3100        60 feet east of North Riverside Drive to Bolton      20
Avenue                   Street
Putnam       2600—2800 South property line of 2708 to south property line   20
Street                   of 2833
Ramey Avenue 3900—4000 East property line of 3908 Ramey Avenue to 190 feet  20
                         east of Dillow Street
Ramey Avenue 5100—5200 60 feet west of Marlin Street to Bethune Street      20
Ramey Avenue 5600—5700 180 feet east of Farrell Street to 149 feet west of  20
                         Cass Street
Rancho       400—500   220 feet west of Cabo Street to 210 feet west of     20
Canyon Way               Diamondback Lane
Rand Street  2300—2400 Meadowbrook Drive to north property line of 2420     20
                         Rand Street
Randol Mill  6800        690 feet east of Loop 820 northbound service road to 20
Road                     15 feet west of Old Randol Mill Road
Randol Mill  4600—4700 Oakland Boulevard to 340 feet northeast of Havasu    30
Road                     Trail
Ray White    8700—8900 320 feet north of Shiver Road to 365 feet south of   25
Road                     Senator Drive
Ray White    9200—9400 200 feet north of Kroger Road to 135 feet south of   25
Road                     Emmeryville Lane
Redgrave     15700—1580Shepperton Way to 120 feet north of Blackhorse Trail 20
Drive
                         100 feet west of the 7900 block of Boylston Drive to
Redwood Tr.  5500—5600 20 feet west of the 8900 block of Parkwood Hill      20
                         Boulevard
Refugio      3100—3200 170 feet north of NW 32nd Street to 210 feet south   20
Avenue                   of NW 32nd Street
Rendon Road  12300       80 feet south of Ponderosa Lane to 1,100 feet north  20
                         of Hopper Road
Rickenbacker 5700—5900 140 feet east of Carverly Avenue to 125 feet west of 20
Place                    Lucas Drive
East Ripy    400—600   Stuart Drive to 130 feet west of Frontage Road IH 35 20
Street                   South
West                     1080 feet east of Cove Meadow Lane to 294 feet west
Risinger     3600—3900 of Cove Meadow Lane                                  25
Road
West                     493 feet west of McCart Avenue to 400 feet west of
Risinger     3500—3900 Cove Meadow Lane                                     25
Road
West                     300 feet west of Shavano Drive to 360 feet east of
Risinger     4500—4600 Tangleridge Drive                                    25
Road
Riverside    500—800   30 feet north of Fisher Avenue to 105 feet north of  20
Drive                    East Twelfth Street
North                    100 feet north of Primrose Avenue to 30 feet south
Riverside    1400—1700 of Aster Avenue                                      20
Drive
North                    321 feet south of Hollis Street to 332 feet north of
Riverside    2100—2200 Hollis Street                                        20
Drive
North                    250 feet south of Staghorn Circle to 80 feet north
Riverside    7500-7600   of Emerywood Lane                                    20
Drive
North
Riverside    7500—7700 Chaddybrook Lane to 245 feet north of Bigleaf Lane   20
Drive
North                    300 feet north of the intersection of North
Riverside    7800—7900 Riverside Drive and Old Denton Road to 300 feet      20
Drive                    south of the intersection of North Riverside Drive
                         and Old Denton Road
South
Riverside    2500—2600 East Mulkey Street to 145 feet south of Colvin       25
Drive (BU-               Avenue
287P)
Roosevelt    2500—2700 185 feet north of Azle Avenue to north property line 20
Avenue                   of 2707 Roosevelt Avenue
East                     300 feet west of South Beach Street to 250 feet east
Rosedale     2510—2630 of Conner Avenue on the south side of East Rosedale  20
Street                   Street
Running      8100—8500 Horse Shoe Bend Drive to 106 feet north of Lindstorm 20
River Lane               Drive
Sabinas      2800—8800 Elbe Trail to Tyne Trail                             20
Trail
St. Louis    3850—3900 West Pafford Street to 130 feet north of West Drew   20
Avenue                   Street
Samuels      300—500   22 feet north of East Bluff Street to 290 feet South 20
Avenue                   of Gounah Street
Sandshell    7100—7400 87 feet northeast of Corrine Drive to 110 feet north 25
Boulevard                of Clay Mountain Trail
Sandy Lane   1000—1100 John T. White Road to 125 feet south of Alverstone   20
                         Drive
San Rose     3700—3800 North property line of 3717 San Rose Drive to 214    20
Drive                    feet north of Baylor Street
Santos Drive 3600        From Azel Avenue to Estrella Street                  20
Saratoga                 50 feet east of Campolina Way to 40 feet south of
Springs      12500       Champions View Parkway                               20
Circle
Saratoga                 50 feet east of Outlook Avenue to 50 feet north of
Springs      12700       Champions View Parkway                               20
Circle
Schwartz     3600—3800 160 feet south of Northeast Thirty-sixth Street to   20
Avenue                   125 feet south of Beaumont Street
Seaman       1100        55 feet south of Clary Avenue to 160 feet north of   20
Street                   Dalford Street
East                     North approach of Fair Park Boulevard to 130 feet
Seminary     1100—1300 east of Arrowwood Drive                              20
Drive
East
Seminary     2300—2900 945 feet west of Campus Drive to Horton Road         25
Drive
West                     75 feet west of 5th Avenue to 70 feet east of James
Seminary     1300—1600 Avenue                                               20
Drive
West
Seminary     3500—3700 90 feet west of Granbury Road to Trail Lake Drive    20
Drive
Serrano      14300       Rancho Canyon Way to Copper Ridge Road               20
Ridge Road
West Seventh 3700—3900 West property line 3720 West Seventh Street to north 20
Street                   approach of Belle Place
S.H. 114
Control      1900—1700 600 feet+/- east of Harriet Creek Drive to 360       30
Section:                 feet+/-east of Blackwater Trail
0353-02
Shackleford  4800—5000 Cutter Street to 110 feet south of Pecos Street      20
Street
Shelby Road  2900—3000 300 feet west of Georgetown Drive to 593 feet east   25
                         of Rendon Road
Shelton      6000        West property line of 6009 Shelton Street to Canton  20
Street                   Drive
Sheridan     7200—7400 Bellvue Drive to Victorian Drive                     20
Road
Shiver Road  4600—4700 250 feet east of Trace Ridge Drive to 850 feet west  20
                         of Trace Ridge Drive
Shiver Road  5300—5500 112 feet east of Saratoga Road to 150 feet south of  20
                         Scott Valley Street
Somerset     1900—2200 51 feet south of Ederville Road to 50 feet north of  20
Drive                    Meadowbrook Drive
Southcrest   1900—2100 200 feet east of Townsend Drive to 200 feet west of  20
Drive                    Townsend Drive
South Drive  3500—3550 Anita Avenue to 115 feet north of Clay Avenue        20
South
Freeway West 3500—3600 255 feet south of East Biddison Street to East       20
Frontage                 Butler Street
Road
South Hills  3200—3500 60 feet east of Winston Road to the west property    20
Drive                    line of 3519 South Hills Avenue
Southwest
Boulevard    3850—4000 200 feet north of Kermit Avenue to Davenport Avenue  20
(S.H. 183)
Spanish      1200—1300 Belle Prairie Trail to 1,000 feet east of Belle      20
Needle Trail             Prairie Trail
Spring       8500        Golf Club Drive to Lake Country Drive                20
Street
Spurgeon     1300—1400 Fifth Avenue to east property line of 1413 Spurgeon  20
Street                   Street
Stadium      2600—2700 138 feet south of McPherson Avenue to 114 feet south 20
Drive                    of Cantey Street
Stadium                  South property line of 3700 Stadium Drive to 128
Drive        3700—3900 feet north of north property line of 3901 Stadium    20
                         Drive
Staghorn     4000        Buttonwood Drive to Honeybee Lane                    20
Circle
Stalcup Road 2600—2900 208 feet east of Ramey Avenue to 133 feet west of    20
                         Anderson Street
Stalcup Road 3400—3700 North property line of 3400 Stalcup Road to 325 feet 20
                         south of Cox Street
State
Highway 114              600 east +/- east of Harriet Creek Drive to 360 feet
Control      1900—1700 +/- east of Blackwater Trail                         35
Section:
0353-02
Stillwater   9000—9030 Lehigh Drive to 200 feet east of Lehigh Drive        20
Trail
Summer Creek 8000—8100 75 feet south of Leafy Trail to 75 feet north of     25
Drive                    Summer View
Summer Creek 9800—10200300 feet north of Beautyberry Drive to Sunflower     20
Drive                    Drive
Summerfields 3800—4000 420 feet west of Fox Chase Drive to 360 feet east of 20
Boulevard                Fox Chase Drive
Summerfields 3900—4100 200 feet west of Buttonwood Drive to 350 east of     20
Boulevard                Buttonwood Drive
Summerfields 4000—4100 202 feet west of Buttonwood Drive to 349 feet east   20
Boulevard                of Buttonwood Drive
Sycamore     4900—5000 185 feet west of Star Ridge Drive/Creekmoor Drive to 25
School Road              71 feet east of Greengage Drive
North                    340 feet west of Rainy Lake Drive to 415 feet east
Tarrant      4000—4200 of Taggart Trail                                     25
Parkway
Teal Drive   7100—7300 225 feet south of Basswood Boulevard to 200 feet     20
                         south of Cable Drive
East Terrell 950—1100  West property line of 956 East Terrell Avenue to 355 20
Avenue                   feet west of Tennessee Avenue
Texan Road   2100—2200 2520 feet west of FM 156 to 1808 feet west of FM 156 20
                         370 feet south of the intersection of Tyne Trail and
Thames Trail 2700—2800 Thames Trail to the intersection of Tyne Trail and   20
                         Thames Trail
                         370 feet north of the intersection of Elbe Trail and
Thames Trail 2900—2935 Thames Trail to the intersection of Elbe Trail and   20
                         Thames Trail
Northeast
Thirty-sixth 1600—1900 300 feet west of Weber Street to Oscar Avenue        20
Street
Thomas Place 2100—2300 Bryce Avenue to El Campo Avenue                      20
Thomas Place 2500—2700 From West Freeway west bound service road to 250     20
                         feet north of Birchman Avenue
Thompson     3000—3400 540 feet from Interstate Highway 35W to 250 feet     20
Road                     west of N Riverside Drive
Thompson     4000—4200 40 feet west of Appleyard Drive to 350 feet east of  20
Road                     east school drive
Thompson     3900—4100 220 feet west of Heritage Place to 450 feet east of  20
Road                     Heritage Place
Thompson     4200—4400 260 feet west of Heritage Way to 380 feet east of    20
Road                     Heritage Way
Timberland   12100—1230300 feet southwest of Hollow Valley Lane to 300 feet 20
Boulevard                northeast of Durango Root Drive
Townsend     4900—5200 261 feet north of Yates Street to 204 feet south of  20
Drive                    Southcrest Drive
Turner       5500—5550 140 feet east of Stalcup Road to Stalcup Road        20
Street
Northwest                195 feet east of Ellis Avenue to Northwest Sixteenth
Twentieth    100—300   Street                                               20
Street
Northwest
Twenty-first 700—800   Prospect Avenue to 200 feet east of Lincoln Avenue   20
Street
Northwest
Twenty-      700—800   Prospect Avenue to 200 feet east of Lincoln Avenue   20
second
Street
Trace Ridge  8900—9000 Shiver Road to 30 feet north of Grinstein Drive      20
Parkway
Trail Lake   4200—4300 90 feet south of Encanto Drive to 335 feet north of  20
Drive                    South Drive
Trail Lake   7400—7500 30 feet north of Sycamore School Road to 274 feet    25
Drive                    south of Valley Village Drive/Palm Ridge Drive
Twin Creek   4000—4100 Basilwood Drive to Bray Birch Drive                  20
Drive
                         600 feet west of the intersection of Thames Trail
Tyne Trail   8700—9067 and Tyne Trail to 600 feet east of the intersection  20
                         of Thames Trail and Tyne Trail
U.S. 377
Control      4900—5000 623 feet southeast of Lyndon Drive to Osbun Street   30
Section:
0080-07
U.S. 377
Control      3900—4000 122 feet southeast of Kermit Street to 430 feet      30
Section:                 northwest of Davenport Avenue
0080-07
Vaughn       2000—2300 70 feet north of Avenue M to 150 feet south of       20
Boulevard                Millet Avenue
Village      3600—3750 59 feet north of Richardson Street to 123 feet north 20
Creek Road               of Virgil Street
Virgil       4600—4800 Mountcastle Street to 259 feet east of Anglin Drive  20
Street
Walker Creek 2400—2600 Riverfalls Drive to Trammel Davis Road               20
Road
Wall Price   5300—5500 40 feet east of Wagon Court to 200 feet east of      20
Keller Road              Corral Drive
Walton       2900—3400 135 feet west of Odessa Avenue to east property line 20
Avenue                   of 3424 Walton Avenue
Walton       4000—4150 Wharton Drive to 95 feet west of Whitman Avenue      20
Avenue
Wedgmont     5400—5500 North property line of 5440 Wedgmont Circle North to 20
Circle North             160 feet south of Wharton Avenue
Weiler       700—800   90 feet south of East Lancaster Avenue to South      20
Boulevard                Hamphire Boulevard
Weiler       2100—2200 107 feet north of Meadowbrook Drive to 123 feet      20
Boulevard                south of Yosemite Drive
Westcreek    5600—5650 135 feet south of Wren Avenue to 110 feet north of   20
Drive                    Duringer Road
Westcreek    6640—6645 200 feet east of Loma Vista Drive to 150 feet west   20
Drive                    of Countyside Lane
Westpoint    10200—1030460 feet west of Blue Haze Drive to 415 feet east of 25
Boulevard                Blue Haze Drive
West Point   10600—1070300 feet east of Voltamp Drive to 270 feet west of   25
Boulevard                Voltamp Drive
Wheeler      4000—4200 West property line of 4020 Wheeler Street to 130     20
Street                   feet west of Shadow Lane
White                    230 feet west of Churchill Road to 395 feet east of
Settlement   4600—4700 Churchill Road                                       20
Road
White                    160 feet west of Suttonwood Drive to 135 feet east
Settlement   10000—1010of Flaxseed Lane                                     20
Road
Whitman      5400—5600 North property line of 5432 Whitman Avenue to north  20
Avenue                   property line of 5613 Whitman Avenue
Wichita      4900—5000 250 feet south of Pecos Street to 290 feet north of  20
Street                   Pioneer Street
Wichita      4700—4800 131 feet south of Knox Street to 169 feet south of   20
Street                   Martin Street
Wilbarger    3200—3300 256 feet east of Wichita Street to 48 feet west of   20
Street                   Nolan Street
Wilkie Way   3800—3900 Woodway Drive to Wimbleton Way                       20
Willie       5050—5150 Dillard Street to Vincennes Street                   20
Street
Winter Hawk  1900—2050 90 feet east of Harmon Road to 60 feet northwest of  20
Drive                    Frosted Willow Lane
Wimbleton    5600—5700 North property line of 5648 Wimbleton Way to south   20
Way                      property line of 5725 Wimbleton Way
Winifred     5300—5400 East property line of 5308 Winifred Drive to 150     20
Drive                    feet east of Wales Avenue
Wishbone     400         Artisan Drive to Serrano Ranch Road                  20
Lane
Woodland                 170 feet south of Gold Creek Drive to 90 feet south
Springs      11900—1230of Silver Maple Drive                                20
Drive
Woodway      5600—6000 190 feet north of Wilkie Way to 140 feet south of    25
Drive                    Ashford Avenue
Woodway      6100—6300 340 feet south of Wedgworth Road South to 510 feet   20
Drive                    north of Altamesa Boulevard
Woodway      6700—6900 Madrid Drive to 132 feet north of Misty Meadow Drive 20
Drive
Wrigley Way  6100—6175 East property line of 6136 Wrigley Way to 50 feet    20
                         east of Hulen Street
Yates Street 1800—2000 50 feet west of Townsend Drive to 10 feet east of    20
                         Gordon Avenue
Yosemite     5900—6000 Canton Drive to Yosemite Court                       20
Drive
Yucca Avenue 2600—2700 130 feet east of Sylvania Avenue to north approach   20
                         of Blandin Street
Yucca Avenue 3000—3600 320 feet east of Gwynne Street to 160 feet east of   20
                         North Chandler Drive
Yucca Avenue 2700        130 feet east of Sylvania Avenue to Blandin Avenue   20
 
   (i)   The prima facie maximum and any prima facie minimum reasonable and
prudent speed at the following locations, identified by the inclusive listing
of block numbers but limited as set forth under "Extent," shall be as
designated below, effective when an appropriate sign giving notice thereof is
erected, provided that
      (1)   The freeways shall be referred to as designated herein, except that
the information in parentheses may be deleted; and
      (2)   The abbreviations used include the following:
         a.   “E” means “East;”
         b.   “F.M.” means “Texas State Farm to Market Road;”
         c.   “I” means “Interstate Highway;”
         d.   “N” means “North;”
         e.   “R.M.” means “Texas State Ranch to Market Road;”
         f.   “S” means “South;”
         g.   “S.H.” means “Texas State Highway;”
         h.   “U.S.” means “United States Highway;” and
         i.   “W” means “West.”
Freeways
Street Block Extent Speed (mph)
Freeways
Street                      Block       Extent                      Speed (mph)
                                        1,874 feet west of North
Airport Freeway (S.H. 121)  2100—4800 Sylvania Avenue to Maxine   65
                                        Street (Haltom City Limits)
                                        Saginaw/Fort Worth city
Blue Mound Road/F.M. 156    8000—10300limit to East Bonds Ranch   55
                                        Road
Chisholm Trail Parkway      3000—5300 IH 30 to University         50
(CTP)                                   Boulevard
Chisholm Trail Parkway      3000—5300 University Boulevard to     60
(CTP)                                   Arborlawn Drive
Chisholm Trail Parkway      4700—5900 Arborlawn Drive to Altamesa 65
(CTP)                                   Boulevard
Chisholm Trail Parkway      5400—5900 Altamesa Boulevard to south 70
(CTP)                                   City Limits
East Loop 820 (I-820)       100—3100  Randol Mill Road to East    60
                                        Lancaster Avenue
East Loop 820 North (I-820) 100—3200  Randol Mill Road to         60
                                        Railtran railroad
East Loop 820 South (I-820) 100—6400  East Lancaster Avenue to    60
                                        Mansfield Highway
                                        South right-of-way of
F.M. 157 Control Section:               Trinity Railway Express
0747-03                     3300—3600 (Arlington City Limits) to  50
                                        616 feet south of Trinity
                                        Boulevard
F.M. 157 Control Section:               616 feet south of Trinity
0747-03                     3700—4000 Boulevard to South Pipeline 45
                                        Road (Euless City Limits)
IH-30 (East Freeway)        200—9500  Main Street to East Fort    60
                                        Worth City Limit
IH-30 (West Freeway)        100—4000  Main Street to Clover Lane  60
IH-30 (West Freeway)        4100—9799 Clover Lane to Longvue      65
                                        Avenue (RM2871)
IH-30 (West Freeway)        9800—14600Longvue Avenue (RM2871) to  70
                                        West City Limits
Martin Luther King Freeway              Union Pacific Railroad
(US 287) Control Section:   100—5300  underpass to East Loop 820  60
0172-06                                 South
Northeast Loop 820 (Jim                 North Main Street to
Wright Freeway) (I-820)     100—700   Burlington Northern         65
                                        Railroad
Northeast Loop 820 (Jim     1000—2500 City Limits of Fort Worth   65
Wright Freeway) (I-820)                 at Blue Mound Road to I-35W
Northeast Loop 820 (I- 820) 2600—3800 I-35W to North Beach Street 65
Northwest Loop 820 (Jim     100—5600  North Main Street to City   65
Wright Freeway) (I-820)                 of Lake Worth City Limits
                                        200 feet southwest of
Northwest Loop 820 (Jim     6200—8000 Jacksboro Highway to        65
Wright Freeway) (I-820)                 southwest shore of Lake
                                        Worth
North Freeway (I-35W)       100—6600  East Belknap Street to      70
                                        Basswood Boulevard
North Freeway (I-35W)       6700—15000Basswood Boulevard to Fort  70
                                        Worth City Limits
North-South Freeway (I-35W) 100—600   East Belknap Street to Spur 70
                                        280
North-South Freeway (I-35W) 700—2100  Spur 280 to East Vickery    70
(BU-287P)                               Boulevard
                                        +/- 5,300 feet west of
S.H. 114                    1300—1100 Roaring River Road to +/    70
                                        - 6,300 feet west of
                                        Roaring River Road
S.H. 114 Control Section:               City of Fort Worth/Denton
0353-02                     1100—3700 County Line to Interstate   55
                                        Highway 35W
                                        North Freeway (I-35W) to
S.H. 114 Control Section:   3700—2900 190 feet+/- west of Jarrett 60
0353-02                                 Drive Denton County/Fort
                                        Worth City Limits
                                        2,300 feet+/- west of Blue
S.H. 114 Control Section:   2000—1300 Mound/F.M.156 southbound    45
0353-02                                 overpass to 370 feet+/-east
                                        of Roaring River Road
                                        370 feet+/- east of Roaring
S.H. 114 Control Section:               River Road to 1,061 feet+/-
0353-02                     1300—1100 west of Roaring River Road  55
                                        Denton County/Fort Worth
                                        City Limits
South Freeway (I-35W) (BU-  100—1000  East Vickery Boulevard to   70
287P)                                   East Rosedale Street
South Freeway (I-35W)       1100—8700 East Rosedale Street to     70
                                        Everman Parkway
                                        West Everman Parkway/
South Freeway (I-35W)       8800—13400Everman Parkway to South    70
                                        Fort Worth City Limits
Southwest Boulevard (S.H.   4350—4800 Piedmont Road to Culver     45
183)                                    Avenue
Southwest Boulevard (S.H.               Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)
183)                        4400—7000 (I-820) to West Vickery     60
                                        Boulevard
Southwest Boulevard (S.H.   4800—7000 Culver Avenue to West       60
183)                                    Vickery Boulevard
Southeast Loop 820 (I-20)   100—3200  I-35W South to Wichita      70
(I-820)                                 Street
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)               I-35W South to Fort Worth
(I-820)                     100—6700  City Limits at the west     70
                                        fork of the Trinity River
Spur 280 (BU-287P) Control  400—700   Jones Street to Grove       30
Section: 0172-06                        Street
Spur 280 (BU-287P) Control  800—1300  Grove Street to North-South 45
Section: 0172-06                        Freeway (I-35W)
Spur 280 (BU-287P) Control  800—1300  Elm Street to North-South   45
Section: 0172-06                        Freeway (I-35W)
West Loop 820 North (Jim                White Settlement Road to
Wright Freeway) (I-820)     100— 2100 the southwest shore of Lake 65
                                        Worth
West Loop 820 South (Jim    100—1900  White Settlement Road to    65
Wright Freeway) (I-820)                 West Freeway (I-30)
West Loop 820 South (I- 20) 2000—5000 West Freeway (I-30) to City 65
(I-820)                                 Limits (Aledo Road)
                                        Interstate Highway 35 west
S.H. 170                    2400—5600 and the Fort Worth/Westlake 70
                                        City Limits
                                        City limit between City of
S.H. 183                    13400—1600Fort Worth and Euless to    60
                                        Tarrant and Dallas County
                                        Line
S.H. 360                    4900—4400 State Highway 183 to        60
                                        Learning Center Driver
                                        Learning Center Driver to
S.H. 360                    4500—3500 west fork of the Trinity    60
                                        River (city limits)
U.S. 287 Control Section:               North-South Freeway (I-35W)
0172-06                     700—2300  to Union Pacific Railroad   60
                                        underpass
                                        North Freeway (I-35W) to
U.S. 287                    8100—10500west right-of-way of Santa  70
                                        Fe Railroad tracks
U.S. 377 Control Section:               Weatherford Traffic Circle
0080-07                     3700—4100 to 100 feet north of        35
                                        Davenport Avenue
                                        100 feet north of Davenport
U.S. 377 Control Section:   4100—4900 Avenue to Osbun Street      45
0080-07                                 Benbrook/Fort Worth City
                                        Limits
                                        250 feet northwest of South
                                        Z Boaz Park Drive Benbrook/
U.S. 377 Control Section:   5400—5500 Fort Worth City Limits to   45
0080-07                                 700 feet southeast of Z
                                        Boaz Park Drive Benbrook/
                                        Fort Worth City Limits
                                        7,000 feet northeast of
                                        Tiger Trail at Benbrook/
U.S. 377 Control Section:               Fort Worth City Limits to
0080-07                     11600—12303,600 feet northeast of     65
                                        Tiger Trail at Fort Worth
                                        City Limits/Tarrant County
                                        Line
Frontage Roads
Street Block Extent Speed (mph)
Frontage Roads
Street                      Block       Extent                      Speed (mph)
Airport Freeway (S.H. 121)  2600—4700 North Sylvania Avenue to    40
North Frontage Road                     Oakview Street
Airport Freeway (S.H. 121)  2600—4900 North Sylvania Avenue to    40
South Frontage Road                     Wheeler Street
Beach Street Frontage Roads 2200—2300 Carter Avenue to East       30
                                        Lancaster Avenue
East Loop 820 (I-820)       100—1600  Randol Mill Road to         45
Frontage Road                           Brentwood Stair Road
East Loop 820 (I-820) East  1500—2800 Ederville Road to Craig     30
Frontage Road                           Street
East Loop 820 (I-820) West  1700—3100 Brentwood Stair Road to     40
Frontage Road                           East Lancaster Avenue)
East Loop 820 (I-820),                  East Rosedale Street to
South (I-820) East Frontage 1600—2500 Ramey Avenue                40
Road
East Loop 820, South (I-                East Rosedale Street to
820) West Frontage Road     1600—2500 Ramey Avenue                40
(Cravens Road, South)
East Loop 820, South (I-    2600—5900 Ramey Avenue to 0.3 mile    40
820) East Frontage Road                 south of Sun Valley Drive
East Loop 820, South (I-    2600—4350 Ramey Avenue to Sun Valley  40
820) West Frontage Road
East Loop 820, South (I-    4900—6400 Sun Valley to Mansfield     45
820) West Frontage Road                 Highway
Jacksboro Highway Frontage  7500—12300500 feet east of Surfside   40
Roads                                   Drive to Scotland Avenue
Martin Luther King Freeway  300—5200  South Riverside Drive to    35
(U.S. 287) Frontage Roads               East Loop 820, South
North Freeway (I-35 W)      14900—1590Eagle Parkway to State      55
Frontage Road                           Highway 114
North-South Freeway (I-35W) 1400—1800 East 9th Street to East     30
East Frontage Road                      13th Street
Northwest Loop 820 (Jim                 Old Decatur Road to City of
Wright Freeway)(I-820)      2100—5600 Lake Worth eastern city     40
Frontage Roads                          limits
South Freeway (I-35W)       100—13400 East Vickery Boulevard to   40
Frontage Roads                          city limits
Southeast Loop 820 (I-20)   1100—3200 Oak Grove Road to Wichita   40
(I-820) Frontage Roads                  Street
Southwest Boulevard         4800—4900 Culver Avenue to West       30
Frontage Roads                          Vickery Boulevard
Southwest Boulevard (S. H.  4500—5900 South Hulen Street to       45
183) Frontage Roads                     Bryant Irvin Road
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)   100—600   South Freeway (I-35W) to    40
(I-820) Frontage Roads                  Hemphill Street
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)               Hemphill Street to Atchison
(I-820) Frontage Roads      700—2200  Topeka and Santa Fe         35
                                        Railroad
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)               Atchison Topeka and Santa
(I-820) Frontage Roads      2300—3850 Fe Railroad to Granbury     35
                                        Road
Southwest Loop 820 (IH-20)  3900—4400 Granbury Road East to South 35
(IH820) Frontage Road                   Hulen Street
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)               State Highway 183 to city
(I-820) North Frontage Road 4300—6700 limits (clear fork Trinity  45
                                        River)
Southwest Loop 820 (I-20)   4500—6700 South Hulen to city limits  45
(I-820) South Frontage Road             (clear fork Trinity River)
State Highway 183 Frontage  13600—1500American Boulevard to city  40
Roads                                   limits
State Highway 183 Frontage              State Highway 183 to west
Roads                       3600—5000 fork of the Trinity River   40
                                        (city limits)
                                        North Freeway (I-35W) to
State Highway 170           2500—3600 1.704 miles east of North   55
                                        Freeway
State Highway 170           4100—5600 2.082 miles east of North   55
                                        Freeway to city limits
West Freeway North Frontage 3100—5400 University Drive to Camp    40
Road                                    Bowie Boulevard
West Freeway North Frontage 6200—6750 Taxco Road to Green Oaks    30
Road                                    Road
West Freeway North Frontage 7100—8800 300 feet east of Alta Mere  35
Road                                    Drive to Las Vegas Trial
West Freeway North Frontage 8900—9100 Las Vegas Trail to Alameda  40
Road                                    Street
West Freeway (I-30) South   3100—5400 University Drive to Camp    40
Frontage Road                           Bowie Boulevard
West Freeway (I-30) South   6800—7800 Cherry Lane to Green Oaks   35
Frontage Road                           Road
West Freeway (I-30) South   7900—8700 Las Vegas Trail to Cherry   40
Frontage Road                           Lane
West Freeway (I-30) South   8900—9100 Alameda Street to Las Vegas 45
Frontage Road                           Trail
West Loop 820 North (Jim                White Settlement to Heron
Wright Freeway) (I-820)     100—2100  Drive                       40
Frontage Roads
West Loop 820 South (Jim                White Settlement Road to
Wright Freeway) (I-820)     100—1900  West freeway (I—30)       40
Frontage Roads
West Loop 820 South (I-820) 2000—3300 West Freeway (I-30) to U.S. 40
(I-20) Frontage Roads                   Highway 80
West Loop 820 South (I-820) 3400—4900 U.S. Highway 80 to overhead 45
(I-20) Frontage Roads                   TESCO power lines
West Loop 820, South (I-    5000        Overhead TESCO power lines  35
820)(I-20) Frontage Roads               to Aledo Road
 
Streets
Street Block Extent Speed (mph)
Streets
Street          Block       Extent                                  Speed (mph)
5th Avenue      600—1000  West Rosedale Street to Pennsylvania    25
                            Avenue
6th Avenue      600—1000  West Rosedale Street to Pennsylvania    25
                            Avenue
7th Avenue      600—1000  West Rosedale Street to Pennsylvania    25
                            Avenue
Abner Lee Drive 500—700   Stone Road to Wildcat Way South         35
Academy         100—700   White Settlement Road to Westpoint      40
Boulevard                   Boulevard
Alameda Street  600—3300  Academy Boulevard to U.S. Highway 80    35
East Allen      900—1200  Evans Avenue to East Maddox Avenue      35
Avenue
West Allen      143—454   Jennings Avenue to South Main Street    25
Avenue
Alliance        2200—2700 Alliance Airport entrance to North      40
Boulevard                   Freeway (I-35W)
Altamesa        100—400   South Freeway (I-35W) to 1060 feet west 40
Boulevard                   of Sheridan Road
Altamesa        400—1700  1060 feet west of Sheridan Road to 1060 40
Boulevard                   feet east of Crowley Road
Altamesa        1700—6400 1060 feet east of Crowley Road to       40
Boulevard                   Bryant Irvin Road
East Altamesa   100—1400  South Freeway (I-35W) to Campus Drive/  40
Boulevard                   Oakgrove Road
Alta Mere Drive 400—3100  2,165 feet northeast of Green Oaks Road 40
(SH-183)                    to 400 feet north of Arbor Avenue
Alta Mere Drive 3100—3600 400 feet north of Arbor Avenue to       40
(SH-183)                    Traffic Circle (U.S. 377)
Alta Vista      10300—1130Ray White Road to Keller Hicks Road     40
Boulevard
Alta Vista Road 4500—10200North Beach Street to Ray White Road    40
Alta Vista Rd.  10300—1330200 feet north of Ray White Road to 600 40
                            feet south of SH-170 (Alliance Gateway)
Alta Vista Rd.  13300—1350600 feet south of SH-170 (Alliance      35
                            Gateway) to 890 east of Lost Spurs Road
Alta Vista Rd.  3500        100 feet east of Lost Spurs Road to 700 30
                            feet east of Lost Spurs Road
American        4100—4900 S.H. 183 to Trinity Boulevard           35
Boulevard
Amon Carter     4100—4900 Trinity Boulevard to Airport Freeway    40
Boulevard
Angle Avenue    2800—3300 Cliff Street to 375 feet northwest of   35
                            Long Avenue
Angle Avenue    3300—4550 375 feet northwest of Long Avenue to    40
                            Marine Creek Parkway
Anglin Drive    7500—8300 Lon Stevenson Road to Enon Road         30
Ashbrook Drive  6700        Bellaire Drive South to River View      25
                            Drive
Azle Avenue     2000—3400 Roosevelt Avenue to Sherman Avenue      30
Azle Avenue     3500—5700 Sherman Avenue to Broadview Drive       45
Bailey Avenue   100—700   White Settlement Road to West Seventh   35
                            Street
North Bailey    100—900   White Settlement Road to Rockwood Park  30
Avenue                      Drive
Bailey-Boswell  4500—6200 Old Decatur Road to Boat Club Road      40
Road
Basswood        3200—3600 IH 35 North Service Road to Riverside   40
Boulevard                   Drive
Basswood        3000—5700 IH 35W West Frontage Road to Denton     40
Boulevard                   Highway (U.S. 377)
Beach Street    100—400   East First Street to Lawnwood Street    35
Beach Street    500—2500  Lawnwood Street to Texas and Pacific    40
                            Railroad tracks (Underpass)
Beach Street    2200—2400 Carter Avenue to East Lancaster Avenue  30
North Beach     100—1200  East First Street to East Belknap       35
Street                      Street
North Beach     2800—5200 Northeast 28th Street to Northeast Loop 40
Street                      820 (I-820)
North Beach     5200—10800Northeast Loop 820 to Golden Triangle   40
Street                      Boulevard
South Beach     100—1800  Texas and Pacific Railroad tracks       40
Street                      (Underpass) to Mitchell Boulevard
East Belknap    100—300   Main Street to North Jones Street       30
Street
East Belknap    400—500   North Jones Street to North Pecan       35
Street                      Street
East Belknap
Street (Spur                North Pecan Street to North-South
347) Control    600—1900  Freeway (I-35W)                         40
Section: 0081-
01
East Belknap    2000—2400 North-South Freeway (I-35W) to Oakhurst 40
Street (US-377)             Scenic Drive
East Belknap    2400—3700 Oakhurst Scenic Drive to North Beach    35
Street (US-377)             Street
West Belknap    100—1100  Main Street to Purcey Street            30
Street
Bellaire Circle 3300—3800 Bellaire Drive South/West Berry Street  30
                            to Dead End/Cul-de-sac
Bellaire Drive  3000—3200 West Berry Street to Westcliff Road     30
West                        West
Bellaire Drive  4500—5200 South Hulen Street to Arborlawn Drive   35
South
Bellaire Drive  6200—7000 IH-20 to Bryant Irvin                   30
South
Bell Spur       3000—3200 Trinity Boulevard to State Highway 183  30
Berkshire Lake  9600—10400Blue Mound Road to United States        35
Boulevard                   Highway 287
East Berry      100—900   South Main Street to 490 feet east of   30
Street                      Evans Avenue
East Berry      900—2900  400 feet east of Evans Avenue to        40
Street                      Binkley Street
East Berry      3000—5900 Binkley Street to Cravens Road          35
Street
East Berry      2100—2500 Cobb Park Drive to Mitchell Boulevard   40
Street, South
West Berry      100—600   South Main Street to Hemphill Street    30
Street
West Berry      700—2000  Hemphill Street to Townsend Drive       35
Street
West Berry      2100—3700 Townsend Drive to Bellaire Drive West   35
Street
Beverly Hills   2300—2500 Northbound: Jacksboro Highway to        30
Drive                       Flagstone Drive
East Biddison   100—600   South Main Street to South Freeway (I-  30
Street                      35W)
West Biddison   100—600   South Main Street to Hemphill Street    30
Street
West Biddison   700—2300  Hemphill Street to McCarthy Avenue      35
Street
Bilglade Road   3850—4300 Westbound: 35 feet west of Granbury     30
                            Road to Lanark Avenue
Blue Mound Road
(FM-156)                    Terminal Road (FM 156) to Saginaw City
Control         4100—4300 Limits or 814 feet north of De Rider    45
Section: 0718-              Avenue
02
Blue Mound Road
(FM-156)                    75 feet south of Meacham Boulevard to
Control         4300—5300 Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF)     45
Section: 0718-              Railroad
02
Blue Mound Road
(FM-156)                    1,737 feet south of Intermodal Parkway
Control         13900—1400to 617 feet north of Intermodal Parkway 45
Section: 0718-              at the Tarrant/Denton County Line
02
Blue Mound Road
(FM-156)                    975 feet northwest of Bailey Boswell
Control         8000—10300Road to 50 feet north of East Bonds     55
Section: 0718-              Ranch Road
02
Blue Mound Road 14000—1650Garfield Road to the Denton/Tarrant     55
(FM-156)                    County Line
Blue Meadow     6700        Bellaire Drive South to Cool Meadow     25
Drive                       Drive
Boat Club Road  4400—5700 130 feet south of Shadydell Drive to    45
                            350 feet north of Ten Mile Bridge Road
Boat Club Road  5800—8700 350 feet north of Ten Mile Bridge Road  50
                            to Bailey Boswell Road
Boat Club Road  8800—9350 Park Drive to 330 feet east of Tranquil 50
                            Acres or 1840 feet west of Landing Way
Boca Raton      5400—6700 Woodhaven Boulevard to East Loop 820    30
Boulevard
East Bolt       100—600   St. Louis Avenue to South Freeway (1-   30
Street                      35)
West Bolt       100—1500  St. Louis Avenue to 8th Avenue          30
Street
Bomber Road     500—1700  Clifford Avenue to the northern end of  35
                            Bomber Road
East Bond Ranch 500—1300  Blue Mound Road (F.M. 156) to Harmon    45
Road                        Road
East Bond Ranch 100—400   Highway 287 to Blue Mound Road (F.M.    45
Road                        156)
West Bond Ranch 100—300   U.S. 287 to Hawks Landing Road          40
Road
West Bond Ranch 300—600   Hawks Landing Road to Foothill Drive    45
Road
West Bonds      2700—3000 Business Highway 287 to 800 feet west   50
Ranch Road                  of Colonial Heights Lane
West Bonds      3000—3800 800 feet west of Colonial Heights Lane  35
Ranch Road                  to 850 fee east of Swiftcurrent Trail
West Bonds      3800—4700 850 feet east of Swiftcurrent Trail to  50
Ranch Road                  Morris Dido Road
Bowman-Roberts  6300—7300 Cromwell-Marine Creek Road to W. J.     35
Road                        Boaz Road
Brandon Lane    3400—3500 Southbound: U.S. Highway 80 to Bangor   30
Brentwood Stair 4200—7300 Oakland Boulevard to Sandy Lane         40
Road
Brentwood Stair 7400—8350 Sandy Lane to Ranch Lane                35
Road
Bridge Street   4200—5800 Oakland Boulevard to 575 feet east of   40
                            Country Club Lane
Bridge Street   5900—6700 575 feet east of Country Club Lane to   40
                            East Loop 820
Bridgewood      100—1500  Randol Mill Road to Brentwood Stair     35
Drive                       Road
Brookway Drive  3900—4100 W. Cleburne Road to Hulen Park Circle   30
Bryant Irvin    2900—7100 West Vickery Boulevard to Dirks Road    40
Road
Bryant Irvin    2600—3200 West Freeway (I-30) to 175 feet south   30
Road North                  of Camp Bowie Boulevard
Bryant Irvin    3200—5100 175 feet south of Camp Bowie Boulevard  35
Road North                  to West Vickery Boulevard
Burnett-Tandy   3200—3500 Harley Avenue to Montgomery Street      20
Drive
Burton Hill     700—2100  100 feet north of Fursman Avenue to     30
Road                        Byers Avenue
Byers Avenue    4800—5600 Westbound: 175 feet west of Camp Bowie  30
                            Boulevard to Roaring Springs Road
Cahoba Drive    All         Roberts Cut-Off Road to Malaga Drive    30
California
Parkway North
and South       700—1600  Hemphill Street to James Avenue         35
(Southwest Loop
820 Frontage
Roads)
Calloway        12300—1300F.M. 157 to South Main Street, Euless   30
Cemetery Road
Calmont Avenue  5700—7100 Horne Street to Alta Mere Drive         35
Calmont Avenue  7200—7800 Alta Mere Drive to Cherry Lane          35
Calmont Avenue  7900—8800 Cherry Lane to the southernmost         35
                            frontage road of the West Freeway
Camelot Road    6800—7800 Altamesa Boulevard To Sycamore School   30
                            Road
Camp Bowie      3100—5500 University Drive to West Freeway (I-30) 35
Boulevard
Camp Bowie
Boulevard (U.S.
377) Control    5400—6600 West Freeway (I-30) to Wellington Road  35
Section: 0008-
04
Camp Bowie
Boulevard (U.S.             Wellington Road to Weatherford Traffic
377) Control    6700—7100 Circle                                  35
Section: 0080-
07
Camp Bowie West
(Highway 80
West)(Spur 580) 6800—7000 Camp Bowie Boulevard to 380 feet east   35
Control                     of Irene Street
section: 0008-
04
Camp Bowie West
(Highway 80
West)(Spur 580) 7000—9000 380 feet east of Irene Street to 500    40
Control                     feet east of Renzel Boulevard
Section: 0008-
04
Camp Bowie West
(Highway 80
West)(Spur 580) 9000—11200500 feet east of Renzel Boulevard to    50
Control                     West Freeway (IH-30)
Section: 0008-
04
Campus Drive    4000—4300 Mansfield Highway to East Seminary      40
                            Drive
Campus Drive    4350—5300 East Seminary Drive to Southeast Loop   40
                            820
Campus Drive    5500—6300 I-20 to East Alta Mesa Boulevard        40
Cantrell-Sansom 2100—3000 Blue Mound city limits to Old Denton    35
Road                        Road
Carey Street    3800—4400 Berry Street to Wilbarger Street        30
Carey Street    4500—4700 Wilbarger Street to Poly Freeway (U.S.  40
                            287)
Carswell Access 6000—6200 Gillham Road to West Fork of the        40
Road                        Trinity River
Castle Creek    6600—6700 Castle Creek Drive East to Bellaire     25
Drive                       Drive South
Castle Creek    7000        Castle Creek Drive to Oakmont Boulevard 25
Drive East
Caylor Road     200—600   Katy Road to Caylor Road North          35
Chapel Creek    100—3500  White Settlement Road to Spur 580       40
Boulevard
North Chapel    100—300   White Settlement Road to Leatherwood    35
Creek Boulevard             Drive
Chapin Road     7500—7900 West Frontage Road (U.S. 377) (Traffic  30
                            Circle) to Williams Road
Charleston      3200—3300 McCart Avenue to O’Hara Lane          30
Avenue
Charleston      8500—8600 O’Hara Lane to Stonewall Lane         30
Avenue
Cherry Lane     2600—3300 West Freeway (I-30) to U.S. Highway 80  40
Cimarron Trail  3300—3700 U.S. Highway 80 to Chapin Road          30
Clayton Road    3400—4200 125 feet south of Camp Bowie Boulevard  30
East                        to Rowan Drive
Clayton Road    3700—4300 Floyd Drive to Rowan Drive              30
West
Clear Springs   6700—6800 River Bluff Drive to Trinity Landing    25
Drive                       Drive West
Clearfork Main  4300—5000 South Hulen Street to Edwards Ranch     40
Street                      Road
Cleburne Road   2800—3200 Eighth Avenue to West Shaw Street       35
West Cleburne   6800—7900 McCart Avenue to 150 feet south of      35
Road                        Columbus Trail
West Cleburne   7900—8400 150 feet south of Columbus Trail to     45
Road                        South Hulen Street
West Cleburne   8700—9000 South Hulen Street to City Limit        45
Road
Cleveland Gibbs 15400—1570Litsey Road to Fort Worth/Northlake     35
Road                        City Limits
Cliff Street    400—800   Clinton Avenue to Angle Avenue          30
Clifford Avenue 9300—9600 West Loop 820 North to White Settlement 40
                            Road
Cockrell Avenue 4300—5100 South Loop 820 to Seminary Drive        30
Coffey Avenue   5100        2400 Seminary Drive to 3000 Horton Road 20
Cold Springs    1500—1800 Southbound: 100 feet south of Armour    30
Road                        Street to Delga Street
Cold Springs    1800—2000 350 feet south of East North Side Drive 30
Road                        to 100 feet south of Armour Street
Cold Springs    2300—2700 Northbound: East North Side Drive to    30
Road                        end of street
Collett Little  4900—5300 Mansfield Highway to East Loop 820,     30
Road                        South
Colonial        2100—2300 South University Drive to Parkhill      30
Parkway                     Drive
Columbus Trail  3500—5400 McCart Avenue to Summer Creek Drive     35
Columbus Trail  6000—6100 Sycamore School Road to Old Granbury    40
                            Road
Commerce Street
(BU-287P)                   East Weatherford Street to East Fourth
Control         100—400   Street                                  30
Section: 0014-
01
Commerce Street 500—1700  East Fourth Street to East Lancaster    30
                            Avenue
North Commerce
Street (BU-                 North Main Street to East Weatherford
287P) Control   100—200   Street                                  30
Section: 0014-
01
Cooks Lane      100—850   Randol Mill Road to John T. White Road  30
Cooks Lane      900—1800  John T. White Road to Brentwood Stair   40
                            Road
Cooks Lane      1900—3200 Brentwood Stair Road to East Lancaster  30
                            Avenue
Cool Meadow     6700        Bellaire Drive South to River View      25
Drive                       Drive
Cooper Street   1200—1250 5th Avenue to South Henderson Street    25
Cooper Street   1400—1500 8th Avenue to 7th Avenue                25
Country Club    1000—1200 Bridge Street to Oakmont Lane           30
Lane
Country Creek   2500—3400 Hawkwood Trailer to McCart Avenue       30
Lane
Craig Street    5700—7300 From 2800 Stark Street to 2900 Sandy    30
                            Lane
Cravens Road    2800—4300 East Loop 820, South, to Wilbarger      30
                            Street
Cromwell-Marine 4400—6300 Old Decatur Road to Boat Club Road      40
Creek Road
Crowley Road    5400—5550 James Avenue to I-20 South Frontage     35
                            Road
Crowley Road
(FM 731)                    I-20 South Frontage Road to Edgecliff
Control         5600—5700 Road Fort Worth/Edgecliff City Limits   40
Section: 1094-
01
Crowley Road                250 feet north of Altamesa Boulevard
(FM 731)                    Fort Worth/Edgecliff City Limits to 725
Control         6600—8000 feet south of Sycamore School Road/West 45
Section: 1094-              Everman Parkway
01
Crowley Road
(FM 731)                    725 feet south of Sycamore School Road/
Control         8000—10600West Everman Parkway to Fort Worth/     55
Section: 1094-              Crowley City Limits
01
North Crowley-  2100—4300 Crowley Road to West Cleburne Road      40
Cleburne Road
Dan Danciger    6500—6900 6450 block of Granbury Road to 7000     45
Road                        block of Granbury Road
David           4600—5300 Parker Henderson Road to East Loop 820, 35
Strickland Road             South
Decatur Avenue  2300—3950 Northeast 23rd Street to Terminal Road  35
Deen Road       2800—3400 Northeast 28th Street to 200 feet north 30
                            of Northeast 33rd Street
Deen Road       3400—4100 200 feet north of Northeast 33rd Street 35
                            to Terminal Road
Deep Valley     6700        Bellaire Drive South to River Bend Road 25
Lane
Dirks Road      6400—6500 Bryant Irvin Road to Fort Worth West    40
                            City Limits
Dottie Lynn     2100—2500 Meadowbrook Drive to Arlington city     45
Parkway                     limit
Dottie Lynn     2900—3200 Arlington city limit to East Lancaster  45
Parkway                     Avenue
Double Eagle    15600—1590Fire Ridge Drive to SH-114              40
Boulevard
Dutch Branch    6900—7800 Oakmont Trail to Bryant Irvin Road      35
Road
Eagle Parkway   2000—3100 F.M. 156 to North Freeway (I-35W)       45
Eastchase       1000—2000 John T. White Road to Meadowbrook Drive 40
Parkway
Ederville Road  6800—8350 Nottingham Boulevard to Eastchase       40
                            Parkway
Ederville Road  8400—8500 Eastchase Parkway to Meadowbrook Drive  30
Ederville Road, 1500—2200 Brentwood Stair Road to Meadowbrook     30
South                       Drive
Edgecliff Road  700—1000  Tasman Street to Lenore Street          30
Edgecliff Road  2300—2550 Jennie Drive to McCart Avenue           30
Edgecliff       1900—2600 Normandy Drive to East Lancaster Avenue 30
Terrace, North
Edwards Ranch   4900—5800 Clearfork Main Street to Bryant Irvin   40
Road
Eighth Avenue   600—1800  Pennsylvania Avenue to West Jefferson   30
                            Avenue
Eighth Avenue   1800—2800 West Jefferson Avenue to Cleburne Road  35
Elliot-Reeder   5100—5800 Haltom Road to Carson Street            30
Road
Ephriham Avenue 1500—2800 Jacksboro Highway to Northwest 28th     40
                            Street
Euless South    3500—3800 Trinity Railway Express to Trinity      30
Main Street                 Boulevard
Euless South    3900—4000 Trinity Boulevard to South Pipeline     35
Main Street                 Road
Everman Parkway 100—2300  South Freeway (I-35W) to Race Street    40
                            (Everman)
West Everman    1300—1900 440 feet east of Wild Willow Trail to   35
Parkway                     Crowley Road
F.A.A.          13300—1400State Highway 183 to State Highway 360  30
Boulevard
F.A.A.          14700—1520Amon Carter Boulevard to Fort Worth/    40
Boulevard                   Irving city limits
Feliks Gwozdz   100—400   South Jennings Avenue to South Main     25
Place                       Street
East Felix      100—1000  Railroad overpass to Oak Grove Road     35
Street
West Felix      100—500   Railroad overpass to Hemphill Street    35
Street
East Fifth
Street (BU-     100—400   Main Street to Spur 280                 30
287P)
West Fifth
Street (BU-     100         Houston Street to Main Street           30
287P)
East First      3600—4000 Fourth Street to North Beach Street     35
Street
East First      4100—5700 Beach Street to Randol Mill Road and    35
Street                      Oakland Boulevard
Fitzhugh Avenue 5500—6000 Stalcup Road to East Loop 820 South     30
Floyd Drive     3600—3900 150 feet south of Camp Bowie Boulevard  30
                            to Clayton Road East
Floyd Drive     6400—6600 Edgehill Road to Clayton Road East      30
Folwell         5100—5600 Tappan Boulevard to Southeast Loop 820  35
Boulevard
Forest Park     800—900   West Freeway (I-30) to 200 feet north   30
Boulevard                   of West Rosedale Street
Forest Park     900—3200  200 feet north of West Rosedale Street  35
Boulevard                   to Benbrook Drive
North Forest    100         450 feet west of Purcey Street to       30
Park Boulevard              Purcey Street
North Forest    100—1600  450 feet west of Purcey Street to 500   40
Park Boulevard              feet south of West Lancaster Bridge
North Forest    1600—1800 500 feet south of West Lancaster Bridge 40
Park Boulevard              to 325 feet north of Parkview Drive
North Forest    1800—2000 325 feet north of Parkview Drive to     30
Park Boulevard              West Freeway (I-30)
Fossil Creek    3300—4400 North Freeway (I-35W) to North Beach    40
Boulevard                   Street
East Fourth
Street (BU-     200—400   Commerce Street to Spur 280             30
287P)
East Fourth     1200—3500 Nichols Street to East First Street     35
Street
Fuller Avenue   700—1600  Hemphill Street to James Avenue         35
Galvez Avenue   3200—4000 Riverside Drive to Beach Street         30
West Gambrell   800—1500  Hemphill Street to James Avenue         30
Street
Garden Acres    100—600   South Freeway (I-35W) to Oak Grove Road 30
Road
General Worth   9200—9500 120 feet south of Heritage Trace        30
Drive                       Parkway to Green Drive
Glen Meadow     6700—6800 Birch Hollow Lane to Trinity Landing    25
Drive                       West
Glen Park Drive 5000—5050 Kellis Street to Nolan Street           30
Golden Heights  1900—2300 Harmon Road to Harmon Road              30
Road
Golden Triangle 2000—2400 Harmon Road to Golden Heights Road      40
Boulevard
Golden Triangle 2500—3400 Harmon Road to Old Denton Road          40
Boulevard
Golden Triangle 4800—6000 Alta Vista Road to city limits          40
Boulevard
Granbury Road   3300—4400 Benbrook Boulevard to Trail Lake Drive  40
Granbury Road   4600—7100 Trail Lake Drive to Altamesa Boulevard  45
Granbury Road   7100—7500 Altamesa Boulevard to Meadow Valley     40
                            Drive
Great Southwest 1700—2300 Lone Star Boulevard to 125 feet west of 40
Parkway                     Mark IV Parkway
Green Oaks Road 1100—2700 Alta Mere Drive (Highway 183) to        40
                            Calmont Avenue
Greenbelt Road  1600—3200 Beady Road to Mosier Valley Road        35
Hamilton Avenue 3300—3900 Arch Adams Lane to Crestwood Drive      30
Hampshire       3500—4100 North Collard Street to South Oakland   30
Boulevard                   Boulevard
Handley Drive   1400—1600 Nottingham Boulevard to Brentwood Stair 40
                            Road
Handley Drive   1700—2400 Brentwood Stair Road to Jewell Avenue   30
Handley Drive   2400—3100 Jewell Avenue to East Lancaster Avenue  35
South Handley   1000—1050 East Lancaster Avenue to East Rosedale  35
Drive                       (S.H. 303)
Handley         100—2400  Randol Mill Road to city limit          40
Ederville Road
East Harmon
Road Control    800—1700  Blue Mound Road to 540 feet east of     45
Section: 3551-              Desperado Road
01
East Harmon
Road Control    1700—1800 540 feet east of Desperado Road to      45
Section: 3551-              Harmon Road
01
Harmon Road
Control         8600—8600 East Harmon Road to NW Highway 287      40
Section: 3551-
01
Harmon Road     8700—10200U.S. Hwy 287 to Bonds Ranch Road East   45
Harmon Road     10300—1070Hicks Road to Golden Heights Road       30
Harris Parkway  6000—7000 Oakmont Boulevard to Dirks Road         40
Hartwood Drive  2600—4400 Mockingbird Lane to South Hulen Street  25
Haslet Roanoke  3800—3900 150 feet east of High Mesa Trail to     40
Road                        Ridgetop Road
Hawkwood Trail  7500—7900 Sycamore School Road to Coldstream      30
                            Drive
Hemphill Street 100—4700  West Vickery Boulevard to West Felix    35
                            Street
Hemphill Street 4800—5600 West Felix Street to I-20               40
Hemphill Street 5700        I-20 to Tasman Street                   40
Hemphill Street 6700—7200 Altamesa Boulevard to 1200 block        35
                            Kielder Circle
Hemphill Street 9700—9900 West Risinger Road to Dead End          40
North Henderson 100—800   West Weatherford Street to North        30
Street                      Commercial Street
North Henderson 900—1000  North Commercial Street to the west     35
Street                      fork of the Trinity River
Heritage        13400—1490Westport Parkway to Eagle Parkway       45
Parkway
Heritage Trace  2000—5100 Harmon Road to 35N                      40
Parkway
Heron Drive     All         Silver Creek Road to Shore View Drive   30
Hicks Field     10000—1020Saginaw Boulevard (BU-287P) to Hicks    40
Road                        Field Road East
Hicks Field     1600—1800 1,200 feet east of Hicks Field Road to  40
Road East                   Hicks Field Road
Highwoods Trail 100—700   Randol Mill Road to Boca Raton          30
                            Boulevard
Hillcrest       900—1500  West Seventh Street to Crestline Road   30
Street
Horne Street    2300—2600 Byers Avenue to West Freeway (I-30)     30
Horne Street    2900—5000 Camp Bowie Boulevard to West Vickery    35
                            Boulevard
Hosta Way       7900—8000 From Columbus Trail to Dynasty Drive    25
House Anderson  3100—3600 1,000 feet south of Mosier Valley Road  30
Road                        to South Pipeline Road
Houston Street
(BU-287P)                   West Weatherford Street to West Fifth
Control         100—500   Street                                  30
Section: 0014-
01
Houston Street  600—1600  West Fifth Street to West Lancaster     30
                            Avenue
North Houston
Street (BU-                 West Weatherford Street to North Main
287P) Control   100—200   Street                                  30
Section: 0014-
01
Huffines        4600—5200 IH 820 North Frontage Road to Ten Mile  40
Boulevard                   Bridge Road
Hulen Street    2100—2700 Camp Bowie Boulevard to West Freeway    30
Hulen Street    2800—3900 West Freeway to West Vickery Boulevard  35
South Hulen     2400—6000 West Vickery Boulevard to Granbury Road 40
Street
South Hulen     6100—6700 Granbury Road to Altamesa Boulevard     35
Street
South Hulen     6800—9700 Altamesa Boulevard to Winnipeg Way      40
Street
Irish Glen      10700—1090West Bonds Ranch Road to Hawks Landing  30
Trail
Isbell Road     100—1000  White Settlement Road to Ohio Garden    35
                            Road
Avenue J        2600—3300 Eastbound: 50 feet west of Conner       30
                            Avenue to Bishop Street
Jacksboro       1100—1300 The west fork of the Trinity River to   40
Highway                     260 feet north of West Northside Drive
Jacksboro       1300—2300 260 feet north of West Northside Drive  45
Highway                     to Ephriham Avenue
Jacksboro       2400—5200 Ephriham Avenue to Skyline Drive        45
Highway
Jacksboro       7100—7300 South end of bridge over Lake Worth to  55
Highway                     Love Circle
Jacksboro       7400—12300Love Circle to Scotland Drive at Azle/  60
Highway                     Fort Worth city limits
James Avenue    4300—5400 West Seminary Drive to Crowley Road     35
James Avenue    5500—5700 Crowley Road to Edgecliff Road          30
South Jennings  1500—1600 Allen Avenue to Feliks Gwozdz Place     25
Avenue
Joel East Road  1100—1400 Will Rogers Road to Oakgrove Road       40
John T. White   6600—8600 East Loop 820 to Randol Mill Road       40
Road
John T. White   8700—9000 Randol Mill Road to Racquet Club Drive  30
Boulevard
John T. White   650—900   Randol Mill Road to John T. White Road  30
Road North
Keller-Haslet   3000—3400 Old Denton Road to Alta Vista Road      40
Road
Keller Hicks    3600—4200 North Beach Road to Park Vista          40
Road                        Boulevard
Kingswood Drive 6700—7200 Altamesa Boulevard to South Hulen       30
                            Street
Kroger Drive    5200—5900 Ray White Road to 400 feet west of      35
                            Denton Highway (U.S. 377)
Lackland Road   2800—3400 Calmont Avenue to Highway 80            35
Lakeside Drive  7000—7400 Dirks Road to city limits               30
East Lancaster  1850—6300 Grafton Street to Haynie Street         40
Avenue
East Lancaster  6300—6800 Haynie Street to Milam Street           35
Avenue
East Lancaster  6900—7300 Milam Street to 600 feet west of        45
Avenue                      Boswell Drive
East Lancaster  7400—8000 600 feet west of Boswell Drive to       55
Avenue                      Village Creek
East Lancaster  100—1600  Main Street to 780 feet east of Pine    30
Avenue                      Street
East Lancaster  1600—1800 780 feet east of Pine Street to Grafton 35
Avenue                      Street
West Lancaster  100—1600  Main Street to 900 feet west of Summit  30
Avenue                      Avenue
West Lancaster  1700—2700 900 feet west of Summitt Avenue to Foch 40
Avenue                      Street
West Lancaster  2800—3500 Foch Street to Montgomery Street        35
Avenue
Las Vegas Trail 2500—3400 West Freeway to U.S. Highway 80         35
Lea Crest Lane  4800—5900 Boat Club Road to Ten Mile Bridge Road  30
Litsey Road     5300—3700 Fort Worth East City Limits to North    35
                            Beach Street
Little Fox Lane 400—700   Westpoint Boulevard to Stoney Bridge    30
                            Road
Lone Star       5000—5200 Great Southwest Parkway to 125 feet     40
Boulevard                   south of Northeast Parkway
East Long       100—2400  North Main Street to Deen Road          35
Avenue
East Long       2500—2550 Deen Road to North Sylvania Avenue      40
Avenue
East Long       2550—3800 North Sylvania Avenue to North Beach    40
Avenue                      Street
West Long       100—1800  North Main Street to Northwest 35th     35
Avenue                      Street
West Long       1900—3400 Jacksboro Highway to Northwest 35th     35
Avenue                      Street
Longvue Avenue  2700—3300 West Freeway (I-30) to Camp Bowie West  45
Longvue Avenue  3400—3900 Camp Bowie West to Mary’s Creek (City 50
                            Limits)
                            100 feet south of Aledo Road (City
Longvue Avenue  6500—6700 Limits) to 500 feet south of Rolling    55
                            Hills (City Limits)
Lost Creek      3600—4000 El Rancho Road to Blue Creek Drive      35
Boulevard
Love Circle     All         Jacksboro Highway to North Shore Drive  30
Lovell Avenue   3300—3800 Pulido Street to Chambers Street        30
McCart Avenue   2400—3200 Forest Park Boulevard to Benbrook       35
                            Boulevard
McCart Avenue   3300—3600 Benbrook Boulevard to West Butler       35
                            Street
McCart Avenue   3700—6200 West Butler Street to 200 feet south of 35
                            Westcreek Drive
McCart Avenue   6200—6500 200 feet south of Westcreek Drive to    35
                            150 feet south of Altamesa Boulevard
McCart Avenue   6500—7800 150 feet south of Altamesa Boulevard to 40
                            Columbus Trail
McCart Avenue   7900—9100 Columbus Trail to Cayman Drive          40
McPherson Road  700—1900  Oakgrove Road to Forest Hill Everman    45
                            Road
East Maddox     1250—2500 East Allen Avenue to Mitchell Boulevard 35
Avenue
East Maddox     2500        Mitchell Boulevard to South Beach       30
Avenue                      Street
Main Street     1700—1800 East Lancaster Avenue to West Vickery   35
                            Boulevard
North Main
Street (BU-                 Bluff Street to 275 feet north of Bluff
287P) Control   300         Street                                  30
Section: 0014-
01
North Main
Street (BU-                 275 feet north of Bluff Street to
287P) Control   300—1100  Northeast 11th Street                   40
Section: 0014-
01
North Main
Street (BU-                 Northeast 11th Street to Northeast/
287P) Control   1200—2700 Northwest 28th Street                   30
Section: 0014-
01
North Main
Street (BU-                 Northeast/Northwest 28th Street to 335
287P) Control   2800—3900 feet north of Northeast 38th Street     40
Section: 0013-
10
North Main
Street (BU                  335 feet north of Northeast 38th Street
287P) Control   3900—4500 to 792 feet north of Meacham Boulevard  40
Section: 0013-
10
North Main
Street (BU                  792 feet north of Meacham Boulevard to
287P) Control   4500—6000 Saginaw City Limits                     50
Section: 0013-
10
South Main      100—1000  West Vickery Boulevard to West Rosedale 35
Street                      Street
South Main      1100—1300 West Rosedale Street to West Magnolia   35
Street                      Avenue
South Main      1300—1700 West Magnolia Avenue to West Allen      25
Street                      Avenue
South Main      1700—2500 West Allen Avenue to Morningside Drive  35
Street
West Magnolia   100—1550  South Main Street to Eighth Avenue      30
Avenue
Malaga Drive    All         Cahoba Drive to Marina Drive            30
Mansfield                   South Riverside Drive to 625 feet east
Highway (BU-    2350—4000 of Trentman Street                      40
287P)
Marina Drive    All         Malaga Drive to Foster Drive            30
Marine Creek    4550—4700 Angle Avenue to Northwest Loop 820 (Jim 40
Parkway                     Wright Freeway)
Marine Creek    4700—6200 Northwest Loop 820 (Jim Wright Freeway) 40
Parkway                     to Cromwell Marine Creek Road
Marks Place     4500—5000 West Vickery Boulevard to Southwest     30
                            Boulevard (SH183)
Mark IV Parkway 4500—6500 Meacham Boulevard to Western Center     40
                            Boulevard
Marsalis Street 41000—4800North Beach Street to Maxine Street     30
Martin Street   4200—4700 Miller Avenue to Village Creek Road     30
Martin Street   4800—5600 Village Creek Road to East Loop 820,    35
                            South
Martin Street   5700        East Loop 820, South, to city limit     30
Meacham         1000—2500 Blue Mound Road to Aquarius Drive       40
Boulevard
Meacham         2500—3800 Aquarius Drive to North Beach Street    45
Boulevard
South Meadow    2600—3200 South Meadow Drive East to Willowview   30
Drive
South Meadow    7100—7400 Sycamore School Road to South Meadow    30
Drive East                  Drive
Meadowbrook     8500—9100 Eastchase Parkway to city limits at     40
Boulevard                   Village Creek
Meadowbrook     2600—7400 South Beach Street to 300 feet east of  30
Drive                       Sandy Lane
Meadowbrook     7400—7900 300 feet east of Sandy Lane to Cooks    40
Drive                       Lane
Meadowbrook     8000—8600 Cooks Lane to Meadowbrook Boulevard     30
Drive
Meadow Haven    6500—6700 Bellaire Drive South to River View      25
Drive                       Drive
Meadows West    6600—6800 River Bend Road to Still Meadow Drive   25
Drive South
Mercantile      4600-4900   Meacham Boulevard to Northern Cross     35
Drive                       Drive
Michael Drive   8900—9400 Everman Parkway to County Road 1098     30
Miller Avenue   1000—5400 Texas and Pacific Railroad Tracks to    40
                            Mansfield Highway
Mitchell        1400—4500 Avenue G to Wichita Street              40
Boulevard
Montgomery      800—1100  West Seventh Street to 150 feet north   25
Street                      of Camp Bowie Boulevard
Montgomery      1200—1800 West Lancaster Avenue to LaFayette      35
Street                      Avenue
Montgomery      1900—2600 LaFayette Avenue to Calmont Avenue      40
Street
Montgomery      2600—3000 Calmont Avenue to Vickery Boulevard     30
Street
East
Morningside     100—600   Main Street to I-35                     35
Drive
West
Morningside     100—600   Main Street to Hemphill Street          35
Drive
Mosier Valley   10700—1190Arlington-Bedford Road to Rock Island   30
Road                        Railroad
Nixon Street    200—500   Pharr Street to Glenmore Avenue         30
North                       South Normandale Street to Saints
Normandale      8600—9600 Circle                                  35
Street
South                       West Normandale Street to North
Normandale      8600—9000 Normandale Street                       35
Street
West Normandale 2900—3200 Chamita Lane to North Normandale Street 35
Street
West Normandale 2900—3200 Chamita Lane to North Normandale Street 35
Street
East Northside  100—1800  North Main Street to Oakhurst Scenic    40
Drive                       Drive
West Northside  100—1200  North Main Street to Jacksboro Highway  40
Drive                       (SH-199)
Oak Grove Road  1000—1100 East Felix Street to Southeast Loop 820 40
Oak Grove Road  1100—1550 Southeast Loop 820 to Glasgow Road      35
Oak Grove Road  5500—6000 Glasgow Road to Campus Drive            35
Oak Grove Road  6400—10400McPherson Road to East Alta Mesa Road   30
Oak Grove Road  6400—10500East Altamesa Boulevard to McPherson    40
                            Road
Oak Grove Road  10500—1080McPherson Road to Oak Grove Road, East  30
Oak Grove Road  700—1300  Oak Grove Road to Brownfield Drive      30
East
Oak Hill Road   2800—2950 Oak Park Lane to Oak Hill Circle, dead  35
                            end
Oakhill Road    1400—2200 Brentwood Stair Road to Meadowbrook     35
                            Drive
Oakhurst Scenic 300—2000  East Belknap Street to Watauga Road     40
Drive
Oakland         100—2600  East First Street to East Lancaster     35
Boulevard                   Avenue
South Oakland   300—900   East Lancaster Avenue to Texas and      40
Boulevard                   Pacific Railroad Tracks
Oakmont         6200—7400 South Hulen Street to Bryant Irvin Road 40
Boulevard
Oakmont         7500—8100 Bryant Irvin Road to Bellaire Drive     35
Boulevard                   South
Oakmont Trail   6000—6800 Oakmont Boulevard to Dutch Branch Road  35
Ocean Drive     7900—8000 From Columbus Trail to Wildflower Way   25
Ohio Garden     1100—1200 Quail Trail to Isbell Road              30
Road
Ohio Garden     3700—4300 Jacksboro Highway to Quail Trail        30
Road
Ohio Garden     4300—4500 Isbell Road to Tyra Lane                30
Road
Old Crowley     10000—1030West Cleburne Road to City Limits       45
Cleburne Road
Old Decatur     4500—6000 Angle Avenue to Longhorn Road           35
Road
Old Denton Road 5700—6500 Cantrell-Sansom Road to Western Center  35
                            Bouelvard
Old Denton Road 11400—1190Keller Hicks Road to Timberland         35
                            Boulevard
Old Denton Road 12600—1340800 feet north of Sawtimber Trail to    40
                            Keller Haslet Road / Westport Parkway
Old Granbury    7900—9300 Columbus Trail to City Limits           40
Road
Old Mansfield   4000—4900 East Berry Street to Mansfield Highway  30
Road
Old Weatherford 10200—1040Chapel Creek Boulevard to Wake Crest    30
Road                        Drive
Overton Ridge   4800—6400 South Hulen Street to I-20              40
Boulevard
Paint Pony      100—700   White Settlement Road to Stubbs Trail   35
Trail
East Park Drive 6700        River Bluff Drive to Bellaire Drive     25
                            South
Park Vista      1000—8400 Fort Worth City Limits to North Tarrant 35
Boulevard                   Parkway
Park Vista      11400—1360Keller Hicks Road to SH 170             40
Boulevard
Parker          4800—5800 Martin Street to 190 feet north of      35
Henderson Road              Mansfield Highway
Parkwood Hill   7400—8400 Basswood Boulevard to North Tarrant     35
Boulevard                   Parkway
Pecos Street    3400—3500 Nolan Street to Shackleford Street      30
Penrose Avenue  4100—5100 West Vickery Boulevard to Southwest     30
                            Boulevard
Pennsylvania    100—1100  South Main Street to South Henderson    35
Avenue                      Street
Pennsylvania    1100—1500 South Henderson Street to 8th Street    25
Avenue
Presidio Vista  2000—2500 Harmon Road to North Freeway (I-35W)    40
Drive                       West Service Road
Pruitt Street   1500—1550 8th Avenue to 7th Avenue                25
Phoenix Drive   3000—3400 Northbound: 100 feet north of U.S.      30
                            Highway 80 to El Retiro Drive
South Pipeline  10800—1220State Highway 183 to F.M. 157           35
Road
South Pipeline  12300—1400F.M. 157 to American Boulevard          35
Road
Post Oak        3400—4000 13500 block of Trinity Boulevard to     30
Boulevard                   13900 block of Trinity Boulevard
Precinct Line   100—3000  Randol Mill Road to Hurst city limits   40
Road
Precinct Line   13700—1460Haslet City Limits to Denton County/    55
Road/FM 156                 Fort Worth City Limits
Preston Hollow  3000—3200 Bellaire Drive South to Harlanwood      30
Road                        Drive
Putnam Street   2700—2800 435 feet north of Beaty Street to 325   20
                            feet south of Beaty Street
Quail Road      2800—3000 Henco Drive to Elizabeth Road           20
Quail Valley    8500—8700 North Tarrant Parkway to Ridge Lake     35
Drive                       Drive
Quebec Street   5500—6100 Cahoba Drive to Northwest Center Drive  30
Raider Road     3300—3600 Mosier Valley Road to South Pipeline    30
                            Road
Ramey Avenue    4200—5500 Miller Avenue to Stallcup Road          30
Randol Mill     4600—6400 Oakland Boulevard to Bridgewood Drive/  45
Road                        Handley-Ederville Road
Randol Mill     6500—6700 Bridgewood Drive/Handley-Ederville Road 35
Road                        to East Loop 820
Randol Mill     6800—9000 East Loop 820 to Meadowbrook Boulevard  30
Road
Ray White Road  8500—9700 North Tarrant Parkway to 100 feet south 40
                            of Archer Drive
Ray White Road  4900—5200 75 feet west of Bear Hollow Drive to    40
                9800—10200200 feet south of Pinellas Avenue
Redwood Trail   5300—5600 Park Vista Boulevard to Parkwood Hills  35
                            Boulevard
Rendon Road     12200—1240F.M. 1187 to 200 feet north of Hopper   30
                            Road
Rendon Road     12500—1320200 feet north of Hopper Road to 300    45
                            feet north of Retta-Mansfield Road
East Rendon-
Crowley Road
(FM1187)        100—1200  South Freeway (I-35W) to Hunters Field  45
Control                     Drive
Section: 1330-
02
East Rendon-
Crowley Road
(FM1187)        1200—1400 Hunters Field Drive to Oak Grove Road   50
Control                     South
Section: 1330-
02
West Rendon-
Crowley Road
(FM1187)        100—800   South Freeway (I-35W) to Crowley City   45
Control                     Limits
Section: 1330-
01
Ridglea Avenue  2800—3300 Calmont Avenue to Camp Bowie Boulevard  30
Ridglea Country 3500—4100 Southwest Boulevard (State Loop 820) to 30
Club Drive                  Coral Circle
Ridgmar         1000—2600 Newport Court to West Freeway           35
Boulevard
Ridgmar         6400—6800 Newport Court to Green Oaks Road        35
Boulevard
West Risinger   100—2000  South Freeway to Crowley Road           45
Road
West Risinger   3100—6100 Elk Creek Lane to Sweet Flag Lane       40
Road
River Park      2500—3400 Bryant Irvin Rd. to Southwest Boulevard 35
Drive
River Bend Road 6500—6800 Meadows West Drive to Meadows West      25
                            Drive South
River Bluff     5000—5100 Trinity Landing Drive North to East     25
Drive                       Park Drive
Riverdale Drive 6800        Bellaire Drive South to Meadows West    25
                            Drive South
Riverside Drive 2100—2400 Bomar Avenue to Texas and Pacific       40
                            Railroad tracks
North Riverside 100—200   East First Street to Airport Freeway    40
Drive                       (S.H. 121)
North Riverside 300—2300  Airport Freeway (S.H. 121) to Northeast 35
Drive                       28th Street
North Riverside 5000—5300 Northern Cross Drive to Northeast Loop  35
Drive                       820
North Riverside 5300—5600 Northeast Loop 820 to Fossil Creek      35
Drive                       Boulevard
North Riverside 5700—6550 Fossil Creek Boulevard to Western       35
Drive                       Center Boulevard
North Riverside 6600—7900 Western Center Boulevard to             40
Drive                       Summerfields Boulevard
North Riverside 8000—11500Summerfields Boulevard to Keller Hicks  40
Drive                       Road
North Riverside 11600—1250Timberland Boulevard to 800 feet north  40
Drive                       of Sawtimber Trail
South Riverside 100—4850  Texas and Pacific Railroad tracks to    40
Drive                       Mansfield Highway
Riverside Drive 100—2200  East First Street to East Lancaster     40
                            Avenue
Riverside Drive 2300—2400 East Lancaster Avenue to Texas and      30
                            Pacific Railroad tracks
River Oaks                  200 feet northeast of Sam Calloway Road
Boulevard (SH-  6000        to west fork of the Trinity River (city 40
183)                        limits)
River View      4800—4900 Meadows West Drive to Meadows West      25
Drive                       Drive South
Roaring Springs 400—1000  Westworth Village city limits to        40
Road                        Westover Hills city limits
Roaring Springs 2200        Southbound: 300 feet north of Byers     30
Road                        Avenue to Byers Avenue
Roberts Cut-Off 2300—2600 Fritz Alan Street to Jacksboro Highway  30
Road
Robertson Road  6400        Boat Club Road to City Limits           40
Rogers Road     1300—1800 West Vickery Boulevard to Colonial      30
                            Parkway
Rolling Hills   2100        Eastbound: Ridgeview Street to          30
Drive                       Kingsdale Drive
East Rosedale   100—600   South Main Street to South Freeway (I-  40
Street                      35W)
East Rosedale               South Freeway (I-35W) to South
Street (BU-     700—1600  Riverside Drive                         35
287P)
East Rosedale   1700—4300 South Riverside Drive to Griggs Avenue  35
Street
East Rosedale   4300—5400 Griggs Avenue to Stalcup Road/Winnie    40
Street                      Street
East Rosedale
Street (Spur                Stalcup Road/Winnie Street to 2,375
303) Control    5500—7100 feet east of Arkansas Lane              45
Section: 2208-
01
West Rosedale   100—2200  South Main Street to Forest Park        35
Street                      Boulevard
West Rosedale   2300—3400 Eastbound: Forest Park Boulevard to 300 45
Street                      feet east of DeGary Street
West Rosedale   2300—3400 Westbound: Forest Park Boulevard to 210 45
Street                      feet east of DeGary Street
West Rosedale
Street to West  2400—3300 West Rosedale Street to West Freeway    40
Freeway (I-30)              (I-30)
Ramp
West Rosedale   5400—5600 West Freeway, South Frontage Road to    30
Street                      Horne Street
Ryan Avenue     3500—4000 West Biddison Street to West Bolt       30
                            Street
Saginaw
Boulevard (BU-              2,300 feet northwest of Bailey Boswell
287P) Control   9700—11600Road to 240 feet southeast of West      60
Section: 0013-              Bonds Ranch Road
10
Saginaw
Boulevard (BU-              300 feet north of Prairie Ridge Trail/
287P) Control   12800—1300Fort Worth City Limits to Avondale      60
Section: 0013-              Haslet Road/Fort Worth City Limits
10
Sam Calloway    500—900   Sam Calloway Court to Black Oak lane    30
Road
Sam Calloway    5700—5900 River Oaks Boulevard to Sam Calloway    30
Road                        Court
Samuels Avenue  400—700   East Peach Street to 230 feet north of  30
                            Cold Springs Road
Samuels Avenue  700—1200  230 feet north of Cold Springs Road to  35
                            290 feet north of Poindexter Street
Samuels Avenue  1200—2300 290 feet north of Poindexter Street to  40
                            Northeast 23rd Street
Sandshell Drive 4400—6300 North Beach Street to North Freeway (I- 30
                            35W)
Sandy Lane      1000—1400 John T. White Road to Ederville Road    35
Sandy Lane      1400—2200 Ederville Road to Meadowbrook Drive     35
Sandy Lane      2300—3200 Meadowbrook Drive to East Lancaster     40
Sandybrook      6800—7000 East Loop 820 North to east of          30
Drive                       Elderwood Trail (deadend)
Sanguinet       2800—3300 West Freeway to Diaz Avenue             30
Street
Savannah Lane   6700—6800 River Bluff Drive to Trinity Landing    25
                            Drive West
East Seminary   100—1400  South Main Street to Carter Park Drive  30
Drive
East Seminary   1400—2900 Carter Park Drive to 300 feet west of   40
Drive                       Old Mansfield Road
East Seminary   2900—3300 300 feet west of Old Mansfield Road to  30
Drive                       Mansfield Highway
West Seminary   100—700   South Main Street to Hemphill Street    30
Drive
West Seminary   800—3500  Hemphill Street to Cherokee Trail       35
Drive
West Seminary   3500—3900 Cherokee Trail to Granbury Road         30
Drive
Sendera Ranch   13300—1430Avondale Haslet Road to Willow Springs  40
Boulevard                   Road
West Seventh    1600—3000 Penn Street to University Drive         35
Street
Shadydell Drive 6100—6400 Boat Club Road to Brianhill Drive       30
Sheridan Road   6400—7800 Altamesa Boulevard to Sycamore School   30
                            Road
Shiver Road     3600—3800 Foxwood Drive to Morning Meadow Drive   30
Shiver Road     4200—5100 Golden Sunset Trail to Ray White Road   35
Shore View      All         Phillips Parker Road to Bomber Road     30
Drive
Silver Creek    900—3600  Silver Creek Road to Watercress Drive   35
Road North
Silver Creek    9300—9600 West Loop 820 North to Silver Creek     35
Road                        Road North
Silveridge      7900        From Columbus Trail to Tearose Trail    25
Drive
Silver Sage     6600—7700 Western Center Boulevard to Prewett     30
Drive                       Road
Skyline Drive   1600—2200 Thurston Road to Jacksboro Highway      30
Slade Boulevard 3400—3700 U.S. Highway 80 to Chapin Road          30
Songbird Lane   7900        From Columbus Trail to Bell Flower      25
South Drive     3500—4700 Granbury Road to Southwest Loop 820 (I- 30
                            20) (I-820)
South Drive     4800—5300 Southwest Loop 820 (I-20) (I-820) to    35
                            Westhaven Drive
South Drive     4600—4900 Westhaven Drive to South Hulen Street   35
West
Sovereign Road  14100—1460State Highway 360 to Amon Carter        40
                            Boulevard
Sovereign Road  14700—1490Amon Carter Boulevard to Diplomacy Road 35
Stadium Drive   2500—3000 Parkhill Drive to West Berry Street     30
Stalcup Road    1500—3800 East Rosedale Street to Eastland Street 30
Stone Drive     10900—1120Oak Grove Road to Crockett Drive        30
Stone Road      13500—1410East Alsbury Boulevard to Abner Lee     35
                            Drive
Stoney Bridge   9700—9800 Settlement Plaza Drive to Academy       30
Road                        Boulevard
Summer Creek    7500—8500 Meadow Valley Drive to West Rissinger   40
Drive                       Road
Summerfields    3600—4400 North Riverside Drive to North Beach    35
Boulevard                   Street
Sycamore School 100—1800  South Freeway to West Everman Parkway   35
Road
Sycamore School 2000—5900 Crowley Road to Columbus Trail          40
Road
North Sylvania  100—2000  East First Street to Watauga Road       35
Avenue
North Sylvania  2100—3600 Watauga Road to East Long Avenue        40
Avenue
North Sylvania  3700—4500 East Long Avenue to Meacham Boulevard   40
Avenue
South Sylvania  100—3100  East First Street to Riverside Drive    35
Avenue
Tappan          2300—3200 Campus Drive to Wichita Avenue          35
Boulevard
Tarrant Main    3500—4000 Trinity Railway Express to South        30
Street                      Pipeline Road
North Tarrant   3000—5700 North Freeway (I-35W) to Denton Highway 40
Parkway                     (U.S. 377)
Tehama Ridge    8800—9500 North Tarrant Parkway to Heritage Trace 40
Parkway                     Parkway
Tehama Ridge    9600—10000Heritage Trace Parkway to 225 feet      30
Parkway                     north of Carlotta Drive
Ten Mile Bridge             150 feet east of east property line of
Road            6000—6300 6003 Ten Mile Bridge Road to Boat Club  30
                            Road
Ten Mile Bridge 6500        Westbound: 0.2 mile west of Boat Club   50
Road                        Road to Fort Worth city limit
West Terrell    1200—1500 Henderson Street to 8th Avenue          25
Avenue
Texan Road      2000—2300 4550 feet west of FM 156 to FM 156      30
East Third      500—1100  Grove Street to Nichols Street          35
Street
Terminal Road
(FM-156)
Control         100—1200  North Main Street to Blue Mound Road    45
Section: 0718-
02
Terminal Road   1200—2300 Blue Mound Road to Deen Road            35
Thompson Road   3500—4400 Old Denton Road to North Beach Street   35
Timberland      11200—1240North Freeway (I-35W) East Frontage     40
Boulevard                   Road to Alta Vista Road
Trace Ridge     8300—8800 Island Circle to Shiver Road            30
Parkway
Trail Drive     3200—3500 Montgomery Street to University Drive   35
Trail Lake      4600—5300 Granbury Road to Woodway Drive          35
Drive
Trail Lake      7000—7500 Altamesa Boulevard to Sycamore School   40
Drive                       Road
Trinity         6300—6700 Handley-Ederville Road to East Loop     40
Boulevard                   820, North
Trinity         6800—20000East Loop 820 North to city limits      40
Boulevard
Trinity Landing 6700—6800 River Bluff Drive to Trinity Landing    25
Drive North                 Drive West
Trinity Landing 5000—5100 Trinity Landing Drive North to Trinity  25
Drive West                  Landing Drive South
Northwest 21st  100—1600  South Main Street to Roosevelt Avenue   30
Street
Northwest 25th  100—1600  North Main Street to Roosevelt Avenue   30
Street
Northeast 28th  100—3800  North Main Street to North Beach Street 40
Street (SH-183)
Northwest 28th  100—1900  North Main Street to Ephriham Avenue    40
Street (SH-183)
University      100—1500  White Settlement Road to Crestline Road 35
Drive
University      1600—2600 Crestline Road to West Freeway          40
Drive
North                       White Settlement Road to 500 feet
University      100—800   southwest of Jacksboro Highway          35
Drive
North                       500 feet southwest of Jacksboro Highway
University      800         to Jacksboro Highway                    30
Drive
South
University      1300—1400 West Freeway to West Vickery Boulevard  40
Drive
South                       West Vickery to 200 feet south of Log
University      1400—2200 Cabin Village Lane                      40
Drive
South                       200 feet south of Log Cabins Village to
University      2200—2400 Park Hill Drive                         30
Drive
South
University      2500—3750 Park Hill Drive to Granbury Road        30
Drive
South                       145 feet north of Princeton Street to
University      2800—3000 110 feet south of West Bowie Street     25
Drive
Verna Trail     100—9800  White Settlement Road to Silver Creek   35
North                       Road North
East Vickery    100—2100  South Main Street to Poly Freeway       30
Boulevard
East Vickery    2200—2500 Poly Freeway to South Beach Street      35
Boulevard
East Vickery    2600—3600 South Beach Street to South Ayers       30
Boulevard                   Avenue
West Vickery    100—600   South Main to Hemphill Street           30
Boulevard
West Vickery    700—1100  Hemphill Street to Henderson Street     35
Boulevard
West Vickery    1200—3800 Henderson Street to Rutledge Street     30
Boulevard
West Vickery    3900—4700 Rutledge Street to 400 feet West of     40
Boulevard                   Micki Lynn Avenue
West Vickery    4700—5300 400 feet west of Micki Lynn to 200 feet 40
Boulevard                   west of Prevost Street
West Vickery                200 feet west of Prevost Street to 150
Boulevard       5300—6600 feet east of Frontage Road to Southwest 45
                            Boulevard
West Vickery                150 feet west of East Frontage Road of
Boulevard       6600—7100 Southwest Boulevard to Benbrook city    35
                            limit
Wabash Avenue   4300—4500 West Seminary Drive to Trail Lake Drive 30
Watercress      All         Jacksboro Highway to Silver Creek Road  30
Avenue
Watermill Drive 6700        Bellaire Drive South to River View      25
                            Drive
East
Weatherford     100—300   Main Street to North Jones Street       30
Street
East                        North Jones Street to North Pecan
Weatherford     400—500   Street                                  35
Street
East
Weatherford
Street (Spur    600—2100  North Pecan Street to East Belknap      40
347) Control                Street
Section: 0081-
01
West
Weatherford     100—1400  Main Street to Pier 1 Place             30
Street
Wedgewood Drive 5400—6100 Wedgmont Circle North to South Hulen    30
                            Street
Weiler          2300—2800 Meadowbrook Drive to East Lancaster     30
Boulevard                   Avenue
West Freeway
(I-30) to West  2400—2800 West Rosedale Street to West Freeway    40
Rosedale Street             (I-30)
Ramp
Westcreek Drive 4750—6100 Medina Avenue to McCart Avenue          30
Westcreek Drive 6200—6700 McCart Avenue to Southpark Lane         30
Westport        2500—2900 North Freeway (I-35W) to Old Denton     40
Parkway                     Road
Western Center  1600—4400 Saginaw city limits to Haltom city      45
Boulevard                   limits
Westpoint       9400—10750West Loop 820 South (Jim Wright         40
Boulevard                   Freeway) to American Flyer Boulevard
Westport        2200—2450 City limits to North Freeway (I-35W)    45
Parkway
Westridge       3200—5200 Camp Bowie Boulevard to West Vickery    35
Avenue                      Boulevard
Westview Avenue 100—700   White Settlement Road to West Seventh   30
                            Street
White                       North Henderson Street to 300 feet east
Settlement Road 1700—4200 of the eastern bridge over the west     35
                            fork of the Trinity River
White                       300 feet east of the eastern bridge
Settlement Road 4200—5400 over the west fork of the Trinity River 35
                            to the western bridge over said river
White           9300—9600 West Loop 820 North to Clifford Avenue  40
Settlement Road
White           9700—10700Clifford Avenue to city limits          40
Settlement Road
Whittenburg     1200—1900 Eastbound: Crowley Road to Steinburg    30
Drive                       Lane
Wichita Avenue  3600—4400 Vaugn Boulevard to Mitchell Boulevard   30
Wichita Street  4500—5200 Mitchell Boulevard to Mansfield Highway 40
Wilbarger       3100—5900 Mitchell Boulevard to Cravens Road      30
Street
Wildcat Way     13700—1410Abner Lee Drive to Burleson Retta Road  35
South
Wildflower Way  5000        From Sunscape Lane South to Ocean Drive 25
Wildflower Way  5000—5300 Summer Creek Road to east of Sunscape   30
                            Lane (dead end)
Will Rogers     6400—8600 East Altamesa Boulevard to Everman      40
Boulevard                   Parkway
Willow Springs  12400—1320US Highway 287 to Avondale Haslet Road  45
Road
Wilson Road     1500—1700 Brentwood Stair Road to Jenson Road     30
W J Boaz Road   4500—6300 Old Decatur Road to Boat Club Road      40
Woodhaven       100—1300  Randol Mill Road to Brentwood Stair     35
Boulevard                   Road
Woodland        11400—1230Keller Hicks Road to Park Vista         30
Springs Drive               Boulevard
Woodway Drive   5400—7000 Trail Lake Drive to West Cleburne Road  35
Yucca Drive     1800—3800 Oakhurst Scenic Drive to North Beach    35
 
(1964 Code, § 26-63) (Ord. 21539-11-2014, 1, passed 11-18-2014; Ord. 21827-08-
2015, § 1, passed 8-18-2015, eff. 8-22-2015; Ord. 22292-06-2016, §§ 1, 2,
passed 6-28-2016; Ord. 22595-02-2017, §§ 1-3, passed 2-7-2017; Ord. 22678-04-
2017, §§ 1, 2, passed 4-22-2017; Ord. 23726-08-2019, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-6-2019;
Ord. 24241-06-2020, § 1, passed 6-16-2020, eff. 6-25-2020; Ord. 24475-10-2020,
§ 1, passed 10-20-2020; Ord. 24498-10-2020, § 1, passed 10-27-2020; Ord. 24638-
01-2021, § 1 passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 25139-10-2021, § 1, passed 10-12-2021, eff.
11-1-2021; Ord. 25975-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-14-2023, eff. 3-3-2023; Ord.
27201-10-2024, § 1, passed 10-15-2024, eff. 10-25-2024; Ord. 27754-06-2025, §§
2, 3, passed 6-24-2025, eff. 8-20-2025)
Statutory reference:
Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 166—172
§ 22-87 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in such position as
to interfere with the driver’s or motorman’s view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
(1964 Code, § 26-64)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 175
§ 22-88 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the
traffic upon and condition of the roadway.
   (b)   The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle
when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and
which is following another motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle
shall whenever conditions permit leave sufficient space so that an overtaking
vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall
not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from
overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle.
   (c)   The drivers of motor vehicles driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not
towing other vehicles shall drive so as to allow sufficient space between each
such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicles to
enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to
funeral processions.
(1964 Code, § 26-65)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 61
§ 22-89 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving
an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use
another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier
or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing
section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established by public
authority.
(1964 Code, § 26-66)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 62
§ 22-90 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession when such vehicles
are in motion and are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply
to intersections where traffic is controlled by police officers.
(1964 Code, § 26-67)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate processions, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch.
544
§ 22-91 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
(1964 Code, § 26-68)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 187
§ 22-92 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property.
(1964 Code, § 26-69)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 51
§ 22-93 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS OR AMBULANCE.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire
apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
   (b)   No driver of a vehicle, except a driver on official business, may
follow closer than 500 feet behind an ambulance when the flashing red lights of
the ambulance are operating. No driver of a vehicle may drive or park his or
her vehicle at a place where an ambulance has been summoned for an emergency
call in a manner calculated to interfere with the arrival or departure of the
ambulance.
(1964 Code, § 26-70)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 100
§ 22-94 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No driver of a streetcar or vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of
the fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or street
car track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without consent of the fire
department official in command.
(1964 Code, § 26-71)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 101
§ 22-95 SAFE PASSING OF VULNERABLE ROAD USERS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, a VULNERABLE ROAD USER means:
      (1)   A pedestrian (including a runner), physically disabled person,
child, skater, stranded motorist or passenger, highway construction or
maintenance worker, tow truck operator, utility worker or other worker with
legitimate business in or near the road or right-of-way;
      (2)   A person on horseback;
      (3)   A person operating equipment other than a motor vehicle, including,
but not limited to, a bicycle, handcycle, horse-driven conveyance or
unprotected farm equipment;
      (4)   A person operating a motorcycle, moped, motor-driven cycle or
motor-assisted scooter; or
      (5)   A firefighter or peace officer whose vehicle is equipped with
emergency lights that are activated, regardless of whether it is a marked
vehicle.
   (b)   Safe passing. An operator of a motor vehicle passing a vulnerable road
user, who is either traveling or stationary on a highway or street, shall:
      (1)   Vacate the lane nearest to or in which the vulnerable road user is
located if the highway or street has two or more marked lanes running in the
same direction; or
      (2)   Pass the vulnerable road user at a safe distance.
         a.   For the purpose of subsection (b)(2) above, when road conditions
allow, safe distance is at least:
            1.   Three feet from the vulnerable road user if the operator’s
vehicle is a passenger car or light truck, as defined by Tex. Transportation
Code § 541.201(7); or
            2.   Six feet from the vulnerable road user if the operator’s
vehicle is a truck, other than a light truck, or a commercial motor vehicle as
defined by Tex. Transportation Code § 522.003.
   (c)   Throwing or projecting any object or substance. An occupant of a motor
vehicle may not knowingly throw or project any object or substance at or
against a vulnerable user, or the user’s animal, equipment or vehicle.
   (d)   Maneuvering the vehicle. An occupant of a motor vehicle may not
maneuver the vehicle in a manner that:
      (1)   Is intended to cause intimidation or harassment to a vulnerable
road user; or
      (2)   Is reckless and which causes a collision with any vulnerable road
user on any roadway or intersection. This includes a collision caused by
opening a motor vehicle’s door into the path of a vulnerable road user or the
user’s animal or equipment.
   (e)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under
this section that, at the time of the offense, the vulnerable road user was
acting in violation of any applicable traffic laws.
   (f)   Offenses. To the extent that the conduct is not already covered by the
Texas Penal or Transportation Codes:
      (1)   The penalty for any violation of this ordinance that causes injury
to a vulnerable road user shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   The penalty for violations of subsections (c) or (d) above which do
not result in injury shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
      (3)   The penalty for any violation of this ordinance other than of
subsections (c) and (d) above which does not cause injury to a vulnerable road
user shall be a fine not to exceed $200.
   (g)   Exception. This section does not apply to conduct or injuries
sustained on private property.
(Ord. 19570-03-2011, § 1, passed 3-1-2011)
§§ 22-96—22-110 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: TRUCK TRAFFIC
§ 22-111 USE OF TRUCK ROUTES REQUIRED FOR THROUGH TRAFFIC; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor
vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or any combination thereof
through the city in inter-city travel, without a local destination or point of
origin, except upon such streets as are designated as truck routes by this
article.
(1964 Code, § 27-73)
§ 22-112 USE OF TRUCK ROUTES OR COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTES REQUIRED—GENERALLY.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall operate or cause to be
operated upon any public street within the city any commercial motor vehicle,
motorbus, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or any combination thereof
except on such streets as are designated as either truck routes or commercial
delivery routes by this article; such vehicles shall be operated on a truck
route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial
delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the
purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated.
(1964 Code, § 26-74) (Ord. 8077, § 2, passed 4-1-1980)
§ 22-113 SAME—DEFENSES.
   The following shall be defenses to prosecutions under the provisions of §
22-112:
   (a)   To operate a vehicle to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of
repair, place of performing a service, or a place of loading or unloading, over
the shortest route to a point on a truck route or commercial delivery route;
any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such point not on a
truck route or commercial delivery route to another such point without
returning to a truck route or commercial delivery route if to so return would
increase the distance to be traveled on nondesignated streets; the operators of
any such vehicles shall carry evidence of the location of its last stop and of
its immediate destination in order for this defense to apply;
   (b)   To operate emergency vehicles in response to any emergency call;
   (c)   To operate vehicles of a public utility while cruising in an assigned
area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of such public utility or
providing maintenance service to the facilities; and
   (d)   To operate motorbuses for the purpose of transporting people for hire
upon a regular schedule over a defined route.
(1964 Code, § 26-75) (Ord. 8077, § 3, passed 4-1-1980)
§ 22-114 TRUCK ROUTE STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The following streets and sections of streets are designated as truck
routes:
TRUCK ROUTES
Name of Street Limits
TRUCK ROUTES
Name of Street                           Limits
Farm to Market Road 157                  Within city limits
Farm to Market Road 731 (Crowley Road)   Within city limits
Handley Drive                            From State Highway 180 (East Lancaster
                                         Avenue) south to Spur 303
Interstate Highway 20                    Within city limits
Interstate Highway 30 (Old Turnpike and  Within city limits
West Freeway)
Interstate Highway 35-W (North and South Within city limits
Freeway)
Interstate Highway 820 (Loop 820)        Within city limits
Spur 303 (East Rosedale Street)          From Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop
                                         820) east to city limits
State Highway 121 (Airport Freeway)      Within city limits
State Highway 180 (East Lancaster        From Interstate Highway 35-W east to
Avenue)                                  city limits
State Highway 183                        Within city limits
State Highway 199 (Jacksboro Highway)    From Ephriham northwest to city limits
State Highway 360                        Within city limits
U.S. 287 (Martin Luther King Freeway)    From Interstate Highway 35-W to
                                         Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop 820)
U.S. 377                                 From Benbrook Circle southwest to city
                                         limits
U.S. Bus. 287 (North Main Street)        From State Highway 183 (28th Street)
                                         north to city limits
 
(1964 Code, § 26-76) (Ord. 5911, passed - -; Ord. 8077, § 4, passed 4-1-1980;
Ord. 11662, § 1, passed 9-6-1994)
§ 22-115 COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ROUTE STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The following streets and sections of streets are designated commercial
delivery routes:
Commercial Delivery Routes
Name of Street Limits
Commercial Delivery Routes
Name of Street                        Limits
Allen Avenue                          From Hemphill to Interstate Highway 35-W
Altamesa Boulevard                    From Bryant Irvin Road east to Interstate
                                      Highway 35-W (North and South Freeway)
Altamesa Boulevard, East              From Interstate Highway 35-W east to
                                      Campus Drive
Amon Carter Boulevard                 From Trinity Boulevard north to State
                                      Highway 183
Angle Avenue                          From Northwest Twenty-Eighth Street
                                      northwest to Marine Creek Parkway
Azle Avenue                           From Titus Street southeast to Ephriham
                                      Avenue
Beach Street                          From Belknap Street south to Mitchell
                                      Boulevard
Beach Street                          From Western Center Boulevard south to
                                      Northeast 28th Street
Belknap Street                        From Henderson Street east to Beach
                                      Street
Bellaire Drive South                  From Bellaire Drive West, west to Bryant
                                      Irvin Road
Benbrook Boulevard                    From Cleburne Road to Granbury Road
Berry Street                          From Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop
                                      820) west to Bellaire Drive West
                                      From Glen Garden Drive and East Berry
Berry Street South                    Street intersection east to Mitchell
                                      Boulevard
Biddison Street                       From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      Hemphill Street
Blue Mound Road (Farm to Market Road  From Terminal Road north to the city
156)                                  limits
Brentwood Stair Road                  From Oakland Boulevard east to Interstate
                                      Highway 820
Bridge Street                         From Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop
                                      820) west to Oakland Boulevard
Bridgewood Drive                      From Randol Mill Road south to Brentwood
                                      Stair Road
Bryant Irvin Road                     From Interstate Highway 30 south to Dirks
                                      Road (Altamesa Boulevard)
Camp Bowie Boulevard                  From University Drive to Benbrook Circle
Campus Drive                          From Mansfield Highway south to East
                                      Altamesa Boulevard
Cantrell Sansom Road                  From Old Denton Road west to city limits
Chapel Creek Boulevard                From White Settlement Road south to Spur
                                      580 (Highway 80)
Cherry Lane                           From Interstate Highway 30 south to Spur
                                      580 (Highway 80)
Cleburne Road                         From West Cantey Street southwest to
                                      Benbrook Boulevard
                                      From Interstate Highway 820 (Jim Wright
Clifford Street                       Freeway North) west to White Settlement
                                      Road
Columbus Trail                        From Granbury Road east to McCart Avenue
Commerce Street                       From Bluff Street south to Weatherford
                                      Street
Crestline Road                        From University Drive west to Harley
                                      Avenue
Decatur Avenue                        From Terminal Road south to Samuels
                                      Avenue at Northeast 23rd Street
Dottie Lynn Parkway                   From Meadowbrook Drive south to East
                                      Lancaster Avenue (State Highway 180)
Eastchase Parkway                     From John T. White Road south to
                                      Meadowbrook Drive
Edgecliff Road                        From McCart Avenue to Edgecliff city
                                      limits
Eighth Avenue                         From Interstate Highway 30 south to West
                                      Cantey Street
Everman Parkway                       From Sycamore School Road east to Will
                                      Rogers Boulevard
Felix Avenue                          From Hemphill Street east to Interstate
                                      Highway 35-W
First Street                          From Beach Street east to Randol Mill
                                      Road
First/Fourth Street Connection        From Riverside Drive east to Beach Street
Forest Park Boulevard                 From Interstate Highway 30 (West Freeway)
                                      south to Rosedale Street
Fourth Street                         From Interstate Highway 35-W east to
                                      Riverside Drive
Fuller Street                         From James Avenue east to Hemphill Street
Granbury Road                         From Benbrook Boulevard to Trail Lake
                                      Drive
Granbury Road                         From Trail Lake Drive south to Columbus
                                      Trail
Green Oaks Road                       From Calmont Drive north to (Alta Mere
                                      Drive) State Highway 183
Grove Street                          From 38th Street south to Long Avenue
Handley-Ederville Road                From Randol Mill Road north to city
                                      limits
Harley Avenue                         From Crestline Road west to Montgomery
                                      Street
Hemphill Street                       From Vickery Boulevard to Interstate
                                      Highway 820 (Southwest Loop 820)
Henderson Street                      From West Fork Trinity River to
                                      Pennsylvania Avenue
Horne Street                          From West Vickery Boulevard north to
                                      Byers Avenue
Houston Street                        From Weatherford Street north to Bluff
                                      Street
Hulen Street                          From Interstate Highway 30 south to West
                                      Risinger Road
James Avenue                          From Seminary Drive south to Interstate
                                      Highway 820 (Southwest Loop 820)
John T. White Road                    Interstate Highway 820 east to Eastchase
                                      Parkway
Lackland Road                         From Spur 580 (Highway 80) north to
                                      Calmont Street
Lancaster Avenue                      From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      University Drive
Las Vegas Trail                       From Interstate Highway 30 south to Spur
                                      580 (Highway 80)
Long Avenue                           From State Highway 199 (Jacksboro
                                      Highway) east to Beach Street
Longvue                               From Spur 580 (Highway 80) south to city
                                      limits
                                      From Vickery Boulevard at Pulido Street
Lovell Street                         west to Vickery Boulevard at Chambers
                                      Avenue
Main Street (U.S. Bus. 287)           From Bluff Street north to State Highway
                                      183
Main Street                           From Lancaster Avenue south to
                                      Morningside Drive
Mansfield Highway (U.S. Bus. 287)     From Glen Eden Drive southeast to city
                                      limits
                                      From Angle Avenue north to Interstate
Marine Creek Parkway                  Highway 820 (Jim Wright Freeway
                                      Northwest)
Mark IV Parkway                       From Cantrell Sansom Road south to
                                      Meacham Boulevard
McCart Avenue                         From Benbrook Boulevard south to West
                                      Risinger Road
Meacham Boulevard                     From Blue Mound Road east to North Beach
Meadowbrook Boulevard                 From Eastchase Parkway east to city
                                      limits
Miller Avenue                         From Union Pacific Railroad south to city
                                      limits
Mitchell Boulevard                    From East Rosedale south to Wichita
                                      Street
Montgomery Street                     From Camp Bowie Boulevard south to
                                      Vickery Boulevard
Morningside Drive                     From Hemphill Street east to Interstate
                                      Highway 35-W
Northside Drive                       From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      State Highway 199 (Jacksboro Highway)
Oakland Boulevard                     From Randol Mill Road south to Brentwood
                                      Stair Road
Oakland Boulevard                     From East Lancaster Avenue south to Union
                                      Pacific Railroad
Oakmont Boulevard                     From Bryant Irvin Road east to South
                                      Hulen Street
                                      From Angle Avenue north to Interstate
Old Decatur Road                      Highway 820 (Jim Wright Freeway
                                      Northwest)
Old Denton Road                       From Western Center Boulevard south to
                                      Cantrell Sansom Road
Overton Ridge Boulevard               From Bryant Irvin Road east to South
                                      Hulen Street
Pafford Street                        From McCart Avenue west to Granbury Road
Pennsylvania Avenue                   From 8th Avenue east to Interstate
                                      Highway 35-W
Pine                                  From Lancaster Avenue south to Union
                                      Pacific Railroad
Randol Mill Road                      From 1st Street east to Interstate 820
                                      (Loop 820)
Risinger Road                         From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      Crowley Road (Farm to Market Road 731)
Risinger Road                         From South Hulen Street east to McCart
                                      Avenue
Riverside Drive                       From Belknap Street (U.S. 377) south to
                                      Glen Eden Drive
Roaring Springs Road                  From Byers Avenue north to Westover Hills
                                      southern limits
Roaring Springs Road                  From Westover Hills northern limits north
                                      to Westworth Village city limits
Rosedale Street                       From Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop
                                      820) west to Smiley Street
Samuels Avenue                        From Northeast 23rd Street and Decatur
                                      Avenue south to Northside Drive
Seminary Drive                        From Granbury Road east to Wichita Street
Seventh Street, West                  From Henderson Street west to University
                                      Drive
Spur 580 (Highway 80)                 From Camp Bowie Boulevard west to
                                      Interstate Highway 30
State Highway 199 (Jacksboro Highway) From Ephriham Avenue southeast to West
                                      Fork Trinity River
Summit Avenue                         From West 7th Street to Interstate
                                      Highway 30
Sycamore School Road                  From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      Hulen Street
                                      From Meacham Boulevard south to NE 28th
                                      Street and from Belknap Street to
Sylvania Avenue                       Riverside Drive (excluding that area
                                      between NE 28th Street and Belknap
                                      Street)
Tennessee Street                      From Union Pacific Railroad south to
                                      Vickery Boulevard
Tension Drive                         From Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop
                                      820) southwest to East Rosedale Street
Terminal Road                         From North Main Street (U.S. Bus. 287)
                                      east to Decatur Avenue
Thirty-Eighth Street                  From North Main Street east to Decatur
                                      Avenue
Trail Lake Drive                      From Granbury Road south to Wabash Avenue
Trail Lake Drive                      From Interstate Highway 820 (Southwest
                                      Loop 820) south to Woodway Drive
Trinity Boulevard                     From Interstate Highway 820 west to city
                                      limits
Trinity Boulevard                     From Industrial Boulevard (Farm to Market
                                      Road 157) east to county line
University Drive                      From State Highway 199 (Jacksboro
                                      Highway) south to Granbury Road
Vickery Boulevard                     From Henderson Street to Beach Street
Vickery Boulevard                     From 8th Avenue west to city limits
Wabash Avenue                         From Seminary Drive southwest to Trail
                                      Lake
Weatherford Street                    From Interstate Highway 35-W west to
                                      Henderson Street
Western Center Boulevard              From Blue Mound Road east to North Beach
                                      Street
White Settlement Road                 From Henderson Street west to city limits
                                      From Interstate Highway 820 (Jim Wright
White Settlement Road                 Freeway South) west to Chapel Creek
                                      Boulevard
Wichita Street                        From Mitchell Boulevard south to
                                      Mansfield Highway (U.S. Bus. 287)
Wilbarger Street                      From Mitchell Boulevard east to
                                      Interstate Highway 820 (East Loop 820)
Will Rogers Boulevard                 From Altamesa Boulevard south to Everman
                                      Parkway
Woodhaven Boulevard                   From Randol Mill Road south to Brentwood
                                      Stair Road
Woodway Drive                         From Altamesa Boulevard north to Trail
                                      Lake Drive
 
(1964 Code, § 26-77) (Ord. 4750, § 4, passed - -; Ord. 4883, § 2, passed - -;
Ord. 5991, § 2, passed - -; Ord. 8077, § 5, passed 4-1-1980; Ord. 11194, § 1,
passed 11-5-1992; Ord. 11662, § 2, passed 9-6-1994; Ord. 22376-08-2016, § 1,
passed 8-30-2016)
§ 22-116 TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section the following terms are defined:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any quantity, group, form or class of material
designated as hazardous material in any official publication of the Secretary
of Transportation of the United States under the authority of 27 U.S.C.A. §
1803 (1976), as amended, including any such publication issued after the
effective date of this section.
      REQUIRING PLACARDS. That the material to be transported is hazardous and
is in sufficient quantity to require placarding in accordance with the
Department of Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 U.S.C.A. §§
1801 et seq. (1976)) or in accordance with the Tex. Revised Civil Statutes
Article 6701d, § 139, as amended, or regulations promulgated under the
authority of such § 139, as amended.
      TRANSPORT. To move any motor vehicle requiring placards upon any public
street or highway.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport hazardous materials or knowingly
cause hazardous materials to be transported upon any public street within the
corporate limits of the city, except upon the following:
      (1)   That portion of Interstate Highway 820 and Interstate Highway 20
lying within the corporate limits of the city;
      (2)   That portion of any state or federal highway running outward from
Interstate Highway 820 or Interstate Highway 20 to the corporate limits of the
City of Fort Worth, Texas; and
      (3)   Any other street or thoroughfare posted by the traffic engineer of
the city with signs stating.
   “HAZARDOUS MATERIAL ROUTE.”
   (c)   It shall be a defense to prosecutions under subsection (b) of this
section that the transporting vehicle was empty.
   (d)   It shall be a defense to prosecutions under subsection (b) of this
section that such transportation was to a point of destination within the
corporate limits of the city or was from a point of origin within the corporate
limits of the city, or both, and that no portion of such transportation was in
violation of §§
22-112 and
22-113, as amended, of this code.
   (e)   The operator of a vehicle that is used for transport of hazardous
materials requiring placards shall before operations, inspect such vehicle and
determine that:
      (1)   Brakes are in good working condition;
      (2)   Steering mechanism is in good working condition;
      (3)   All electrician wiring is well insulated and firmly secured;
      (4)   The vehicle is in a safe condition to transport hazardous
materials; and
      (5)   All emergency features on bulk transport carriers are installed and
operative as outlined in U. S. Department of Transportation specifications and
requirements.
   (f)   It shall be presumed for purposes of prosecution under this section
that a transporting vehicle contains hazardous materials if it bears a placard.
   (g)   Both the bureau of fire prevention of the city and the city’s police
department are expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of this section.
(1964 Code, § 26-78) (Ord. 7889, § 2, passed 3-6-1979)
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
§ 22-117 VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive, operate or move, or to cause or permit to be driven,
operated or moved, on any public street within the city, any commercial motor
vehicle with or without load, contrary to any of the regulations contained in
this section.
   (b)   Commercial motor vehicles shall be subject to the vehicle width,
length and height limitations and restrictions which are delineated in V.T.C.S.
Article 6701d-11, § 3.
   (c)   No commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer nor
combination of such vehicles shall be operated or caused or permitted to be
operated upon any public street within the city having a weight in excess of
any one or more of the following limitations:
      (1)   In no event shall the total gross weight, with load, of any vehicle
or combination of vehicles, exceed 80,000 pounds;
      (2)   No axle shall carry a load in excess of 20,000 pounds. An AXLE LOAD
shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle;
      (3)   The total gross weight concentrated on the highway surface from any
tandem axle group shall not exceed 34,000 pounds for each such tandem axle
group. TANDEM AXLE GROUP is defined to be two or more axles spaced 40 inches or
more apart from center to center having at least one common point of weight
suspension;
      (4)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport ready-mix concrete may be
operated upon the public streets of the city with a tandem axle load not to
exceed 44,000 pounds, a single axle load not to exceed 20,000 pounds and a
gross load not to exceed 64,000 pounds. Before any vehicle used exclusively to
transport ready-mixed concrete with a tandem axle load in excess of 34,000
pounds may be operated upon the public streets of the city, the owner thereof
shall file with the office of consumer affairs a surety bond in the sum of
$15,000. Such bond shall be conditioned that the owner of such vehicle will pay
to the city all damages done to the public streets and highways by reason of
the operation of such vehicle with a tandem axle load in excess of 34,000
pounds; and
      (5)   A limit is placed on the amount of load which may be carried by
vehicle tires, according to the width in inches of the tires, as follows:
         a.   Six hundred and fifty pounds per inch for low pressure tires; and
         b.   Six hundred pounds per inch for high pressure tires.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person operating or causing to be operated a motor vehicle
under a valid and subsisting permit for the operation of overweight or oversize
equipment for the transportation of such commodities as cannot be reasonably
dismantled issued by the state highway department under the provisions of Tex.
Revised Civil Statutes Article 6701a as such Article now exists or might from
time to time be amended;
      (2)   Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call;
      (3)   Vehicles operated for the purpose of constructing or maintaining
any public utility in the city.
      (4)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport solid wastes, as defined in
Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, may be operated in accordance with V.T.C.S.
Article 6701d-19a of that statute; and
      (5)   Vehicles used exclusively to transport milk may be operated in
accordance with V.T.C.S. Article 6701d-12a of Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes.
   (e)   The permits referred to in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be
subject to the following.
      (1)   Upon written application timely made by any person who desires to
operate or cause to be operated on the public streets within the city,
overweight or oversize equipment for the transportation of such commodities as
cannot be reasonably dismantled, where the total gross weight or size of the
vehicle and its load exceed the limits allowed by this section, the office of
consumer affairs, after consulting with the public works department, shall
issue a permit for the operation of such equipment or fleets of equipment for a
specified period of time, over a route or routes to be designated by the public
works department, if such routes can be determined at the time application for
the permit is made.
      (2)   The application for the permit provided for in this section shall
be in writing and contain the following:
         a.   The kind of equipment to be operated, with a complete description
of same and a statement as to its weight;
         b.   The kind of commodity to be transported and a certificate as to
its weight;
         c.   The street or streets over which the equipment is to be operated,
and the date or dates and the approximate time of the operation, and the number
of trips to be made, except when the nature, route, time or frequency of
operation cannot be determined at the time the permit is issued; and
         d.   The application shall be dated and signed by the applicant.
      (3)   Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant for the
same shall file with the office of consumer affairs a bond in an amount to be
set and approved by the public works department. The amount of such bond shall
not exceed the product of the number of vehicles for which a permit is sought
multiplied by $15,000, which bond shall be payable to the city and conditioned
that the applicant will pay to the city the sum of money necessary to repair
any damage which might be occasioned to any public street or publicly owned
fixture appurtenant to such street by virtue of operation of any commercial
vehicle under such permit. Venue of any suit for recovery upon the bond shall
be in the county and any bond issued hereunder shall contain an unambiguous
contractual provision to that effect.
      (4)   A fee shall be charged for each permit as follows:
 
Oversize load
   Single-trip                        $20
   Not to exceed 30 days              $45
   Not to exceed 60 days              $60
   Not to exceed 90 days              $75
Overweight load, single-trip permit only $20
 
      (5)   Any permit issued hereunder shall include at least the following:
         a.   The name of the applicant, the date, a description of the
equipment is to be operated and a description of the commodity to be
transported;
         b.   The signature of an authorized member of the police department
and the public works department;
         c.   The time for which the permit is issued; and
         d.   The specified street or streets over which the equipment is to be
operated, insofar as it can be determined at the time the permit is issued.
(1964 Code, § 26-80) (Ord. 7887, § 1, passed 2-27-1979; Ord. 9983, §§ 1—6,
passed 10-13-1987; Ord. 10012, § 1, passed 11-24-1987)
§ 22-118 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated or aid in the operation of a vehicle on the public streets of the city
in violation of this article. The appropriate officials of the office of
consumer affairs of the city are empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to load, or cause to be loaded, a
vehicle for operation on the public streets of the city with the intent to
violate the weight limitations established in this article. Intent to violate
such limitations is presumed if the loaded vehicle exceeds the applicable gross
vehicular weight limit by 15% or more.
(Ord. 9983, § 7, passed 10-13-1987)
Editor’s note:
   Section 22-118 previously contained provisions now codified as §
22-120.
§ 22-119 ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS BY CITY; FINE.
   Any official of the office of consumer affairs having reason to believe that
the gross weight, vehicle tire load limit or axle load of a loaded motor
vehicle is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the same by means of a portable or
stationary scales, and to require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest
available scales for the purpose of weighing. If a vehicle is found to be in
violation of the weight limits set out in this article, the driver of the
vehicle shall be issued a citation.
(Ord. 9983, § 8, passed 10-13-1987)
§ 22-120 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed § 22-120.
Formerly, said section pertained to spilling loads and derived from § 9 of Ord.
9983, adopted October 13, 1987.
§§ 22-121—22-135 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: ACCIDENTS
§ 22-136 LEAVING THE SCENE OF COLLISION.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or any passenger of any vehicle involved
in a collision of any kind resulting in damage to person or property on the
public streets or public places of the city to leave the scene of such
collision until after the arrival there of police officers of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Driver to stop after accident, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 38 to 49
§ 22-137 MOVING VEHICLE AFTER COLLISION.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with or obstruction of other
traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, it shall be
unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved a vehicle involved in a
collision of any kind resulting in damage to person or property on the public
streets and public places of the city after such collision and before police
officers have arrived at the scene and made investigation thereof.
(1964 Code, § 26-84) (Ord. 7508, § 1, passed 2-28-1977)
§ 22-138 REPORT TO BE MADE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle involved in a
collision of any kind resulting in damage to person or property on the public
streets to fail to report such collision to the police department within 24
hours after the occurrence of such collision.
   (b)   Where the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required collision report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the
time of the collision capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or
cause to be made such report.
(1964 Code, § 26-85)
Statutory reference:
   Accident reports generally, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 43 to 49
   Authority of city to require accident reports, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 49
§§ 22-139—22-154 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Cross-reference:
   Parking of vehicles at city-owned landing fields, see §
3-98
   Parking violations bureau, see §§
10-16 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate standing and parking, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch.
544
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 95, 96
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 22-155 SOME PARKING VIOLATIONS AS CIVIL OFFENSES.
   With the exception of violations of §§
22-162.1,
22-162.3 and
22-162.4 which are criminal offenses, the violation of the provisions of this
article related to the parking and stopping of vehicles shall be civil offenses
subject to civil penalties and fines pursuant to the procedures for
administrative adjudication as set forth in
Chapter 10 of this code.
(Ord. 10107, § 1, passed 5-3-1988; Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 2, passed 7-8-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Parking violation bureau, see §§
10-16 et seq.
§ 22-156 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN BUS LANES.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park or cause to be stopped, stood or
parked any vehicle in any bus lane, except to render by bus the service of the
public bus transportation system or except in those portions of that bus lane,
being described as the easternmost lane of Throckmorton Street and the
westernmost lane of Houston Street between the north curb line of West
Lancaster Street and the south curb line of West Belknap Street, adjoining the
following described loading zones:
      (1)   Throckmorton Street.
         a.   That loading zone which may be employed as such zone at any time
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., such zone being more
particularly described as that space or section of the curb adjoining such lane
between a point of beginning being 28 feet north from the north curb line of
West Fourth Street and a point of termination being 80 feet north from such
point of beginning; and
         b.   Those loading zones which may be employed as such zones at any
time except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours
of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., such zones being more particularly described as
follows: that space or section of the curb adjoining such lane between a point
of beginning being 24 feet north of the north curb line of West Sixth Street
and a point of termination being 60 feet north from such point of beginning.
      (2)   Houston Street. That space or section of the curb adjoining such
lane between a point of beginning being 125 feet north from the north curb line
of West Second Street and a point of termination being 40 feet north from such
point of beginning.
   (b)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
      (1)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are
adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb.
      (2)   Parking of vehicles with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and
within 18 inches of the left-hand curb of a one-way roadway shall be permitted.
(1964 Code, § 26-86) (Ord. 7015, § 5, passed 6-3-1974)
§ 22-157 RESTRICTED WHERE LESS THAN TEN FEET OF ROADWAY LEFT AVAILABLE FOR
TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon
a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less
than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
(1964 Code, § 26-87)
Statutory reference:
   State law requiring an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle to be left for free passage of other vehicles, see Tex. Transportation
Code Ch. 545
§ 22-158 PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park longer than five minutes in any place marked as a passenger loading zone,
and then only for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful at any time to leave an unattended vehicle in any
place marked as a passenger loading zone.
(1964 Code, § 26-88) (Ord. 15712, § 2, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-158.1 COMMERCIAL LOADING ZONE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a noncommercial motor vehicle
to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time in a location
specifically designated for use by commercial motor vehicles unless such
vehicle has a loading permit for that time and place.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a commercial motor vehicle to
stop or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than that specified for
that commercial loading zone or as detailed in a loading permit.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a commercial motor vehicle or
the holder of a loading permit who parks a vehicle in a commercial loading zone
to use such zone for any use besides the expeditious loading, unloading,
delivery or pick up of supplies or merchandise.
(Ord. 15712, § 3, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. 19947-10-2011, § 2C, passed 10-25-
2011)
§ 22-158.2 WHEN PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of §§
22-158 and
22-158.1 shall apply daily between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except
as otherwise posted, Sundays, and such other days as shall be specifically
designated by the city council.
(Ord. 15712, § 4, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. 20315-08-2012, § 2, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 22-158.3 VALET PARKING ZONES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle, other than a licensee
operating under a valet parking license issued under
Chapter 30, Article VI of the city code, as amended, to park in any place
marked as a valet parking zone.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a valet parking operator to violate Chapter
30, Article VI, §
30-96(a)(5) of the city code, as amended. For purposes of this subsection, a
valet parking operator is defined as a person or entity, including any
employees or subcontractors, that operates under a valet parking license issued
pursuant to
Chapter 30, Article VI of the city code, as amended.
(Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 2, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 22-158.4 PRE-ARRANGED MOTORBUS ZONE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle or a commercial motor vehicle that is not a
pre-arranged motorbus shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle for any period
of time in a location specifically designated for use by pre-arranged
motorbuses.
   (b)   The driver or operator of a pre-arranged motorbus shall not load or
discharge passengers outside of a pre-arranged motorbus zone when in downtown,
or within the pre-arranged motorbus zone in an unsafe manner.
   (c)   A pre-arranged motorbus parked in a pre-arranged motorbus zone shall
not idle its engines nor remain parked for more than the posted time limit for
that pre-arranged motorbus zone, unless extenuating weather conditions require
a longer period.
   (d)   The pre-arranged motorbus driver or operator shall enter a pre-
arranged motorbus zone in such a manner that the pre-arranged motorbus shall be
in a position with the right front wheel no further than 18 inches from the
curb and with the pre-arranged motorbus parked parallel to the curb so as not
to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 23478-12-2018, § 2, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 22-159 STORING OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREET PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or allow the storage of a
vehicle upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or parkways of the city.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered stored if
it is parked at the same location for a continuous period of time in excess of
five days. Relocating the vehicle by less than one-tenth of a mile to another
location on a public street, alley, sidewalk, or parkway of the city will not
stop the running of the five day period. A stored vehicle is deemed to be a
vehicle which is illegally parked on public property, and such vehicle shall be
subject to removal and disposal as an abandoned vehicle, according to the terms
of
Article IX, Division 1, of this chapter.
(1964 Code, § 26-89) (Ord. 7190, § 1, passed 7-11-1975; Ord. 9852, § 2, passed
3-31-1987; Ord. 23193-04-2018, § 2, passed 4-17-2018; Ord. 24825-04-2021, § 1,
passed 4-20-2021, eff. 4-25-2021)
§ 22-160 PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS, BOATS AND OTHER VEHICLES IN FRONT
YARDS AND SIDE YARDS OF AREAS ZONED ONE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY.
   (a)   It shall be illegal for any person to park or to allow to be parked on
any property under his or her control any automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle,
motorhome, camper, trailer, boat or any vehicle on any portion of a front yard
or side yard of any area which is zoned “A” One-Family, “A-R” Residential, “B”
Two-Family, “R-1" Residential or “R-2" Residential under the comprehensive
zoning ordinance or on any premises which is used for one-family, two-family or
multifamily dwelling purposes unless:
      (1)   Such area is a part of a hard-surfaced driveway or parking area;
      (2)   Such area is a part of a gravel driveway bordered by cement curbing
or similar permanent border;
      (3)   Such area is a part of a required driveway that provides access to
a garage, carport or off-street parking area required by the zoning ordinance;
or
      (4)   Such area is part of a side yard which is enclosed by a screening
fence at least six feet in height and so constructed that no person can see
through into the area surrounded by the fence.
   (b)   The term VEHICLE as used herein shall mean every device in, upon or by
which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or
highway, except devices moved exclusively by human power.
   (c)   The term HARD-SURFACED as used herein shall include cement, asphalt,
brick and other commonly accepted pavement which may be approved by the
building official.
   (d)   The terms of this section shall not be construed to apply to the
parking of vehicles in a front yard or side yard where such parking is
permitted in conjunction with temporary special events open to the public which
may be designated from time to time by the city council.
   (e)   This section shall be cumulative of all ordinances of the city except
where the provisions of this section are in direct conflict with the provisions
of such ordinances, in which event conflicting provisions of such ordinances
are hereby repealed.
(1964 Code, § 27-54) (Ord. 9863, § 1, passed 4-21-1987; Ord. 9916, § 1, passed
7-28-1987)
§ 22-161 PARKING IN ALLEY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to park a vehicle within an alley.
(1964 Code, § 26-90)
§ 22-162.1 PARKING OF OVERSIZE COMMERCIAL VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to be parked any
oversize commercial vehicle or any tow trucks, dump trucks, truck-tractors,
concrete mixing trucks, stake-bed trucks, buses, or similar vehicles,
regardless of weight, on any property under his or her control or any portion
of a front yard including the driveway, side yard or rear yard of any area of
district which is residentially zoned under the comprehensive zoning ordinance
or used for residential purposes.
   (b)   This section does not apply to a recreational vehicle as defined in §
22-1 that is less than 26 feet in length.
(1964 Code, § 26-91) (Ord. 12436, § 1, passed 3-14-1996; Ord. 17867, § 2,
passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 19947-10-2011, § 2D, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 23193-04-
2018, § 2, passed 4-17-2018)
Editor’s note:
   Section 22-162.1 was formerly § 22-162.
§ 22-162.2 PARKING OF LARGE AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner or operator of an oversized
commercial vehicle to park or permit to be parked, stand or remain motionless:
      (1)   On a public street in any area zoned residential under the
comprehensive zoning ordinance or used for residential purposes unless the
vehicle is being actively loaded or unloaded; or
      (2)   For more than two hours on a public street in any area not zoned
residential under the comprehensive zoning ordinance or not used for
residential purposes.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner or operator of a large
recreational vehicle and an oversized recreational vehicle to park or permit to
be parked, stand or remain motionless:
      (1)   On a public street in any area zoned residential under the
comprehensive zoning ordinance or used for residential purposes; or
      (2)   On a public street in any area not zoned residential under the
comprehensive zoning ordinance or not used for residential purposes.
   (c)   It is an exception to subsection (b)(1) above that the large
recreational vehicle or oversize recreational vehicle is being parked or
allowed to be parked, stand or remain motionless for loading, unloading,
maintenance, or any combination thereof, for no more than 72 hours in any
seven-day period. Relocation of the large recreational vehicle or oversize
recreational vehicle to another location on private property or the adjoining
public street does not stop the running of the 72-hour period.
(Ord. 17867, § 3, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 3, passed 7-8-2008;
Ord. 23193-04-2018, § 2, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 22-162.3 PARKING OF LARGE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Except as specifically set forth below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or allow to be parked any large recreational vehicle on any
property under his or her control on any portion of a front yard, side yard or
rear yard of any area or district which is residentially zoned under the
comprehensive zoning ordinance or used for residential purposes.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, a large
recreational vehicle may be parked on a side yard or rear yard provided that it
is parked behind a screening fence at least six feet in height which fence
shall be sufficient to obscure the view of such large recreational vehicle by
persons on adjacent property.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, a large
recreational vehicle may be parked on a driveway or other lawful parking area
for up to 72 hours during any seven-day period for loading, unloading or
maintenance so long as such vehicle is parked in compliance with all relevant
parking regulations.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, a person who
owns a large recreational vehicle on the date of the passage of this ordinance
may, within 90 days of the passage of this ordinance obtain, without charge,
from the development department of the City of Fort Worth a continuance permit.
Such continuance permit shall allow the large recreational vehicle to be parked
on a driveway in the front yard of the owner of the large recreational vehicle
so long as such large recreational vehicle is not parked within ten feet of the
curb or edge of an improved street, does not interfere with the use of a
sidewalk and does not create a visual obstruction to drivers or pedestrians
using the street or sidewalk. The continuance permit shall be issued for a
specific large recreational vehicle owned by the owner on the date of the
passage of this ordinance and cannot be transferred to another vehicle or
owner.
(Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 4, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 23193-04-2018, § 3, passed 4-
17-2018)
§ 22-162.4 PARKING OF OVERSIZE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Except as specifically set forth below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or allow to be parked any oversize recreational vehicle on any
property under his or her control on any portion of a front yard, side yard or
rear yard of any area or district which is residentially zoned under the
comprehensive zoning ordinance or used for residential purposes.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, an oversize
recreational vehicle may be parked on a side yard or rear yard provided that it
is parked behind a screening fence at least six feet in height which fence
shall be sufficient to obscure the view of such oversize recreational vehicle
by persons on adjacent property.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, an oversize
recreational vehicle may be parked on a driveway or other lawful parking area
for up to 72 hours during any seven-day period for loading, unloading or
maintenance so long as such vehicle is parked in compliance with all relevant
parking regulations.
(Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 5, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 23193-04-2018, § 2, passed 4-
17-2018)
§ 22-162.5 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   Any violation of the provisions of §§
22-162.1,
22-162.3 or §
22-162.4 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 plus
court costs for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 6, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 22-163 MANNER OF PARKING IN DESIGNATED ZONE FOR CERTAIN HOURS; EXCEPTIONS.
   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., it shall be unlawful for the
owner or driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle or permit the same to be
parked on any roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway or curb
of such roadway in a zone bounded by the north curb line of Belknap Street on
the north, the south curb line of Lancaster Avenue on the south, the west curb
line of Taylor Street on the west, and the east curb line of Calhoun Street on
the east. This section shall not prevent the parking of any vehicle at any
loading platform situated on or alongside any roadway in such zone in a manner
making for the expeditious unloading and delivery or picking up and loading of
materials and merchandise at such platform, and while such vehicle is actually
being used for such purposes, except that on Lancaster Avenue in such zone, it
shall be unlawful to park other than parallel with the edge of the roadway at
any time.
(1964 Code, § 26-92)
§ 22-164 MANNER OF PARKING OF VEHICLES WITH SIX OR MORE WHEELS IN CERTAIN
ZONES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle with six
wheels or more (including articulated vehicles), or with more than two axles,
to park such vehicle or permit the same to be parked, on any metered parking or
times restricted parking space or any roadway in a zone bounded by the north
curb line of Belknap Street on the north, the south curb line of Lancaster
Avenue on the south, the west curb line of Henderson Street on the west, and
the east curb line of Jones Street on the east, unless such vehicle fits
properly within the individual space marked for metered or time restricted
parking.
   (b)   If the area designated for metered or time restricted parking is not
marked or delineated for individual parking, such vehicles are restricted to no
more than eight feet from the curb and a maximum length of 24 feet. Such
vehicles should be parked parallel with the curbs along the streets within the
above-mentioned zone and headed in the direction of traffic.
(1964 Code, § 26-93) (Ord. 20315-08-2012, § 2, passed 8-7-2012)
§ 22-165 PARKING PASSENGER CARS IN CERTAIN ZONE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any passenger car to
park such car or permit the same to be parked in a roadway in front of or
alongside any loading platform.
   (b)   The words PASSENGER CAR, as used in this section, shall mean any motor
vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used primarily for the
transportation of persons.
(1964 Code, § 26-94)
§ 22-166 PARKING OR STANDING CLOSE TO CURB.
   Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs
or signals, the driver of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the
direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the edge of the roadway, except where streets have been marked for
angle or head-in parking.
(1964 Code, § 26-95)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 96
§ 22-167 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key from the ignition and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when
standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
highway. Use of a remote starting device does not create an exemption to this
section.
(1964 Code, § 26-96) (Ord. 19947-10-2011, § 2E, passed 10-25-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 97
§ 22-168 IGNITION KEY TO BE REMOVED FROM UNATTENDED PARKED CARS.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle within the city, shall
allow or suffer such motor vehicle to be left unattended unless and until the
ignition key to such motor vehicle shall be first removed therefrom and the
ignition thereof shall be fixed in a locked position; provided, however, that
this section shall not be applicable to trucks, buses or commercial motor
vehicles.
(1964 Code, § 26-97)
§ 22-169 OWNER PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBLE FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.
   If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this code or of
state statute regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, the
owner, or person in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima
facie responsible for such violation.
(1964 Code, § 26-98) (Ord. 7935, § 1, passed 7-17-1979; Ord. 19947-10-2011, §
2F, passed 10-25-2011)
§ 22-170 MOTORBUS STOPS AND MANNER OF STOPPING.
   All stops by motorbuses within the city for the purpose of taking on or
discharging passengers shall be made at street intersections on the right side
of the street along which the bus is traveling and on the near side of the
intersecting street, except at such other locations as may be designated by the
city traffic engineer. Such stops not located at the near side of street
intersections as may be designated by the city traffic engineer shall be marked
as bus stops by the individual or organization in charge of operation of such
motorbuses. Before making any stop for the purpose of taking on or discharging
passengers, motorbuses shall pull in as near the street curb upon the right-
hand side of the motorbus making such stop as possible, and shall stop as near
such right-hand curb as possible; and, when a motorbus is making such a stop,
such motorbus shall stop in such a place as to interfere with the vehicular
traffic on the street on which such motorbus is traveling as little as
possible, but no part of any motorbus shall be stopped so as to obstruct
traffic on any intersecting street except when such stops shall be necessary
for the purpose of protecting life or property.
(1964 Code, § 26-99)
§ 22-171 PARKING RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Parking restricted on private property of public service, etc.,
corporations. In any areaway, parkway, trafficway or parking space owned or
controlled by any public service concern, public service utility company,
terminal company, railroad or other quasi-public corporation or public concern,
designed for the temporary parking of patrons of such public concern, utility
or corporation, it shall be unlawful for any person or any person having
control of any motor vehicle, or vehicle of any kind, to park upon or in any
such space owned or controlled by a public service corporation or public
service concern mentioned herein for a longer period than two hours, which time
is fixed as a reasonable length of time in which any person may so occupy any
private property owned or controlled by such public service corporation or
public concern set aside and designed for use of the public having business to
transact with such public service corporation or public service concern;
provided, however, that no vehicle shall be parked longer than 30 minutes on
the west side of the private street on the Texas and Pacific Railway Company
property’s west curb line of the street, which opens onto West Lancaster Street
which is at a point 431 feet from the centerline of Jennings Avenue, and the
east curb line of such street is 260 feet from the centerline of the
intersection of Throckmorton Street and West Lancaster Street, such street
being 42 feet wide.
   (b)   Unauthorized parking on private property prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle,
whether occupied or unoccupied, except temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually loading or unloading such vehicle, in any private driveway or on any
private parking lot or other private property without the express or implied
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof.
      (2)   In the event the identity of the driver of such vehicle is unknown,
the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima
facie deemed to be in violation hereof.
   (c)   Exception to subsection (b). No citation issued under the provisions
of subsection (b) above shall be valid unless such citation includes a
statement to the effect that at the time same was issued, a clearly visible
sign was located on the private property involved, informing the public that
such private driveway, parking lot or other private property is reserved for
the use of authorized persons or vehicles only, and further that such sign
states the persons or vehicles authorized.
(1964 Code, §§ 26-129, 26-130) (Ord. 6651, §§ 5, 6, passed 3-20-1972; Ord.
9852, §§ 3, 4, passed 3-31-1987)
§ 22-171.5 PARKING RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   Unauthorized parking on public property prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle, whether occupied or
unoccupied, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually loading or
unloading such vehicle, in a public driveway or on any public parking lot or
other public property without the express or implied consent of the
representative of the public property or person in lawful control thereof. In
the event the identity of the driver of such vehicle is unknown, the owner or
person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie deemed to
be in violation hereof.
   (b)   Exception to subsection (a). No citation issued under the provisions
of subsection (a) above shall be valid unless such citation includes a
statement to the effect that at the time same was issued, a clearly visible
sign was located on the public property involved, informing the public that
such public driveway, parking lot or other public property is reserved for the
use of authorized persons or vehicles only, and further that such sign states
the persons or vehicles authorized.
(Ord. 10248, § 1, passed 1-31-1989)
§ 22-172 TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO SPECIFY CERTAIN PARKING SPACES.
   The traffic engineer, in order to expedite and regulate the flow of
vehicular traffic upon public streets, is directed:
   (a)   To determine and designate spaces for exclusive uses as bus stops,
taxicab stands, and passenger and commercial loading zones, and such other
zones as may be determined at his or her sole discretion to mark the same with
appropriate signs and markings; and
   (b)   To determine and designate no parking zones and to mark such spaces
with appropriate signs or markings.
(Ord. 2789, § 2; Ord. 15712, § 5, passed 10-7-2003)
Editor’s note:
   A reference to §
22-171 in the above section has been changed to §
22-171(a), at the editor’s discretion, in order to conform same to the
amendment to §
22-171 by Ord. 9852, § 3, adopted March 31, 1987.
§ 22-173 MAP TO BE FILED WITH CITY SECRETARY; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF
REGULATION.
   Every regulation, designation, delineation or determination promulgated by
the traffic engineer pursuant to the authority granted by §
22-172 shall be described in writing or by a map of the area and filed with the
city secretary. Such writing or map shall constitute a public record, and all
persons shall be charged with notice of the contents of same. Each and every
failure of any person to observe or comply with any such regulation promulgated
by the traffic engineer of the city shall be deemed a violation of this
article.
(1964 Code, § 26-102)
§ 22-174 PRIVATE OFF-STREET DISABILITY PARKING.
   (a)   Private off-street disability parking spaces exclusively for vehicles
which display the distinguishing license plates, specially designated symbols,
tags or other devices issued to disabled veterans and other persons with
disabilities pursuant to state or federal law, shall have the dimensions and
markings required by prevailing state and federal standards. Such stalls or
spaces shall be designated by posting appropriate signage at the owner’s
expense. Appropriate signage shall be any sign in or immediately adjacent to
and visible from each stall or space, consisting of wording, symbol(s) or a
combination thereof, which conveys to a person of ordinary intelligence that
the stalls or spaces indicated are reserved for persons with disabilities.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, not displaying a
distinguishing license plate, symbol, tag or device issued to persons with
disabilities pursuant to state or federal law to stop, stand, park or leave
standing such vehicle in any parking space designated for the exclusive use of
persons with disabilities pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Such
unlawful action shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for other
parking violations.
   (c)   Any vehicles not displaying the proper license plates, tags or devices
may be towed from a disability parking space designated by subsection (a) of
this section at the expense of the owner of such vehicle, and may be impounded
until all towing and storage charges are paid.
(1964 Code, § 26-102.1) (Ord. 8133, § 1, passed 7-8-1980; Ord. 13164, § 1,
passed 9-23-1997)
§ 22-175 HEAD-IN PARKING.
   (a)   Except as provided for in subsection (d) below, all head-in parking
which requires a parked vehicle to use the public right-of-way for maneuvering
in and out of a parking space is prohibited.
   (b)   Existing head-in parking may remain on a minor street, which is
defined as one that is not more 3,000 feet long, has a speed not exceeding 30
mph, carries no more than 1,200 vehicles per day, and its traffic load is not
expected to increase, if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The city traffic engineer determines that such parking will not
create a traffic or pedestrian hazard;
      (2)   A recessed parking area is constructed in such a manner that no
part of a vehicle (approximately 18 feet long) parked perpendicular to the
street extends into the street as defined by a curb line;
      (3)   A paved pedestrian walkway not less than six feet wide shall be
constructed parallel to the curb line across the front of the parking area. The
six-foot walkway shall be connected on both ends, to the normal walk line with
a paved walk not less than four feet wide constructed perpendicular to the curb
line. If the parking area and six-foot walkway extend beyond the normal
property line, the adjacent property owner requesting the parking shall provide
a dedicated easement for public use. In the event that the existing head-in
parking is located in such a manner that a parked vehicle clears the normal
property line (approximately ten feet behind the curb), the requirement of the
walkway in front of the parking area will be eliminated; and
      (4)   The construction of laid-down curb, pedestrian walks and paved
head-in parking area shall be in accordance with standard City of Fort Worth
specifications for driveways and sidewalks.
   (c)   Existing head-in parking shall be removed except as permitted by
subsection (b) above and stand-up curb shall be constructed at such time that
the property adjacent to the laid-down curb changes usage, the building on the
adjacent property is substantially remodeled or when the street is
reconstructed.
   (d)   New angle/head-in parking may be constructed if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The new parking directly supports a redevelopment project. A
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT shall be defined as any project that includes a change in
use of an existing structure, or the reuse of an existing parcel where prior
use can be demonstrated to the city;
      (2)   The parking space is a minimum of 20 feet in depth measured from
the face of the curb. In constrained areas, an 18-foot minimum may be
considered and approved, when deemed appropriate by the city traffic engineer;
      (3)   The parking spaces are at an angle of 45 degrees or greater to the
face of the curb;
      (4)   The travel lane adjacent to the new parking will be a minimum of 15
feet wide. In constrained areas, a minimum 12-foot wide travel lane may be
considered and approved, when deemed appropriate by the city traffic engineer;
      (5)   A minimum six-foot wide paved sidewalk is required adjacent to the
new parking;
      (6)   The city traffic engineer determines that the new parking does not
create a hazard to pedestrians or traffic; and
      (7)   The construction of curb and gutter, sidewalks and the paved angle/
head-in parking area meet all city specifications.
   (e)   The decision of the city traffic engineer may be appealed to the city
council.
(1964 Code, § 26-102.2) (Ord. 8288, § 1, passed 3-10-1981; Ord. 15946, § 1,
passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 17517, § 1, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 22-176 CURB CUTS AND LAID-DOWN CURB PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   The location of ingress and egress driveways shall be subject to approval of
the city traffic engineer under curb cut or laid-down curb permit procedures.
Driveways shall not exceed 65% of the property frontage. There shall be a
minimum of 20 feet of curb along the street between driveways where there is
more than one driveway on property under unified ownership or control and used
as one premises. The decision of the city traffic engineer may be appealed to
the city council.
(1964 Code, § 26-102.3) (Ord. 8288, § 1, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 22-177 LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES.
   When off-street loading dock facilities are required, the minimum width of
the dock shall be ten feet and the minimum depth shall be 60 feet. The loading
dock facilities shall be constructed in such a manner that any vehicle
anticipated to use the dock will clear the public right-of-way when properly
parked at the dock. Under unusual circumstances, the 60-foot minimum distance
may be reduced by the approval of the city traffic engineer. The decision of
the city traffic engineer may be appealed to the city council.
(1964 Code, § 26-102.4) (Ord. 8288, § 1, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 22-178 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (a)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         b.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         c.   On a sidewalk;
         d.   Within an intersection;
         e.   On a crosswalk;
         f.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         g.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         h.   Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or
         i.   On any railroad track.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         a.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing;
         b.   In front of a public or private driveway;
         c.   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         d.   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         e.   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; or
         f.   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance (when properly sign-posted).
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
         a.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
         b.   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   (b)   Except where official signs or markings indicate otherwise, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked
with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand
curb or edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Except where official signs or markings indicate otherwise, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked
parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized
traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 18 inches of the right-hand
curb or edge of roadway, or its left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the left-
hand curb or edge of roadway.
   (d)   All words and phrases used in this section shall have the same meaning
as they are defined in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Tex.
Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 6701d.
(Ord. 10267, § 1, passed 3-7-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Distance from curb, see §
22-166
   Head-in parking prohibited, see §
22-175
   Parking in disability parking spaces, see §
22-174(b)
   Prohibited in alleys, see §
22-161
   Prohibited in certain residentially zoned yard areas, see §
22-160
   Restricted on certain private property, see §
22-171
   Restricted on certain public property, see §
22-171.5
   Restricted when less than ten feet of roadway left available for traffic,
see §
22-157
   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain bus lanes, see §
22-156
§ 22-179 SOLICITATION BETWEEN AN OCCUPANT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE A PEDESTRIAN.
   (a)   This section applies:
      (1)   In the area defined by a boundary beginning at the intersection of
Pine and Vickery, proceeding north on Pine to Lancaster, then proceeding west
on Lancaster to Commerce, then proceeding north on Commerce to 5th Street, then
proceeding west on 5th Street to Throckmorton, then proceeding south on
Throckmorton to Lancaster, then proceeding west on Lancaster to the east bank
of the Trinity River, then proceeding south along the east bank of the Trinity
River to Vickery, then proceeding east on Vickery to the point of beginning;
and
      (2)   On the streets and pedestrian rights-of-way that bound the areas
described in this subsection (a).
   (b)   In this section PRIVATE PARKING AREA means privately owned property
for vehicle parking, and adjacent driveways, walkways, setbacks and landscaped
areas.
   (c)   A person who is in or next to a street, on a sidewalk, or in a private
parking area commits an offense if the person solicits, attempts to solicit
employment or business from an occupant of a motor vehicle.
   (d)   A person in a motor vehicle commits an offense if the person hires, or
attempts to hire a person who is in or next to a street, on a sidewalk or in a
private parking area.
   (e)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   At a facility operated by or for the city, and designated by the
city manager as a place where the solicitation of employment is permitted;
      (2)   At a facility primarily operated as a employment agency and where
the solicitation of employment is permitted; or
      (3)   A private parking area unless the owner of the parking area has
permanently posted a conspicuous sign at each entrance of the parking area, in
both English and Spanish, stating that it is a misdemeanor to engage in
solicitation for employment.
   (f)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.
(Ord. 14896, § 1, passed 12-18-2001)
§ 22-180 RESIDENTIAL PERMITTED PARKING PROGRAM; DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions under this section are applicable to §§
22-180 through
22-186 only.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the city's transportation and public works
department or the director's authorized representative.
   PERMIT. A resident-parking-only permit issued by the director under §§
22-182 or
22-183.
   RESIDENCE. Each dwelling unit of a single-family, duplex, or multifamily
use.
   RESIDENT-PARKING-ONLY ZONE. One or more blocks of a residential street as
determined by the director in the areas designated under §
22-181, upon which on-street parking is limited to residents' or residents'
visitors' or vendors' vehicles properly displaying a valid permit.
   VEHICLE. Shall have the same meaning as included in
Chapter 22 of the Code of the City of Fort Worth.
   VENDOR. People or businesses providing a service to a residence such as
child care providers, lawn services, repair companies, etc.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-181 AREAS DESIGNATED.
   (a)   The director may designate resident-parking-only zones in eligible
neighborhoods surrounding the following nonresidential parking generators as
determined by traffic studies:
      (1)   Will Rogers Memorial Center/ Dickies Arena;
      (2)   Texas Christian University;
      (3)   University of North Texas Health Science Center;
      (4)   Stockyards; and
      (5)   Magnolia Historic Area.
   (b)   The director shall maintain a map depicting all resident-parking-only
zones.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-182 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND VENDOR PERMITS.
   (a)   The director shall, upon application, issue resident-parking-only
permits, up to a maximum of three permits and two vendor permits per residence,
to any person who is eligible for a permit. An applicant is eligible for a
resident-parking-only permit if:
      (1)   The applicant owns or occupies a residence located within a
resident-parking-only zone; and
      (2)   The applicant and every other person owning or occupying the same
residence as the applicant complies with all other requirements of §§
22-180 through
22-186.
   (b)   The annual application for a permit must contain:
      (1)   The applicant's name and driver's license number;
      (2)   The name of every other licensed driver who owns or occupies the
same residence as the applicant and each such person's driver's license number;
      (3)   The address of the applicant's residence located within a resident-
parking-only zone;
      (4)   The make, model, and license plate numbers of each vehicle to be
parked in a resident-parking-only zone; and
      (5)   Any other information the director determines necessary to prove
that an applicant owns or occupies a residence located within a resident-
parking-only zone, including, but not limited to, examination of a valid
driver's license showing the applicant's current home address, a utility bill
at the same address, and proof of automobile liability insurance for each
vehicle to be parked in a resident-parking-only zone.
   (c)   Up to two vendor permits may be issued with the first permit.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-183 VISITOR PERMITS.
   (a)   Upon application, a resident of a resident-parking-only zone may be
issued temporary parking permits for the use of visitors of the residence or
for when the owner or occupant is temporarily using a vehicle. A temporary
parking permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 24 hours. Long-term
visitors staying longer than 24 hours may receive a temporary parking permit
valid for up to 30 days.
   (b)   An application for one or more temporary parking permits may be made
through an online system or in person at a location designated by the director
not less than 24 hours before the permit is scheduled to be used.
   (c)   There shall be no fee for temporary parking permits issued under this
section.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-184 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle on any street of a resident-parking-
only zone designated under §
22-181 without displaying on such vehicle a valid permit. Provided, however,
that it shall be an exception to this section that any person has parked a
vehicle in compliance with the directions of a police officer or due to a
mechanical or other emergency and was unable to move the vehicle to a lawful
parking space.
   (b)   When a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this
section, such fact shall be prima facie evidence that the person in whose name
said vehicle is registered is liable for a violation of the parking prohibition
contained herein.
   (c)   The director is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate
signs and markings within a resident-parking-only zone to give notice of the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-185 EFFECT OF PERMIT; DISPLAY; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; REPLACEMENT.
   (a)   A permit authorizes the holder to park a vehicle at any time in a
resident-parking-only zone unless such parking is prohibited or restricted by
regulations other than those established under §§
22-180 through
22-186. A permit does not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space
within the resident-parking-only zone and does not exempt the holder from other
applicable parking and traffic regulations.
   (b)   When a vehicle is parked in a resident-parking-only zone, the permit
is only valid if it is conspicuously displayed on the vehicle in accordance
with the policy set by the director.
   (c)   Except for visitor permits, all permits shall expire at 11:59:59 p.m.
on December 31 of each year. Visitor permits shall expire in accordance with §
22-183.
   (d)   A permit holder may submit an application to renew existing permit(s)
by completing an application with the same information outlined under §
22-182(b).
   (e)   A lost, destroyed, or stolen permit may be replaced. The owner or
occupant of a residence located in a resident-parking-only zone must sign an
affidavit stating that the permit was lost, destroyed, or stolen.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§ 22-186 OFFENSES; DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he parks a vehicle in a resident-
parking-only zone without displaying a valid permit on the vehicle.
   (b)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the
person was expeditiously loading or unloading passengers or property, was in
the performance of official duties as a law enforcement officer, government
employee or contractor or utility company employee or contractor, or was
operating an authorized emergency vehicle in the performance of official
duties.
   (c)   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the
registered owner of the vehicle was a vendor providing services to the
residence. The registered owner must submit to the hearing officer an affidavit
from the owner or occupant of the residence describing the services being
provided and the date and time the services were provided.
   (d)   The director may deny a permit if an applicant is not eligible to
receive a permit, fails to submit all information required on an application,
falsely represents himself as being eligible for a permit, submits false
documents, or otherwise makes a false statement of a material fact on an
application for a permit.
   (e)   The director may revoke the permit of any person who violates any
provision of this subchapter.
(Ord. 23048-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017, eff. 12-23-2017)
§§ 22-187—22-190 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: PARKING METERS
§ 22-191 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES AND MAXIMUM PARKING TIME THEREIN; ESTABLISHMENT
OF FEES.
   (a)   The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate parking meter
zones upon any street or portion of street where it is determined, upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the installation of
parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control or
inspection of vehicles which are parked or operated on public streets. The
parking of vehicles in such parking meter zones shall be controlled and
regulated by parking meters installed and maintained by the designee of the
director of the transportation and public works department and located upon the
curb either adjacent to the parking space or at one or more locations within
the block face.
   (b)   A designee of the director of the transportation and public works
department may designate the maximum parking time for each parking meter,
basing the decision upon the investigation set forth above. The designee is
hereby authorized to establish parking meter fees for any parking meter that
has been placed upon any street or other property owned or controlled by the
city.
   (c)   The fees for parking shall be paid in the currency of the United
States of America. The following fees are hereby established for public parking
at any parking meter that is governed by this section:
      (1)   Except for in the West 7th Urban Village Core, short-term parking
fees (less than four hours) will be a rate between $0.20 and $0.25 for each ten
minutes. These rates include any applicable sales tax. Short-term parking fees
shall apply to a meter during time periods for which the meter has been
designated for short-term parking use only. The designee of the director of
transportation and public works makes this designation and establishes the rate
based upon the public's need for parking availability. Short-term parking helps
ensure that a space is not used for lengthy periods of time by one vehicle.
      (2)   In the West 7th Urban Village Core, the parking fees shall be as
follows: (i) from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm, two hours of free parking and a $3.00
rate for the third hour after the allotted two hours of free parking; and (ii)
from 5:00 pm to 10:00 pm, a rate of $3.00 per hour with no free parking. These
rates include any applicable sales tax. Parking fees shall apply to a meter
during time periods for which the meter has been designated for parking use
only. The designee of the director of transportation and public works makes
this designation and establishes the rate in the West 7th Urban Village Core
based upon the public's need for parking availability.
      (3)   Long-term parking fees (four hours or more): A parking rate between
$0.05 and $0.125 for each ten minutes. These rates include any applicable sales
tax. Long-term parking fees shall apply at meters during those periods in which
they have not been designated for short-term parking use.
      (4)   Parking rate for assigned permit spaces for mobility impaired
employees: $100 per month.
   (d)   Without limiting the options available to the designee of the director
of transportation and public works, the times and days designated for short-
term or long-term parking may vary.
(1964 Code, § 26-103) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 7145, § 1, passed
3-10-1975; Ord. 7788, § 1, passed 8-15-1978; Ord. 8629, § 1, passed 8-31-1982;
Ord. 14003, § 1, passed 11-16-1999; Ord. 15712, § 6, passed 10-7-2003; Ord.
16783, § 1, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 18464-02-2009, § 1, passed 2-3-2009; Ord.
18866-10-2009, § 1, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 19947-10-2011, § 2G, passed 10-25-
2011; Ord. 20315-08-2012, § 2, passed 8-7-2012; Ord. 23220-05-2018. § 1, passed
5-15-2018, eff. 8-3-2018; Ord. 23980-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-10-2019, eff. 12-
14-2019)
§ 22-192 HOURS METERS TO OPERATE; INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN ON METERS.
   (a)   Except within the cultural district and the West 7th Urban Village
Core, parking meters at the established rates shall regulate the parking of
vehicles between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise
specified by sign, of any day, except Saturdays and Sundays; or when a street
sign specifically prohibits parking.
      (1)   Within the cultural district, parking meters at the established
rates shall regulate the parking of vehicles between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified by sign, of any day, including
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or when a street sign specifically prohibits
parking.
      (2)   Within the West 7th Urban Village Core, parking meters at the
established rates shall regulate the parking of vehicles between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified by sign, of any day,
including Saturdays and Sundays; or when a street sign specifically prohibits
parking.
   (b)   Except within the Cultural District, the following parking meter
holidays will be observed:
      (1)   New Year’s Day—January first;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday—Third Monday in January;
      (3)   Veteran’s Day—November eleventh;
      (4)   Memorial Day—Last Monday in May;
      (5)   Independence Day—July fourth;
      (6)   Labor Day—First Monday in September;
      (7)   Thanksgiving Day—Fourth Thursday in November;
      (8)   Thanksgiving Friday—Friday after the Fourth Thursday in November;
and
      (9)   Christmas Day—December twenty-fifth.
   (c)   When a parking meter holiday falls on a Saturday and the holiday is
officially observed on the preceding Friday, the parking meter holiday will be
observed on Friday. When a parking meter holiday falls on a Sunday and is
officially observed on the following Monday, the parking meter holiday will be
observed on Monday.
   (d)   The city council may also from time to time designate parking meter
holidays or cultural district parking meter holidays for special events or
activities when such action is in the best interest of the city.
   (e)   Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and
hours when the requirements to deposit coins therein shall apply and the value
of the coins to be deposited.
   (f)   For purposes of this division, the CULTURAL DISTRICT shall be defined
as the area bounded by University Drive on the east, Camp Bowie Boulevard on
the north, Montgomery Street on the west, and West Freeway Service Road on the
south.
   (g)   For purposes of this division, the WEST 7TH URBAN VILLAGE CORE shall
be defined as the area bounded by Foch Street to the east, University Drive to
the west, Lancaster Avenue to the south and West Sixth Street to the north.
   (h)   The city manager or his or her designee may waive the parking fees for
meters within the cultural district during periods of off-peak demand for
parking by causing the meter(s) to be deactivated or encased.
(1964 Code, § 26-104) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 7788, § 1, passed
8-15-1978; Ord. 8629, § 1, passed 8-31-1982; Ord. 10041, § 1, passed 1-12-1988;
Ord. 15712, § 7, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. 19490-12-2010, § 1, passed 12-14-2010;
Ord. 21388-08-2014, § 1, passed 8-19-2014; eff. 8-26-2014; Ord. 23220-05-2018.
§ 1, passed 5-15-2018, eff. 8-3-2018)
§ 22-193 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION.
   (a)   The city traffic engineer or duly authorized designee is authorized to
install or place parking meters at the established parking meter rates. Each
parking meter shall be placed upon the curb alongside of or next to an
individual parking space, such space to be designated as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   The city traffic engineer or employee above referred to shall provide
for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking
meters provided for in this article and shall maintain such meters in good
operating condition. Parking meters shall be capable of being operated, either
automatically or mechanically, upon the deposit therein of a designated coin or
coins of United States currency, for the full period of time for which parking
is lawfully permitted at any of the established parking meter rates.
   (c)   Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and
set that upon expiration of the time period registered by the deposit of one or
more coins as provided herein, such meter will indicate by an appropriate
signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired; and that during such
period of time and prior to the expiration thereof, such meter will indicate
the interval of time which remains of such period.
(1964 Code, § 26-105) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 15712, § 8, passed
10-7-2003)
§ 22-194 HOW PARKING METER AND SPACE TO BE USED.
   (a)   No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street
alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed during the
regulated time applicable, unless a coin or coins of United States currency of
the appropriate denomination shall have been deposited therein, or shall have
been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time, and such
meter has been placed in operation.
   (b)   Multiple motorcycles shall be permitted to park in a single demarcated
space regulated by meter. Multiple motorcycles shall be allowed to park in one
space as long as the space is paid and the meter is in operation. The
motorcycles must be parked within the lines marked on the street for the
applicable parking space.
   (c)   If more than one motorcycle occupies the space, it is not relevant
which motorcycle operator paid the meter as long as the meter is paid while any
of the vehicles are in the space. When time expires on the meter, all
motorcycles in the space are subject to a citation.
(1964 Code, § 26-106) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 15712, § 9, passed
10-7-2003; Ord. 20864-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-13-2013, eff. 8-17-2013)
§ 22-195 PARKING OVERTIME— UNLAWFUL.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to be parked,
to remain or to be placed in any parking space alongside of or next to any
parking meter during the restricted and regulated time applicable for the
established parking meter rate in which such meter is located while the parking
meter for such space indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in such
space has expired or has been restricted. This provision shall not apply to the
act of parking or the necessary time that is required to deposit immediately
thereafter a coin or coins in such meter.
   (b)   When any person permits a vehicle to be parked, to remain or be placed
in any parking space where the parking meter has expired as provided in
subsection (a) of this section and the vehicle remains so parked for
consecutive periods of time, each of which periods exceeds the maximum parking
time applicable for the established parking meter rate where the meter is
located, each such period of parking shall constitute a separate offense and a
separate citation may be issued for each such offense.
(1964 Code, § 26-107) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 9050, § 1, passed
3-13-1984; Ord. 15712, § 10, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-196 SAME—EXPIRED METER PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The displaying of a signal by any parking meter indicating expired or
illegal parking while a vehicle is parked in a parking space adjoining such
parking meter shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle has been parked
overtime and beyond the period of time established for the particular parking
meter rate in which such parking space and such meter are located.
(1964 Code, § 26-108) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 15712, § 11,
passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-197 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (a)   Any vehicle parked in any parking space in any parking meter zone
shall be parked with the hood of such vehicle alongside of or next to the
parking meter alongside of such parking space in parallel parking spaces; and
with the front of the vehicle at the meter in diagonal parking spaces; and in
either event, shall be parked within the lines marked on the street for such
parking space, as provided in this division.
   (b)   Motorcycles shall be the sole exception to the manner of parallel
parking described in subsection (a) above. In addition to parallel and diagonal
parking, motorcycles may also be parked perpendicular to the curb. In the case
of perpendicular parking, the motorcycles must be parked within the lines
marked on the street for the applicable parallel parking space. In cases where
there are no marked spaces on the street parallel to the curb, the motorcycle
cannot extend beyond eight feet from the curb when parked perpendicular to the
curb.
(1964 Code, § 26-110) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 20864-08-2013, §
1, passed 8-13-2013, eff. 8-17-2013)
§ 22-198 MARKING OF SPACES; PARKING WITHIN.
   The traffic engineer or such other officers or employees of the city as he
or she shall select shall place lines, signs or marks on the curb or on the
street about or alongside of each parking meter to designate the parking space
for which such meter is to be used. Each vehicle parking alongside of or next
to any such parking meter shall park within the lines, signs or markings so
established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line,
sign or mark, or to park such vehicle in such way that the same shall not be
within the area so designated by such line, sign or marking.
(1964 Code, § 26-111) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972; Ord. 20864-08-2013, §
1, passed 8-13-2013, eff. 8-17-2013)
§ 22-199 USE OF SLUGS, ETC., IN METERS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking
meter any slug, button, device, substance or substitute for a coin of United
States currency.
(1964 Code, § 26-112) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 22-200 INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or
willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the terms of this division.
(1964 Code, § 26-113) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 22-201 DEPOSITS TO BE USED TO DEFRAY COSTS OF REGULATION.
   The coins required to be deposited, as provided herein, are hereby levied as
police regulation, supervision and inspection fees to cover the cost of
inspection, supervision and regulation involved in the inspection,
installation, operation, control and use of the parking spaces and parking
meters described herein, and involved in checking up and regulating the parking
of vehicles in the parking meter zones created hereby.
(1964 Code, § 26-114)
§§ 22-202—22-204 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15712, § 15, adopted Oct. 7, 2003, repealed §§ 22-202 through 22-204,
which pertained to loading zones in meter area—Establishment; marking; two
minute limit for loading or unloading passengers; and reasonable time for
loading or unloading materials. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 22-205 MAXIMUM PARKING TIME; EXTENDING TIME PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle in a space
controlled by a parking meter for a period of time longer than the maximum time
of the parking meter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be
deposited in a parking meter any coin of the United States for the purpose of
extending the parking time beyond the maximum period of legal parking time for
the established parking meter rate, as shown on the face of the meter. The
provisions of this section apply whether or not an additional coin is put in
the meter after the vehicle has remained parked longer than the maximum period
shown on the meter face.
(1964 Code, § 26-118) (Ord. 7145, § 2, passed 3-10-1975; Ord. 15712, § 12,
passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-205.1 FEEDING METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any vehicle or for
a person on behalf of another person to deposit in any parking meter any coin
for the purpose of parking overtime or beyond the maximum legal parking time
limit prescribed for any established parking meter rate.
(Ord. 15712, § 13, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-206 SAME—WHEN PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of §§ 22-202 through 22-205 shall apply daily between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. except for Sundays and such other days as
shall be specifically designated by the city council.
(1964 Code, § 26-119) (Ord. 3411, § 2, passed - -; Ord. 5047, § 1, passed - -)
§ 22-207 COLLECTION, ETC., OF DEPOSITS FROM METERS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to designate some
members of his or her staff to make regular collections of the money deposited
in parking meters. It shall be the duty of such persons so designated to remove
the coins deposited in the meters, to count same, to place same in sealed
containers, and to deliver such containers and funds to a place designated by
the city treasurer.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to deposit such funds to
the credit of the general fund of the city.
(1964 Code, § 26-120) (Ord. 7145, § 3, passed 3-10-1975)
§ 22-208 PROOF OF PARKING METER LOCATION AND TIME LIMIT.
   When any person is charged with having committed an offense under this
division, proof that a parking meter was located at the parking space in
connection with which the offense was committed shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the parking meter was installed and the space laid out by order
of the traffic engineer, and that the location and maximum parking time of such
space were lawfully designated by the traffic engineer.
(1964 Code, § 26-121) (Ord. 6668, § 1, passed 5-8-1972)
§ 22-209 DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   All permits, hangtags and parking meter receipts must be conspicuously
displayed (as outlined in the display instructions) in the vehicle for which
they are issued, so as to be easily visible to any person passing such vehicle
on the street or sidewalk, while the vehicle is parked in any metered or un-
metered space. In the event the vehicle is manufactured in such a way that the
permit cannot be hung in accordance with the display instructions, then placing
the permit in a visible and conspicuous place in the vehicle will suffice.
Failure to display a permit shall create the presumption that no permit for the
vehicle exists.
(Ord. 20315-08-2012, § 3, passed 8-7-2012)
§§ 22-210—22-220 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: PARKING VIOLATIONS
§ 22-221 TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   In addition to signs regulating stopping, standing or parking of motor
vehicles upon any public street or highway within the city, the traffic
engineer may, in his or her discretion, supplement any such sign with an
additional sign designating a tow away zone. Such signs shall be in substantial
compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The use of
signs designating a tow away zone shall not prohibit the removal by the city of
any vehicle found in any other area if such removal is in conformity with any
provisions of this code or state statute. Any vehicle found in a tow away zone
may be towed away and impounded by the city or its duly authorized
representative in accordance with the procedures established in §
22-222.
(1964 Code, § 26-122) (Ord. 7016, § 1, passed 6-3-1974; Ord. 7217, § 1, passed
8-25-1975; Ord. 7294, § 1, passed 1-26-1976; Ord. 7361, § 1, passed 6-7-1976;
Ord. 7584, § 1, passed 7-26-1977; Ord. 7961, § 1, passed 8-21-1979; Ord. 9852,
§ 5, passed 3-31-1987; Ord. 15712, § 14, passed 10-7-2003)
§ 22-222 TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF CERTAIN VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.
   (a)   Any vehicle found on any private property, public street or other
public place under any circumstances hereinafter set forth and any large
recreational vehicle or oversize recreational vehicle parked on private
property in violation of §§
22-162.3 or
22-162.4 of this chapter shall be deemed to be a nuisance per se, and may be
towed away and impounded in the manner herein provided (provided, however, that
such listed circumstances shall not be deemed exclusive or prohibit such towing
and impoundment in any circumstances not listed):
      (1)   When any vehicle or any other property constitutes an obstruction
to traffic by being left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in
any underpass or tunnel;
      (2)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to
any private driveway;
      (3)   When any vehicle is found upon a street, or highway, and
information has been reported to the effect that such vehicle has been stolen
or complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such
vehicle has been stolen or embezzled;
      (4)   When a vehicle upon a street or highway is so disabled that its
normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other
reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody,
or are not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle;
      (5)   When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control of a
vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is by law required to take the
person arrested immediately before a magistrate;
      (6)   When any vehicle is parked or standing in or on any portion of a
street or highway in such a manner that the vehicle constitutes a hazard or
interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by reason of any
catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance the safety of said vehicle is
imperiled;
      (7)   When any vehicle is stopped or standing or parked in violation of
any official sign or other traffic-control device where said sign or device
gives notice of a tow-away zone;
      (8)   When any vehicle is stored on the public street, sidewalk, parkway
or alley, according to the terms of §
22-159;
      (9)   When a vehicle is found to be an abandoned vehicle or a junked
vehicle;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found parked on private property according to
the terms of §
22-162.1;
      (11)   When any vehicle is found parked on a public street according to
the terms of §
22-162.2; and
      (12)   When any vehicle is found parked on private property according to
the terms of §§
22-162.3 or
22-162.4.
   (b)   Whenever the provisions of this section provide for the towing away
and impoundment of any vehicle, such service shall be performed either by the
city or its duly authorized representative.
   (c)   Whenever a vehicle is towed away and impounded under the provisions of
this section or of §
22-221, the procedures in §
22-302 shall be followed, with regard to notice, hearing, appeal, release,
storage fees, sale and disposition of the vehicle.
(1964 Code, § 26-123) (Ord. 7016, § 2, passed 6-3-1974; Ord. 7217, § 2, passed
8-25-1975; Ord. 7923, § 1, passed 6-12-1979; Ord. 9852, § 6, passed 3-31-1987;
Ord. 17867, § 4, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18162-07-2008, § 7, passed 7-8-2008)
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned and junked vehicles, see §§
22-301 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 94
   Unattended motor vehicles, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 97
§§ 22-223—22-240 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: BICYCLES
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require registration and regulate operation, see Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 544
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15281, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2002, amended Div. 1, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out in §§
22-241 through
22-245. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 1 pertained to similar
subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 22-241 REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   Any person who rides a bicycle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
must have such bicycle equipped on the front thereof with an amber reflector at
least two and one-half inches in diameter or an electric headlight with the
lens not less than two and one-half inches in diameter, and the rear of such
bicycle must be equipped with a reflector of at least two and one-half inches
in diameter.
(Ord. 15281, § 1, passed 10-8-2002)
§ 22-242 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (b)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed or equipped.
(Ord. 15281, § 1, passed 10-8-2002)
§ 22-243 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle to cling to
or attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle
on any street.
(Ord. 15281, § 1, passed 10-8-2002)
§ 22-244 RIDING IN RECKLESS MANNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon, over or along
any street, public square or park or any public property in the city in such a
reckless, indifferent or careless manner as to unreasonably endanger any person
or property.
(Ord. 15281, § 1, passed 10-8-2002)
§ 22-245 BICYCLE HELMETS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their
usage clearly indicates another meaning.
      BICYCLE. A human powered vehicle with two wheels in tandem designed to
transport by a pedaling action a person seated on a seat.
      CHILD. Any individual under 18 years of age.
      DEALER. Any commercial establishment that sells at retail or rents new or
used bicycles, whether as its principal business activity or in connection with
the selling or renting of other merchandise, or the providing of services, from
a place of business within the city.
      HELMET. Properly fitted headgear that is not structurally damaged and
that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute,
the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation
or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets, as
applicable, at the time of the manufacture of the helmet.
      PARENT. The natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian or
conservator of a child.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any property that is publicly owned or maintained, including,
but not limited to a street or highway, a publicly maintained trail or a public
parks facility.
      WEARING A HELMET. That the person has a helmet fastened securely to his
or her head with the straps of the helmet securely tightened.
   (b)   Helmet required.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any child to operate or ride upon a bicycle or
any side car, trailer, child carrier, seat or other device attached to a
bicycle unless the child is wearing a helmet.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate
or ride a bicycle or any side car, trailer, child carrier, seat or other device
attached to a bicycle unless the child is wearing a helmet.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution that the bicycle was not being
operated upon a public way at the time of the alleged offense.
      (4)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section,
upon first offense only, that the person owns or has acquired a helmet prior to
the court hearing and promises the court that the helmet will be used in the
future.
   (c)   Sale or lease.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell a bicycle, bicycle side
car, trailer or child carrier without providing a written statement to the
purchaser advising of the terms of this section. The statement shall be in a
form promulgated by the chief of police. Upon request, the chief of police
shall provide a sample of the required form to a dealer. However, printing of
distribution copies shall be at the dealer’s expense.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any dealer to rent a bicycle to any person
without providing a helmet for the use of each child who will operate or ride
upon the bicycle or determining that each child who will operate or ride upon
the bicycle has a helmet available.
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $50 upon first conviction and an amount not exceeding $100 upon the
second and each subsequent conviction.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to promote bicycle safety by
encouraging the use of helmets. In keeping with that purpose, the municipal
courts are urged to consider the following:
         a.   The courts may consider deferred dispositions under Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure Article 45.051 whenever the circumstances warrant deferred
dispositions. Conditions of the deferral may include that the defendant, if
financially able, has obtained a helmet and has agreed to make a contribution
in support of the bicycle helmet fund; and
         b.   The courts may consider referrals to a teen court program under
Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 45.052 whenever the circumstances
warrant such referrals.
   (e)   Bicycle helmet fund.
      (1)   The bicycle helmet fund is hereby created. The fund shall accept
donations of helmets and money to be used for the purchase of helmets. All
monetary gifts to the fund shall be deposited in the city treasury.
      (2)   The fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of providing
bicycle helmets for the use of children who are members of “very low income
families” as defined in 24 C.F.R. § 813.102, as computed for the city for
purposes of § 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, 12 U.S.C. §§ 1701 to
1750g. The director of the park and recreation department shall administer the
fund and shall promulgate rules and procedures for the distribution of helmets.
Helmets shall be provided on a first-come first-served basis to the extent of
available supply.
(Ord. 15281, § 1, passed 10-8-2002)
§§ 22-246—22-260 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19050-03-2010, § 1, adopted March 2, 2010, repealed Div. 2, §§ 22-261
through 22-266, which pertained to registration. See also the Code Comparative
Table.
§§ 22-261—22-280 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: PEDESTRIANS
§ 22-281 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision
shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
22-283(b).
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(1964 Code, § 26-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 77
§ 22-282 TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(1964 Code, § 26-13)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 80
§ 22-283 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the highway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
(1964 Code, § 26-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 78
§ 22-284 SOLICITATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(1964 Code, § 26-14) (Ord. 14875, § 3, passed 12-4-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 81(c), (d)
§§ 22-285—22-300 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9852, § 7, adopted March 31, 1987, amended Art. IX in its entirety, to
read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§
22-301 through 22-304, pertaining to junked vehicles, derived from 1964 Code,
§§ 26-125 through 26-128, and Ord. 6651, § 4, adopted March 20, 1972.
DIVISION 1: ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 22-301 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Abandoned vehicles shall be impounded and disposed of in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Texas Litter Abatement Act.
(Ord. 9852, § 7, passed 3-31-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Texas Litter Abatement Act, see Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 365
§ 22-302 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Notice requirements. When the police department takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle, the department shall give notice to the owner and
lienholders of the vehicle pursuant to V.A.C.S. Article 4477-9a, § 5.03 of the
Texas Litter Abatement Act. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known
registered owner and to any lienholders of record, and shall contain such
information as is required under V.A.C.S. Article 4477-9a, § 5.03. It shall
include a statement that the vehicle will be disposed of if the owner or
lienholder does not exercise the right to reclaim the vehicle within 20 days of
the date of the notice, according to the terms of V.A.C.S. Article 4477-9a, §
5.03. Such notice shall also state that the procedures for reclaiming the
vehicle include the right to an administrative hearing and an appeal hearing on
the issue of the propriety of the impoundment, which hearing, if requested,
shall be held within 72 hours of the time of such request, exclusive of
Saturday, Sunday and city holidays unless a later date, not later than five
days after the request, is requested by a person entitled to notice. All
requests made pursuant to this section must be in writing, delivered to the
police department.
   (b)   Administrative hearing and appeal hearing. If a hearing is requested,
the following procedure shall be followed:
      (1)   a.   Within 72 hours of the impoundment (unless a later time has
been requested by a person entitled to notice), the issue of the propriety of
the impoundment shall be considered at an administrative hearing, which shall
be presided over by a hearing officer designated by the police chief. If such
hearing officer rules that the impoundment was improper, the vehicle shall be
released, and no charges for the impoundment, preservation or storage of the
vehicle shall be assessed.
         b.   If the person requesting the hearing is not satisfied with the
ruling of the hearing officer on the issue of the propriety of the impoundment,
that person shall have a right to an appeal hearing, according to subsection
(b)(2) of this section, below.
      (2)   If an appeal hearing is requested, such hearing shall be held
within 48 hours of the time of the administrative hearing, unless a later time
is requested by the person entitled to notice. A municipal judge shall preside
at the appeal hearing, at which time the issue of the propriety of the
impoundment will be considered. If the municipal judge orders that the
impoundment was improper, the vehicle shall be released immediately, and no
charges for the impoundment, preservation or storage of the vehicle shall be
assessed. If the municipal judge orders that the impoundment was proper, the
vehicle shall be released only upon the payment of all charges for the
impoundment, preservation and storage of the vehicle.
   (c)   Pre-hearing release. If the person requesting the hearing requests
that the vehicle be released prior to the time of the hearing, upon the posting
of a cash bond in the full amount of all impoundment, preservation and storage
charges, the vehicle shall be released, pending the outcome of the hearing.
   (d)   Storage fees. The police department or agent of the police department
that takes custody of a vehicle is entitled to reasonable storage fees for:
      (1)   A period of not more than ten days beginning on the day the
department takes custody and continuing through the day the department mails
notice as provided in this section; and
      (2)   For a period beginning on the day after the department mails notice
and continuing through the day any accrued charges are paid and the vehicle
removed.
   (e)   Sale or disposition of abandoned vehicles. Following compliance with
the above procedures, an unclaimed vehicle may be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with provisions of the Texas Litter
Abatement Act.
(Ord. 9852, § 7, passed 3-31-1987)
DIVISION 2: JUNKED VEHICLES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 12938, § 2, adopted April 1, 1997, replaced Div. 2, §§
22-303 through 22-313, concerning junked vehicles, in its entirety and added
new §§
22-303 through 22-315. Former §§
22-303 through 22-313 was derived from Ord. 9852, § 7, adopted March 31, 1987.
§ 22-303 JUNKED VEHICLES DECLARED TO BE A PUBLIC NUISANCE; ADOPTION OF
PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Junked vehicles, as defined in this chapter, are detrimental to the
safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of
private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and
are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight
which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and
such vehicles are, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.
   (b)   This declaration is made pursuant to Tex. Transportation Code Chapter
683, Subchapter E. This division adopts municipal procedures that conform to
Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E for the abatement and
removal from private or public property or a public right-of-way of a junked
vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 16539, § 2, passed 8-9-2005; Ord.
18441-01-2009, § 2, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 22-303.1 RESERVED.
Editor’s Note:
Section 2 of Ord. 21854-09-2015, adopted September 1, 2015, repealed § 22-
303.1, Meaning of the terms, “inoperable,”“wrecked,” and “dismantled or
partially dismantled” when used in the definition of junked vehicle, derived
from § 3 of Ord. 16539, adopted August 9, 2005, amended by § 3 of Ord. 18441-
01-2009, adopted January 13, 2009. See also Code Comparative Table.
§ 22-304 NOTICE.
   (a)   Prior to any official action being taken to abate and remove a junked
vehicle, from private or public property or a public right-of-way, not less
than ten days’ notice shall be given of the nature of the nuisance, except as
hereinafter provided, to the following parties:
      (1)   The last known registered owner of the junked vehicle;
      (2)   Each lienholder of record of the junked vehicle; and
      (3)   The owner or occupant of the private property on which the junked
vehicle is located or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the
public right-of-way on which the junked vehicle is located.
   (b)   Such notice shall be personally delivered, mailed by certified mail
with a five-day return requested or delivered by the United States postal
service with signature confirmation service and shall state the following:
      (1)   That the junked vehicle is a public nuisance;
      (2)   That the nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the
tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or
mailed;
      (3)   That a person entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (a) above
may, not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was
personally delivered or mailed, request, in writing, a public hearing in
accordance with §
22-305 of this chapter;
      (4)   That the persons entitled to notice shall be entitled to speak at
the public hearing, either by making a request prior to the time of the hearing
or by making a request at the time of the hearing; and
      (5)   That failure to abate and remove the nuisance or failure to attend
the hearing after notice constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and their consent to disposal of
the junked vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Transportation
Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E.
   (c)   If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
junked vehicle is unknown, notice may be placed on the junked vehicle or, if
the owner is located, hand delivered.
   (d)   If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post
Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not
earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return of the notice.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 18441-01-2009, § 4, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 22-304.1 RELOCATION OF JUNKED VEHICLE AFTER ABATEMENT PROCEEDING HAS
COMMENCED.
   The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another
location in the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the
public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked
vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(Ord. 16539, § 4, passed 8-9-2005)
§ 22-305 HEARING.
   (a)   A person for whom notice is required under §
22-304 may request, in writing, a public hearing to determine whether the
vehicle identified in the notice, or any part thereof, constitutes a public
nuisance. Such written notice must be received by the clerk of the municipal
court not later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day after the date on which the
notice was delivered or mailed.
   (b)   If a public hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is
required under §
22-304, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the
date on which the notice was delivered or mailed.
   (c)   Any hearing officer who has been appointed by the city council under §
10-17 of the Fort Worth city code is hereby designated as an official who is
authorized to conduct hearings under the provisions of this division.
   (d)   At the public hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from
owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to the
alleged public nuisance. The hearing officer may continue the hearing for up to
60 days for cause deemed reasonable to the hearing officer.
   (e)   At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable.
   (f)   Following the public hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all
evidence and determine whether the vehicle, or any part thereof, constitutes a
public nuisance as alleged. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance
does exist and that there is sufficient cause to remove the nuisance, and that
the notice requirements provided in this division have been met, the hearing
officer shall make a written order setting forth his or her findings and
ordering that the nuisance be removed and that the vehicle be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 683,
Subchapter E. If the information is available at the location of the nuisance,
the order shall include a description of the vehicle identification number and
the license plate number.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 16539, § 5, passed 8-9-2005; Ord.
18441-01-2009, § 5, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 22-306 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES.
   If no hearing is requested or if the hearing officer orders removal of the
public nuisance, the city or any duly authorized person may abate such nuisance
by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle in accordance with the provisions
of Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 18441-01-2009, § 6, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 22-307 JUNKED VEHICLES NOT TO BE RECONSTRUCTED OR MADE OPERABLE AFTER
REMOVAL.
   After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this
division, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§ 22-308 NOTICE OF REMOVAL TO BE GIVEN TO TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.
   No later than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked vehicle or
part of a vehicle pursuant to provisions of this division, notice must be given
to the Texas department of transportation. Such notice must identify the
vehicle or part of the vehicle.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§ 22-309 INAPPLICABILITY OF THIS DIVISION.
   (a)   The procedures adopted in this division shall not apply to a vehicle
or vehicle part:
      (1)   That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is
not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
      (2)   That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that
is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector
on the collector’s property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage
area, if any, are:
         a.   Maintained in an orderly manner;
         b.   Not a health hazard; and
         c.   Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means,
including a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery.
   (b)   In this section:
      ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old.
      MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR. A person who:
         a.   Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and/or
         b.   Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest
vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to
restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic
interest.
      SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been
changed from original manufacturer’s specifications and because of its historic
interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§ 22-310 ADMINISTRATION.
   This division shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time
employees of the city as designated by the city manager, except that the
removal of a vehicle or part of a vehicle from property may be performed by any
duly authorized person.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§ 22-311 CRIMINAL COMPLAINT.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance
described by §
22-303(a) of this code.
   (b)   Whenever such a public nuisance is found to exist within the city, the
city may, without notice, pursue the filing of an immediate criminal complaint
against the person or persons in violation of this section.
   (c)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 16539, § 6, passed 8-9-2005)
§ 22-312 ORDER OF ABATEMENT UPON CONVICTION.
   Whenever a person is convicted in a City of Fort Worth municipal court of
maintaining a junked vehicle which constitutes a public nuisance in violation
of §
22-311, the court shall, in connection with its guilty finding, enter an order
directing the guilty party to abate and remove the public nuisance which was
the subject of the criminal complaint. Any order so entered shall take effect
immediately upon conviction becoming final. If abatement is not accomplished as
ordered by the court, the city is authorized to abate the nuisance and assess
the reasonable costs of abatement against the guilty party.
(Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997; Ord. 16539, § 7, passed 8-9-2005)
§ 22-313 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: GENERALLY
§ 22-314 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
   A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by
this article may enter private property for the purposes specified in Tex.
Transportation Code Chapter 683 to examine a vehicle, obtain information as to
the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle that
constitutes a nuisance. A City of Fort Worth municipal court may issue orders
necessary to enforce the procedures of this article.
(Ord. 9852, § 7, passed 3-31-1987; Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§ 22-315 EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON OTHER ORDINANCES OR LAWS.
   This article does not affect any ordinance or law authorizing the immediate
removal of a vehicle left on public property that is an obstruction to traffic.
(Ord. 9852, § 7, passed 3-31-1987; Ord. 12938, § 2, passed 4-1-1997)
§§ 22-316—22-320 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: EQUIPMENT
§ 22-321 MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE.
   Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and no person shall use a muffler cut out, bypass or similar device upon a
motor vehicle on a highway.
(1964 Code, § 26-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 134(a)
§ 22-322 BRAKES.
   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer and pole trailer, and any
combination of such vehicles operating upon a highway within this state shall
be equipped with brakes in compliance with the requirements of Tex. Revised
Civil Statutes Article 6701d, § 132.
(1964 Code, § 26-16)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 132
§ 22-323 LIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall have all lamps and
reflectors and in such condition as required under Tex. Transportation Code
Chapter 547. In addition, such lamps shall be used during the hours required by
such Article XIV and in the manner required by such statute.
(1964 Code, §§ 26-17, 26-18)
§ 22-324 ENGINE BRAKING.
   (a)   Engine-exhaust braking prohibited. No person may use an engine-exhaust
braking system while operating a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of
the City of Fort Worth. For the purpose of this section, the term ENGINE-
EXHAUST BRAKING SYSTEM means an engine-exhaust braking system device which
converts diesel-engine power into an air compressor and when engaged operates
to slow the vehicle, creating an unreasonable noise.
   (b)   Offense. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate
or fail to comply with any provisions hereof. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding
$500. Each day that a provision of this section is violated shall constitute a
separate offense. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 20235-06-2012, § 1, passed 6-5-2012)
§§ 22-325—22-340 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: MOBILE VENDING VEHICLES
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
§ 22-341 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall mean
respectively.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public street, highway or thoroughfare, except
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VENDING VEHICLE. Every vehicle, as herein defined, used in or for the
carrying on of the business of peddling of ice cream, frozen dessert or other
edible or potable intended for use as food or drink for human consumption.
   VENDOR. Any person, group of persons, firm or corporation who individually
or by or through an agent or servant offers to sale, sells or attempts to sell
ice cream, frozen dessert or other edible or potable intended for use as food
or drink for human consumption from any vehicle as herein defined.
(1964 Code, § 27-42)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 22-342 REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any mobile vending vehicle to
stop, stand or park such vehicle on any public street or thoroughfare when ice
cream, frozen desserts or other edible or potable substances are sold or
offered for sale, from such vehicle, unless such vendor before making any such
sale and at the time of such sale shall operate his or her vehicle in the
following manner:
      (1)   Such vehicle shall be equipped with front and rear blinking caution
lamps. The front lamps shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced
laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously flashing amber
lights, and the rear lamps shall be mounted at the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable and shall display simultaneously flashing amber
or red lights or any shade of color between amber and red, which warning lights
shall be illuminated when and only when such vending vehicle stops prior to
conducting any sale or offering to sell;
      (2)   Such vehicle shall be parked at the right curb, within 18 inches of
such curb before any sale or offering of sale shall be made;
      (3)   Such vehicle shall not park within 100 feet of any street
intersection;
      (4)   Such vehicle shall not park within 35 feet of any other vehicle
that may be parked on the street;
      (5)   Customers shall be served only from the curb side of such vehicle,
and at no time shall a customer be served who is not standing on the curb or
otherwise off the street or thoroughfare, or by a driver who remains in his or
her driver’s seat;
      (6)   Customers shall be served only when the mobile vending vehicle is
parked, and at such stops, the vehicle’s motor shall be cut off unless its
operation is essential to producing or maintaining the product sold;
      (7)   No sale or offering to sell shall be made from any mobile vending
vehicle on any public street or thoroughfare between sunset and 9:00 a.m.;
      (8)   No sale or offering to sell shall be made from any mobile vending
vehicle of any ice cream, frozen dessert or other edible substance within two
blocks of any school, or on any park or other municipal recreation facility, or
directly in front of any commercially or industrially zoned property;
      (9)   No sale or offering to sell shall be made on any street where the
lawful speed limit exceeds 30 mph; and
      (10)   If any mechanical or electronic sound producing device is employed
to attract attention to such mobile vending vehicle, it shall not be operated
so as to be audible beyond a distance of 200 feet in any direction. Such sound
producing device shall not be used between the hours of 12:00 noon and 3:00
p.m.
   (b)   The provisions herein shall not apply to any person making regular
deliveries to customers in their homes.
(1964 Code, § 27-43)
§§ 22-343—22-360 RESERVED.
ARTICLE XII: STREET RACING AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 24824-04-2021, § 1, adopted April 20, 2021, added §§ 22-361 through 22-
364, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Article
XII pertained to regulations governing automated red light enforcement and
derived from Ord. 17677, § 1, adopted July 31, 2007 and repealed by Ord. 23920-
11-2019, § 1, adopted November 12, 2019. See also the Code Comparative Table.
DIVISION 1: DEFINITIONS
§ 22-361 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section.
   DAYS. Calendar days including weekends and holidays.
   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY. Any public or private off-street parking area
open for use by the public for parking vehicles, other than a private
residential property or the parking area of a garage or parking lot for which a
charge is made for the storing or parking of vehicles.
   PREPARATIONS. For a street race or reckless driving exhibition include any
of the following acts done for the purpose of causing a street race or reckless
driving exhibition:
      (1)   Causing one or more motor vehicles and persons to gather at a
predetermined location on a public street, highway, or off-street parking
facility;
      (2)   Causing one or more persons to gather on, or adjacent to, a public
street or highway;
      (3)   Causing one or more persons to gather in an off-street parking
facility;
      (4)   Causing one or more persons to impede the free public use of a
public street, highway or off-street parking facility by acts, words or
physical barriers;
      (5)   Causing one or more motor vehicles to line up on a public street,
highway, or off-street parking facility with motors running, impeding the free
public use of a public street, highway, or off-street parking facility or being
a physical barrier;
      (6)   Causing one or more drivers to rev a motor vehicle's engine or
cause the motor vehicle's tires to spin; or
      (7)   Standing or sitting in a location to act as a race starter.
   RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITION. Any exhibition of reckless driving as defined
in Section 545.401 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
   SPECTATOR. Any person who is present at a street race, reckless driving
exhibition or the site of the preparations for either of these events, when
such person attends for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, betting,
gambling, recording, transmitting, or witnessing the event as it progresses.
   STREET RACE. Any motor vehicle race, speed contest, drag race, acceleration
contest, or test of physical endurance of the operator of a motor vehicle as
defined in Section 545.420 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended.
(Ord. 24824-04-2021, § 1, passed 4-20-2021, eff. 4-25-2021)
DIVISION 2: SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING
EXHIBITIONS
§ 22-362 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT STREET RACES AND RECKLESS DRIVING
EXHIBITIONS.
   (a)   In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to be present as a
spectator:
      (1)   Ata street race conducted on a public street or highway;
      (2)   At a reckless driving exhibition conducted on a public street,
highway, or off-street parking facility;
      (3)   Where preparations are being made for a street race conducted on a
public street or highway; or
      (4)   Where preparations are being made for a reckless driving exhibition
conducted on a public street, highway, or in an off-street parking facility.
   (b)   Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers
or their agents who are acting in the course of their official duties, or media
or news personnel who are reporting on the event, from being spectators at a
street race or reckless driving exhibition or spectators at the location of
preparations for either of these activities. Additionally, nothing in this
section shall prohibit spectators from attending properly sanctioned, licensed,
or legally authorized racing events conducted pursuant to city or state
regulations.
(Ord. 24824-04-2021, § 1, passed 4-20-2021, eff. 4-25-2021)
DIVISION 3: AIDING STREET RACING AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS
§ 22-363 AIDING STREET RACING AND RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   Allows street racing or reckless driving exhibitions to occur on
the premises that the person owns, operates or controls; or
      (2)   Engages in preparations for street racing or reckless driving
exhibitions, as defined in §
22-361 of this article.
   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person who owns, operates, or
controls the premises:
      (1)   Submitted a criminal trespass affidavit to law enforcement
authorities complaining of street racing or reckless driving exhibitions
occurring on the premises that the person owns, operates or controls within 30
days prior to receiving a citation pursuant to this section; and
      (2)   Took reasonable and appropriate measures to make the property
inaccessible to the public during non-business hours.
   (c)   Exemption. Nothing in this section shall prohibit participation in
properly sanctioned, licensed, or legally authorized racing events conducted
pursuant to city or state regulations.
(Ord. 24824-04-2021, § 1, passed 4-20-2021, eff. 4-25-2021)
§ 22-364 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an
offense.
   (b)   An offense under this article is punishable by a criminal fine of not
more than $500.
   (c)   The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense
under this article is governed by §
1-6 of the code.
(Ord. 24824-04-2021, § 1, passed 4-20-2021, eff. 4-25-2021)
CHAPTER 23: OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Cross-reference:
   Courts, see
Ch. 10
   General penalty for code violations, see §
1-6
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Police,
Ch. 27
Section
   
23-1   Refrigerators or air-tight containers
   
23-2   Barbed-wire fences
   
23-3   Covering and plugging well or cistern
   
23-4   Discharging BB guns, air guns—Prohibited
   
23-5   Same—Liability of parents
   
23-6   Discharging firearms
   
23-7   Garage and automobile storage rooms
   
23-8   Noise
   
23-9   Intercepting radio communications
   
23-10   Reserved
   
23-11   Loitering for purpose of prostitution
   
23-12   Curfew in publicly owned cemeteries
   
23-13   Fastening notices to vehicles without consent
   
23-14   Posting of handbills, signs, posters or advertisements in certain
places—Prohibited
   
23-15   Posting of handbills, signs, posters or advertisements in certain
places—Prima facie evidence of violation
   
23-16   Certain ticket resales prohibited on city property
   
23-17   Prohibition of possession of aerosol paint by minors
   
23-18   Reserved
   
23-19   Curfew hours for minors
   
23-20   Certain ticket sales prohibited on FW Sports Authority, Inc. property
   
23-21   Unauthorized camping prohibited
   
23-22   Certain amusement redemption machines prohibited
§ 23-1 REFRIGERATORS OR AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building or other structure or within any warehouse or storage
room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or other structure,
under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any ice box,
refrigerator or other air-tight or semi-air-tight container which has a
capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square
inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other
fastening device capable of securing such door or lid shut.
(1964 Code, §§
27-1, 27-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 9203, § 1
§ 23-2 BARBED-WIRE FENCES.
   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to
build, erect, keep or maintain or permit or allow to be built, erected, kept or
maintained any barbed-wire fence on or around any property or premises owned or
controlled by such person within the city; provided, however, up to three
strands of barbed wire shall be permitted on top of a six-foot-high security-
type fence, provided the barbed wire is upright or projecting over the owner’s
property and not over abutting property.
(1964 Code, § 27-3) (Ord. 9153, § 1, passed 7-24-1984)
§ 23-3 COVERING AND PLUGGING WELL OR CISTERN.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any well or cistern,
as much as ten feet deep, and not less than ten inches nor more than six feet
in diameter to fail to keep it entirely covered at all times with a covering
capable of sustaining weight of not less than 200 pounds, except when said well
or cistern is in actual use by the owner or operator thereof.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person who shall drill, dig or otherwise
create, or cause to be drilled, dug or otherwise created, any well or hole of
as much as ten feet in depth and less than ten inches in diameter to abandon
such well or hole without first completely filling such well or hole from its
total depth to the surface or plugging the same with a permanent type plug at a
depth of not less than ten feet from the surface and completely filling the
same from such plug to the surface.
(1964 Code, § 27-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see V.A.C.S. Art. 9202, §§ 1, 1a
§ 23-4 DISCHARGING BB GUNS, AIR GUNS—PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge any kind or species of air gun, air pistol or BB
gun within the city; provided, however, “air gun” and “air pistol” shall not
include a gun or pistol utilizing a compressed gas or air propellant and
operated as part of an amusement arcade or a paintball amusement facility or
event.
(1964 Code, § 27-8) (Ord. 13594, § 1, passed 9-29-1998)
§ 23-5 SAME—LIABILITY OF PARENTS.
   (a)   No parent or any other person having legal control or custody of any
boy or any girl under the age of 17 years shall permit such boy or girl to
discharge any kind or species of air gun, air pistol or BB gun within the city;
provided, however, “air gun” and “air pistol” shall not include a gun or pistol
utilizing a compressed gas or air propellant and operated as part of an
amusement arcade or a paintball amusement facility or event.
   (b)   A violation of §
23-4 by any boy or any girl under the age of 17 years shall be prima facie
evidence of the guilt of the parent or person having legal control or custody
of such boy or girl.
(1964 Code, § 27-9) (Ord. 13594, § 2, passed 9-29-1998)
§ 23-6 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, FIREARM means a gun, pistol, rifle or
other device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel
or cylinder by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance
or any device readily convertible to that use.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the
city; provided, that this section shall not be so construed as to prohibit the
discharge of a firearm if:
      (1)   The person was on premises owned or operated by any branch of the
armed services of the United States government, Texas National Guard, Texas
State Guard or any responsible organization existing for the purpose of
operating and maintaining a rifle or pistol firing range, provided such
discharge is in the course of the regular functions and course of training of
such branch of the armed services or such other organization and provided,
further, that such branch of the armed services or other organization has
secured and holds a permit from the city council;
      (2)   The person was lawfully defending person or property;
      (3)   The person was a certified peace officer or certified security
guard in the performance of his or her duties;
      (4)   The person was using blank cartridges for a show or theatrical
production, for an event sponsored by a military organization, or for signal or
ceremonial purposes for athletic events;
      (5)   The person was using blank cartridges for bird disbursement, had a
valid current permit to participate in the city’s bird relocation program and
is operating in accordance with the city’s adopted bird disbursement policies
and program;
      (6)   The person was discharging a shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun
or bow and arrow on a tract of land that is ten acres or more that was annexed
by the city after September 1, 1981 and the discharge was more than 150 feet
from a residence or occupied building located on another property and was in a
manner not reasonably expected to cause the projectile to cross the boundary of
the tract;
      (7)   The person was discharging a center fire or rim fire rifle or
pistol of any caliber on a tract of land of 50 acres or more that was annexed
by the city after September 1, 1981 and the discharge was more than 300 feet
from a residence or occupied building located on another property and was in a
manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of
the tract; or
      (8)   The person was discharging a firearm in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.
(1964 Code, § 27-10) (Ord. 16641, § 1, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 23-7 GARAGE AND AUTOMOBILE STORAGE ROOMS.
   (a)   Every person engaged in the business of operating a garage or
automobile storage room in the city shall keep a business register, in which
register shall be entered in writing, within 36 hours thereof, if same is not
delivered to the owner before that time, a description of all automobiles or
motor vehicles, purchased or received by such person including the state
license and engine number, the time same was received, the name and place of
residence of the person leaving the car.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of every such person to furnish the chief of
police a written notice when any car or motor vehicle has been left in the
storage room for a period of 15 days.
(1964 Code, § 27-11)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to require reports of garages as to accidents, see V.A.C.S. Art.
6701d, § 49(b)
§ 23-8 NOISE.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Scope. This section applies to the control of all sound and noise
within the City of Fort Worth.
      (2)   Overview. This section is designed to regulate noise by various
alternative means in order to allow the enforcement of noise regulations at
times when and by persons for whom noise meters are not available. A noise may
be in violation of this section because it is disturbing to a reasonable person
of ordinary sensibilities or because it exceeds the decibel level restrictions
provided below. If a noise violates more than one of these provisions, the
violation will be enforced under whichever provision is most applicable to the
situation as determined by the enforcement officer of the city.
   (b)   Definitions.
      A-WEIGHTING (dBA). The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated
dB(A) or dBA.
      AMBIENT NOISE. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given
environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location,
constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given
location.
      BOUNDING REAL PROPERTY LINE. An imaginary line at the ground and its
vertical extension which separates the real property owned or occupied by one
person from that owned or occupied by another person.
      DECIBEL (dBA). The unit of measurement for sound pressure at a specified
location.
      GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION. Work conducted by a governmental entity in the
interest of the community.
      RESIDENTIAL. Property zoned for residential use in accordance with the
city’s zoning ordinance.
      SOUND LEVEL. The instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels
obtained by the use of a sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow
integration speed, unless otherwise noted.
      UNREASONABLE NOISE.
         a.   Any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise which
causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary
sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof; or
         b.   Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration,
which substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes
by persons of ordinary sensibilities.
   (c)   Restrictions on decibel levels.
      (1)   Maximum sound levels. During the times and in the zoning districts
(except for activities originating in industrial zoning districts) set out
below, the activities that create a sound pressure level on the complainant’s
bounding real property line that exceeds the maximum allowable sound level
(dBA) below are declared to be public nuisances:
         a.   All residential (one-, two- and multifamily) zoning districts.
 
Daytime   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. = 70 dBA
Nighttime 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. = 60 dBA
 
         b.   All nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts (excluding
industrial zoning districts) outside “H” central business district and “PI”
Panther Island.
 
Daytime   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. = 80 dBA
Nighttime 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. = 70 dBA
 
         c.   “H” central business district, “PI” Panther Island and West 7th
Village (per attached map).
 
Sunday through Thursday
   Daytime           7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. = 80 dBA
   Nighttime         10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day = 70 dBA
Friday through Saturday
   Daytime           7:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day = 80 dBA
   Nighttime and Sund2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. = 70 dBA
 
         d.   All zoning where ambient noise level exceeds the prescribed
maximum level:
 
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. = Existing ambient (dBA) + 3 dBA
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. = Existing ambient (dBA)
 
      (2)   Method of noise measurement. Noise measurements shall be a minimum
of 30 seconds in duration. Decibel levels are measured from the complainant’s
property line. For residential districts adjacent to other districts (excluding
industrial zoning districts), the residential decibel levels apply when
measured from a residential complainant’s property line. Violations will be
determined based on the highest registered reading in that measurement period.
All measurement levels will be inclusive of any ambient noise that exists at
the time of the measurement.
   (d)   Noise prohibited.
      (1)   In addition to the other noise restrictions in this section, no
person shall make, cause, suffer, allow or permit unreasonably loud noises in
such a manner, or with such volume, intensity or duration, so as to disturb a
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities. A decibel level shall not be
required for the enforcement of this subsection.
      (2)   This subsection is intended to apply to, but is not limited to,
unreasonable noises in the form of:
         a.   Animals. It shall be unlawful to keep, or to permit the keeping
of, any dog(s) or rooster(s) or any other bird or animal that creates any bark,
cry, crow, or other sound on a frequent, repetitive or continuous basis for ten
minutes or longer.
         b.   Construction work. Noise created by construction work within 300
feet of an occupied residential structure involving the erection, excavation,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, structure, or flatwork
before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. is prohibited as follows:
 
Before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday—Friday
Before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Saturday—Sunday
 
         c.   Solid waste collection. Noise created by solid waste haulers
within 300 feet of residential zoning before 6:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. is
prohibited, unless a waiver is granted to the waste hauler by the director of
code compliance or his designee in accordance with the grant of privilege
issued by the city to the waste hauler.
         d.   Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or
other musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, particularly
during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence.
         e.   Horns or other signal devices. The continued or frequent sounding
of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; the creation by means of any such
signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh device for any unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
         f.   Operation of vehicles. The running of any automobile, motorcycle
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring or rattling noise or vibrations.
   (e)   Exemptions. The following acts and sounds shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Noise generated due to normal building conditioning and ventilation
and property maintenance;
      (2)   Noise generated on public and school property, as permitted by the
property owner;
      (3)   Noise generated by an outdoor event that is permitted as described
in §
20-405 of the city code;
      (4)   Noise generated by amplifiers at entertainment venues having a
capacity of 1,000 or more persons within “PI” Panther Island;
      (5)   Noise generated by any governmental body and its contractors in the
performance of a governmental function;
      (6)   Noise generated by airport, railway and vehicular transportation;
      (7)   Noise produced by gas drilling and production, which is regulated
by the gas drilling ordinance in
Chapter 15 of the city code; and
      (8)   Noise generated at Texas Motor Speedway.
   (f)   Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced
primarily by the police department and code compliance department.
   (g)   Penalties.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person makes noise in violation
of this section.
      (2)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not more
than $500.
      (3)   Each occurrence of a violation, or, in the case of multiple
violations, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate
offense and may be punished separately.
      (4)   A violation of this section is a nuisance. The prosecution of an
offense under this section does not limit the city’s right to abate the
nuisance, including the use of injunctive or other civil relief.
(1964 Code, § 27-18) (Ord. 8767, § 1, passed 3-29-1983; Ord. 15608, § 1, passed
7-8-2003; Ord. 20191-05-2012, § 1, passed 5-1-2012; Ord. 24752-03-2021, § 1,
passed 3-23-2021, eff. 3-31-2021)
§ 23-9 INTERCEPTING RADIO COMMUNICATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized to do so by the
sender of the radio message, to intercept any communication or message
transmitted over any city-operated radio station and divulge or publish the
existence, contents, substance, purpose, effect or meaning of such intercepted
communication or message, or to use such intercepted communication or message
for his or her own benefit or for the benefit of any other person.
(1964 Code, § 27-28)
§ 23-10 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 5 of Ord. 9780, adopted December 9, 1986, repealed § 23-10,
pertaining to the operation of certain businesses near churches, schools and
residences, as derived from 1964 Code, § 27-50; Ord. 7711, § 1, adopted March
14, 1978; and Ord. 7746, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 23, 1978. Provisions regulating
the location of sexually oriented businesses are contained in
App. A, Ch. 5, Art. 2.
§ 23-11 LOITERING FOR PURPOSE OF PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she loiters in a public place in
a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the
circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is
manifested is that such person is a known prostitute or panderer, repeatedly
beckons to, stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing,
waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a
violation of this subsection (a) unless the arresting officer first affords
such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be
convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation
given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, a KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PANDERER is a
person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of
this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been
convicted of prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of
prostitution or compelling prostitution. The definition of prostitution in the
State Penal Code shall apply to this section.
   (c)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(1964 Code, § 25-51) (Ord. 7657, § 1, passed 11-8-1977; Ord. 10389, § 1, passed
9-19-1989)
§ 23-12 CURFEW IN PUBLICLY OWNED CEMETERIES.
   (a)   Unless otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful to enter any portion of
any publicly owned cemetery within the corporate city limits at any time
between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise.
   (b)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution brought under this section
that the party entering upon the publicly owned cemetery did so with the
consent of the city or its agents.
(1964 Code, § 27-52) (Ord. 8112, § 1, passed 6-17-1980)
§ 23-13 FASTENING NOTICES TO VEHICLES WITHOUT CONSENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, fasten or otherwise attach to
or upon any part of any vehicle any notice, sign or advertisement without first
obtaining the consent of the owner of such vehicle. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to prohibit a peace officer or other authorized official from
attaching to a vehicle notices of violations of laws or ordinances or other
notices as required in laws or ordinances.
(1964 Code, § 3-3)
§ 23-14 POSTING OF HANDBILLS, SIGNS, POSTERS OR ADVERTISEMENTS IN CERTAIN
PLACES—PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than
the owner of the property to post, fasten, erect or display, or cause to be
posted, fastened, erected or displayed:
      (1)   Any type of handbill, sign, poster or advertisement on or upon any
structure, tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public
street, or upon any public property within the City of Fort Worth, without the
express permission of the city council of the City of Fort Worth;
      (2)   Any handbill, sign, poster or advertisement on or upon any private
property, real, personal or mixed, within the City of Fort Worth if:
         a.   Said property has a “No Soliciting,” “No Handbills” or “No
Trespassing” sign posted that is clearly visible from the street; or
         b.   The property owner, during the time of placement, orally
instructs that no such material be placed on the property.
      (3)   At any residence before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. Central
Standard Time and after 8:00 p.m. during Daylight Savings Time, unless at the
occupant’s request.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to a federal, state or local government
employee or public utility employee in the performance of their duties for
their employer or to a political sign on public property as allowed in
Chapter 29, §
A01.3.(c).
(Ord. 9741, § 1, passed 10-14-1986; Ord. 17829, § 1, passed 10-9-2007; Ord.
21149, § 2, passed 3-4-2014, eff. 3-11-2014; Ord. 21674-03-2015, § 4, passed 3-
3-2015)
§ 23-15 POSTING OF HANDBILLS, SIGNS, POSTERS OR ADVERTISEMENTS IN CERTAIN
PLACES—PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   When any handbill, sign, poster or advertisement for solicitation
shall be found posted, fastened, erected or displayed in violation of §
23-14 of this code, the handbill, sign, poster or advertisement for
solicitation shall be prima facie evidence that such unlawful posting,
fastening, erecting or displaying was caused by the person, firm or corporation
advertised thereby if:
      (1)   A “No Soliciting,” “No Handbills” or
          “No Trespassing” sign was posted on the property;
      (2)   The property owner, during the time of placement, orally instructed
that no such material be placed on the property; or
      (3)   Posted, fastened, erected or displayed on or upon any structure,
tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public street or
upon any public property within the City of Fort Worth without the express
permission of the city council of the City of Fort Worth or as allowed in
Chapter 29, §
A01.3(c).
   (b)   Each day that such handbill, sign, poster or advertisement shall
remain so posted, fastened, erected or displayed shall constitute a separate
violation of this code.
(Ord. 9741, § 1, passed 10-14-1986; Ord. 17829, § 2, passed 10-9-2007; Ord.
18359-11-2008, § 1, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 21149, § 3, passed 3-4-2014, eff.
3-11-2014)
§ 23-16 CERTAIN TICKET RESALES PROHIBITED ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (a)   Terms defined. In this section:
      CITY PROPERTY. Any property which is owned or used by the City of Fort
Worth to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and
includes, but is not limited to, city streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks,
grounds and buildings.
      EVENT. An event of public entertainment or amusement.
      EVENT SPONSOR. An owner, lessee, operator, promoter or manager of an
event or the site of an event.
      RESELL. To sell a ticket after it has been purchased from the event
sponsor or from an individual, corporation or association authorized to sell
the ticket by the event sponsor.
   (b)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person while on city
property to resell or offer to resell a ticket to an event for a price in
excess of the price authorized to be offered to the general public by the event
sponsor.
(Ord. 10852, § 1, passed 5-28-1991)
§ 23-17 PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION OF AEROSOL PAINT BY MINORS.
   (a)   Terms defined. In this section:
      AEROSOL PAINT. An aerosolized paint product, including a clear or
pigmented lacquer or finish.
      MINOR. An individual younger than 17 years.
   (b)   Possession. It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess aerosol paint
of any sort or character.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (d)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation
of this section that, at the time of possession, the minor was accompanied or
supervised by a parent or guardian, a teacher in connection with a bona fide
school project, a supervisor during the minor’s regular employment or that the
minor possessed the aerosal paint on the property on which he or she lives or
that the possession occurred as part of an organized event sponsored or
supervised by the city, a school, a church or some other officially recognized
entity.
(Ord. 11629, § 1, passed 7-6-1994)
Cross-reference:
   Graffiti, see
App. B, §§
11A-90 et seq.
§ 23-18 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16118, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2004, amended the code by consolidating
the regulations of former §
23-18, which pertained to sexually oriented business offenses, and adding
provisions designated as §§ 5.200 through 5.221 to
Appendix A, Zoning. It should be noted that Ord. 16148, § 1, adopted Oct. 5,
2004 also repealed §
23-18. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 23-19 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS.
   (a)   Definitions.  In this section:
      CURFEW HOURS.
         a.   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
         b.   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
      DATE OF THE ADOPTION OF THIS SECTION. January 14, 2020.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         a.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or
         b.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      OFFICER. A police officer, city marshal or deputy city marshal.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         a.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         b.   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN. To:
         a.   Linger or stay; or
         b.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or
the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
      THIS SECTION. Section
23-19 of the Fort Worth City Code.
   (b)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   (c)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor
was:
         a.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
         b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         c.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         d.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         e.   Involved in an emergency;
         f.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department or marshal's office about the minor's presence;
         g.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Fort Worth, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the City of Fort Worth, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
         h.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         i.   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department or marshal's office that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (d)   Enforcement.  Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
an officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection (c) is present.
   (e)   Penalties.
      (1)   A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      (2)   When required by § 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the
municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates
subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
   (f)   City manager's report. Before the third anniversary of the date of the
adoption of this section, the city manager shall review this section, report to
the city council, and make recommendations concerning the effectiveness of and
need for this section. The city manager's report shall specifically include the
following information:
      (1)   The practicality of enforcing this section and any problems with
enforcement identified by the police department and city marshal's office;
      (2)   The impact of this section on crime statistics;
      (3)   The number of persons successfully prosecuted for a violation of
this section; and
      (4)   The city's net cost of enforcing this section.
   (g)   City council review. Before the third anniversary of the date of the
adoption of this section, and every third year thereafter, the city council
shall:
      (1)   Review the section's effects on the community and on the problems
the section was intended to remedy;
      (2)   Conduct public hearings on the need to continue the section; and
      (3)   Abolish, continue or modify the section.
   (h)   Sunset provision.  Failure by the city council to act in accordance
with paragraphs (g)(1)--(3) shall cause this section to expire at 12:01 a.m.
January 14, 2023.
(Ord. 11593, § 1, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 11615, §§ 1, 2, passed 7-12-1994; Ord.
13449, § 1, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. 14617, passed § 1, passed 5-15-2001; Ord.
15941, § 1, passed 4-6-2004; Ord. 18000-03-2008, § 1, passed 3-4-2008; Ord.
19555-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-15-2011; Ord. 21117-02-2014, § 1, passed 2-4-2014,
eff. 2-11-2014; Ord. 22575-01-2017, § 1, passed 1-24-2017; Ord. 24015-01-2020,
§ 1, passed 1-14-2020)
§ 23-20 CERTAIN TICKET SALES PROHIBITED ON FW SPORTS AUTHORITY, INC. PROPERTY.
   (a)   Terms defined. In this section:
      EVENT. An event of public entertainment or amusement.
      EVENT SPONSOR. An owner, lessee, operator, promoter or manager of an
event or the site of an event.
      FW SPORTS AUTHORITY, INC. The industrial development corporation
established under the provisions of § 4B of the Development Corporation Act of
1979, V.C.S. Article 5190.6, for the development of facilities for sports,
athletic, entertainment, tourist, convention and public park purposes and
events, including without limitation the Texas Motor Speedway.
      RESELL. To sell a ticket after it has been purchased from the event
sponsor or from an individual, corporation or association authorized by the
event sponsor to sell the ticket.
   (b)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to resell or offer to
resell a ticket to an event while on property owned, leased or managed by FW
Sports Authority, Inc., specifically including without limitation the Texas
Motor Speedway.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 15120, § 1, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 23-21 UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Terms defined. In this section:
      AUTHORIZATION. Express written permission given by the property owner or
the owner's agent.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  Any private school, including a parochial
school that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades
from kindergarten through grade 12, or a private college or university.
      CAMP.  To reside, dwell, or otherwise remain temporarily in a place,
using transitory shelter.
      GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. Any federal, state or local government, including,
but not limited to, a municipality, county, unit of state government, public
school district, junior college district or special purpose district.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any property or area within the territorial limits of
the city that is not included in a residential district as defined in the
zoning ordinance or that is used for a commercial or industrial use.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property or an area that is owned by an entity or
individual that is not a governmental entity or educational institution.
      RESIDENTIAL. Any property or area within the territorial limits of the
city that is located in a residential district as defined in the zoning
ordinance including vacant residentially-zoned lots.
      TRANSITORY SHELTER. Without limitation, any vehicle or motor vehicle,
including recreational vehicles and truck-tractors, any tent, tarpaulin, lean-
to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blankets, or any form of cover or protection from
the elements other than clothing. A recreational vehicle, semi-truck, or
tractor trailer lawfully parked at a truck stop with fuel and accessory
services shall not be considered transitory shelter for the purpose of this
section.
   (b)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any:
      (1)   Non-residential private property without possessing authorization
of the property owner or the owner's agent;
      (2)   Residential private property that has no permanent dwelling, or
that is lacking a potable water source and toilet facilities, without
possessing authorization of the property owner or the owner's agent; or
      (3)   Residential private property that has a permanent dwelling and both
potable water source and toilet facilities, without possessing authorization of
the property owner or the owner's agent.
   (c)   Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that a person
charged with violation of this section owns the property.
   (d)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (e)   Any property on which camping occurs shall be subject to all other
ordinances of the City of Fort Worth, including those related to zoning and
health and safety.
(Ord. 23839-09-2019, § 1, passed 9-17-2019, eff. 9-25-2019)
§ 23-22 CERTAIN AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this section,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, exception where the
context clearly indicates different meaning:
   AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE. Any electronic, electromechanical or
mechanical contrivance, including sweepstakes machines, designed, made, and
adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of
chance or a combination of skill and chance affords the user, in addition to
any right of replay, an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise
prizes, toys or novelties, or a representation of a value redeemable for those
items and is in compliance with Tex. Penal Code § 47.01(4)(b).
   AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE does not include:
      (1)   A machine that awards the user non-cash merchandise prizes, toys or
novelties solely and directly from the machine, including claw, crane or other
similar machines; or
      (2)   A machine from which the opportunity to receive non-cash
merchandise prizes, toys or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable
for those items, varies depending on the user's ability to throw, roll, flip,
toss, hit or drop a ball or other physical objects into the machine or a part
thereof, including basketball, golf, bowling or similar machines. A
representation of value means cash paid under authority of sweepstakes
contestants as provided by the Tex. Business and Commerce Code § 43, or a gift
certificate or gift card that is presented to a merchant in exchange for
merchandise.
   CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, code enforcement officer, fire marshal or
building official of the city.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical
contrivance that for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to
obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially
by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is
automatically paid by the contrivance. The term includes, but is not limited
to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette,
video poker, or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or
facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so, that as a result of
the play or operation of the game award credits or free games, and that record
the number of free games or credits so awarded and the cancellation or removal
of the free games or credits.
   GAME ROOM. A building, facility or other place where amusement redemption
machines or gambling devices are present.
   (b)   Restrictions, regulations, controls and limitations.
      (1)   It shall be an offense for any person, firm, or corporation to
maintain, display for patronage or otherwise keep for operation by the patrons
any amusement redemption machine or gambling device.
      (2)   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a game room within
the city limits, nor shall game rooms be permitted in any zoning district.
      (3)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed or have the effect to
license, permit, authorize or legalize any existing or future machine, device,
table, amusement redemption machine, gambling device or gaming machine, the
keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or
in violation of any ordinance of the city, any section of the penal code of
this state, or the constitution of this state.
   (c)   Enforcement.
      (1)   In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by individuals, it is
the intent of this section to hold a corporation or association criminally
responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting on behalf of a
corporation or association and within the scope of the agent's office or
employment.
      (2)   The City of Fort Worth Municipal Court shall have the power to
issue to the city official or their designee search warrants, or other process
allowed by law, where necessary to aid in enforcing this section.
      (3)   A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
continued. Each offense is punishable by a fine in accordance with applicable
law.
      (4)   This section may be enforced by civil court action as provided by
state and federal law.
      (5)   In addition to the criminal offenses and penalties prescribed in
this section, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of
licenses or permits. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
this section shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage
incurred by the city by reason of remediating such violation.
(Ord. 27222-10-2024, § 2, passed 10-15-2024, eff. 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 24: PARK AND RECREATION
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   DEPARTMENT
Cross-reference:
   Art commission, see §§
2-56 et seq.
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Regulations pertaining to Lake Worth, see
Ch. 18
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Trees, shrubs, etc., see
Ch. 33
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Authority to appropriate private property for and to construct parks, see
Tex. Government Code Ch. 441
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 21877-09-2015, adopted September 15, 2015, re-titled this
chapter from Parks and Community Services to Park and Recreation.
Section
Article I: In General
   
24-1   Jurisdiction
   
24-2   Conditions for use; enforcement
   
24-3   Animals and birds
   
24-4   Littering
   
24-5   Advertising matter
   
24-6   Selling goods or services
   
24-7   Designated golfing areas
   
24-8   Entering closed areas; hours of operation
   
24-9   Dogs to be on leash
   
24-10   Riding, tethering or pasturing animals
   
24-11   Washing vehicles
   
24-12   Kites, model airplanes
   
24-13   Discharging firearms
   
24-14   Fishing, swimming, boating in nondesignated areas
   
24-15   Traffic regulations
   
24-16   Botanic Garden
   
24-17   Alcoholic beverages
   
24-18   Bicycles, roller blades, skateboards, and other wheeled vehicles or
equipment
   
24-19—24-35   Reserved
Article II: Department
   
24-36—24-38   Reserved
   
24-39   Limitation of expenditures
   
24-40   Budgeting and accounting procedures
   
24-41   Annual audit
   
24-42   Park and recreation advisory board
   
24-43   Same—Responsibilities generally
   
24-44   Same—Duties
   
24-45   Additional advisory boards—Appointment; members; duties
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 24-1 JURISDICTION.
   The rules and regulations in this article shall be in force in all parks,
recreation areas and community centers (regardless of the city department
charged with the day-to-day operations and programming of any particular
community center) of the city.
(1964 Code, § 27-19) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 1, passed 6-24-2003;
Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 2, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-2 CONDITIONS FOR USE; ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations is a condition
of the use of any public park, community center or recreation area of the city.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any park, community center, or
recreation area within the city after being advised by an employee of the city
or a peace officer that he or she is interfering with, disrupting, or
preventing the orderly conduct of any supervised or unsupervised play,
educational program, or amusement program in any park, community center, or
recreation area within the city and having been asked to leave.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(17)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-
1994; Ord. 15599, § 2, passed 6-24-2003; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 3, passed 9-15-
2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-3 ANIMALS AND BIRDS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally harass, harm,
pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect any animal or bird
in any park or recreation area or attempt to engage in any such conduct.
   (b)   The director of park and recreation or designee, is excepted from the
provisions of this section in instances where the health and/or safety of the
public may be threatened.
   (c)   This section does not apply to animal care and control officers as
defined by this code who are performing duties within the scope of their
employment with the city.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(3)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 3, passed 6-24-2003;
Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015; Ord. 23295-06-2018,
§ 4, passed 6-26-2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 24-4 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit paper, glass, metal, litter,
cigarette or cigar butts or trash of any description on any lawn, driveway,
path, trail or other place in any park, community center, trail or recreation
area except in receptacles provided for waste disposal.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(4)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 4, passed 6-24-2003)
§ 24-5 ADVERTISING MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display any advertising matter by
signs or to distribute advertising matter by signs or to distribute advertising
matter of any character within any parkways, medians, parks, golf courses,
swimming pools or other recreation areas of the city without written permission
of the city’s park and recreation director.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(5)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11351, § 1, passed 7-6-1993;
Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-
2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-6 SELLING GOODS OR SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods,
wares, services or merchandise within any parkways, medians, parks,
playgrounds, swimming pools or other recreation areas without permission of the
park and recreation director.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(6)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11351, § 2, passed 7-6-1993;
Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-
2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-7 DESIGNATED GOLFING AREAS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to practice golf in any portion of
a park or recreation area not designated for that purpose; provided, however,
that the practice of golf with knit or plastic balls is permitted in any open
area not specifically , designed or designated for some other specialized
activity.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in activities other than
golf in areas of a park or recreation area designated specifically for golf.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(7)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 27255-10-2024, § 1, passed 10-
29-2024, eff. 11-6-2024)
§ 24-8 ENTERING CLOSED AREAS; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any portion of a
park or recreation area which is designated as restricted, or to enter or
remain, without a permit, in any park or recreation area during the hours of
the day when such park or recreation area is not open to the public, or to
enter or remain at any time in any park and recreation area which is closed for
the season. The director of the park and recreation department may post the
hours during which each park and recreation area is open to the public. Unless
otherwise posted by the director of the park and recreation department, the
hours during which parks and recreation areas are open to the public are 5:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(9)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7337, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994;
Ord. 15599, § 5, passed 6-24-2003; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015,
eff. 10-1-2015; Ord. 27255-10-2024, § 2, passed 10-29-2024, eff. 11-6-2024)
§ 24-9 DOGS TO BE ON LEASH.
   Dogs must be kept on a leash and under the direct physical control of the
owner or handler while in any city park or recreation area. Dogs are permitted
off-leash only in those portions of the park designated by the director of park
and recreation as off-leash areas. Dogs must remain under the immediate
personal supervision and command of the owner or handler while in off-leash
areas.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(10)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 6, passed 6-24-2003;
Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 6
§ 24-10 RIDING, TETHERING OR PASTURING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without written permission of the park
and recreation director or the city, to ride any cow, horse, mule, fowl or
domesticated animal in or upon any park or recreation area not designated by
the park and recreation director for such purpose, or to tether or pasture, or
allow or cause to be tethered or pastured, any cow, horse, mule, fowl or
domesticated animal in or upon any park or recreation area.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(11)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-
1994; Ord. 15599, § 7, passed 6-24-2003; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-
2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 6
§ 24-11 WASHING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wash a vehicle in any park or
recreation area not designated for that purpose.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(12)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
§ 24-12 KITES, MODEL AIRPLANES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a kite or propel or guide a model
airplane in any park or recreation area traversed by high voltage transmission
lines.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(3)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981)
§ 24-13 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, airgun, or
firearm of any kind within or across any park or recreation area not designated
for that purpose.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(14) (Ord. 27255-10-2024, § 3, passed 10-29-2024, eff. 11-6-
2024)
§ 24-14 FISHING, SWIMMING, BOATING IN NONDESIGNATED AREAS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wade, swim or camp
within any park or recreation area, other than in city operated swimming pools
during designated hours of operation, without the expressed written permission
of the director of the park and recreation department.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to boat or fish within
any park or recreational area designated by the park and recreation director as
being an area in which fishing and boating is prohibited and has been so
designated by signs indicating such prohibition.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(15)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 8, passed 6-24-2003;
Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-15 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any motorized
vehicle in, over, or through any park or recreation area except along and upon
park drives, streets or boulevards, or other areas designated for driving
purposes.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a motor
vehicle in any park or recreation area outside of a designated parking space
unless:
      (1)   The motor vehicle has been disabled due to an accident or
mechanical failure and remains within the park or recreation area for a period
of less than 24 hours; or
      (2)   The motor vehicle is temporarily located in the park or recreation
area outside of a designated parking space as directed by a peace officer.
   (c)   If any motor vehicle is found within any park or recreation area in
violation of a provision of this section and the identity of the operator of
such motor vehicle cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such
vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
   (d)   Persons driving motor vehicles within a park or recreation area with
the expressed written permission of the Director of the Park and Recreation
Department, or the Director's designee, are exempt from the provisions of this
section.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(16); Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970; Ord.
6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945, § 1,
passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed 12-
3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 9, passed 6-24-2003;
Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015 ; Ord. 27255-10-2024,
§ 4, passed 10-29-2024, eff. 11-6-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
§ 24-16 BOTANIC GARDEN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the confines of the
Botanic Garden of the City to engage in any active recreational or athletic
pursuit, including by way of example but not limitation, horseback riding,
archery, horseshoes, kite flying, model airplane flying, fishing, football,
baseball, frisbee, croquet, badminton, golf, chase, motorized and nonmotorized
cycling off designated park drives, swimming, running, and camping. Each and
every rule and regulation enumerated within this article, each and every order
and requirement of the park and recreation department, and any ordinance or
general law relating to the maintenance and preservation of the Botanic Garden
for its intended purpose shall be strictly observed and followed by visitors to
the Botanic Garden.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(18)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-
1994; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015 ; Ord. 27255-
10-2024, § 5, passed 10-29-2024, eff. 11-6-2024)
§ 24-17 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly
sell, possess with the intent to sell, or consume any alcoholic beverage in the
following areas:
      (1)   Within the fenced enclosed areas surrounding any swimming pool,
wading pool or spray pool within any park of the city;
      (2)   Within any recreation or community center or the parking lots of
any recreation or community center; or
      (3)   Within any area of a wildlife preserve.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly
sell, possess with the intent to sell, or consume any alcoholic beverage within
any area of a park, playground, or athletic field that has been designated by
the park and recreation director as being an area in which alcohol consumption,
sale, or possession is prohibited and has been so designated by signs
indicating such prohibition.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(19)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 15599, § 10, passed 6-24-
2003; Ord. 20718-04-2013, § 1, passed 4-23-2013; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1,
passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015 ; Ord. 27255-10-2024, § 6, passed 10-29-2024,
eff. 11-6-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages generally, see
Ch. 4
§ 24-18 BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS, AND OTHER WHEELED VEHICLES OR
EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a bicycle, roller blades,
skateboard, or any other wheeled vehicles or equipment, whether self-propelled
or motor-assisted, in designated parks or recreation areas or any portion of
park or recreation areas where such use is prohibited and has been so
designated by signs indicating such prohibition.
(1964 Code, § 27-19(20)) (Ord. 5637, § 1; Ord. 6360, § 1, passed 8-31-1970;
Ord. 6681, § 1, passed 6-5-1972; Ord. 6920, § 10, passed 10-1-1973; Ord. 6945,
§ 1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. 7338, § 1, passed 4-26-1976; Ord. 8225, § 1, passed
12-3-1980; Ord. 8255, § 1, passed 1-20-1981; Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-
1994; Ord. 15599, § 11, passed 6-24-2003; Ord. 27255-10-2024, § 7, passed 10-
29-2024, eff. 11-6-2024)
§§ 24-19—24-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DEPARTMENT
Charter reference:
   Council to provide for parks and community services department, see
Ch. XVIII, § 1
Cross-reference:
   City departments, see §§
2-96 et seq.
§ 24-36—24-38 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 24-36
through 24-38, which pertained to Established, Appointment; Duties of Director,
and Appointment of Employees. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 24-39 LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES.
   The park and recreation department shall not make any expenditure of money
or incur any liability during any fiscal year beyond the amount of money
appropriated or set apart in the annual budget of the park and recreation
department as approved by the city council for such purpose.
(1964 Code, § 2-50) (Ord. 7208, § 2, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 11541, § 1(c),
passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-40 BUDGETING AND ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES.
   The financial management services director shall prescribe all forms for the
keeping of park and recreation fund accounts and vouchers necessary to be used
in the conduct of the business of the park and recreation department, which
forms and methods of accounting shall be employed by that department so as to
conform to the method of accounting instituted and enforced in the financial
management services department. The park and recreation department shall
conform to such rules and regulations regarding financial affairs as are
promulgated by the financial management services director, including rules and
procedures governing preparation and review of the annual budget and control of
budgeted expenditures, and rules and procedures regulating preparation and
review of the capital improvement program and control of capital expenditures
through the bond fund project control system.
(1964 Code, § 2-51) (Ord. 7208, § 2, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 11541, § 1(c),
passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 18318-09-2008, §§ 4, 5, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 21877-09-
2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-41 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   At the end of each fiscal year the financial management services department
shall cause to have made a full and complete audit of the accounts and business
of the park and recreation department.
(1964 Code, § 2-52) (Ord. 7208, § 2, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 11541, § 1(c),
passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 18318-09-2008, § 4, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 21877-09-
2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015, eff. 10-1-2015)
§ 24-42 PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
   The park and recreation advisory board shall have such members and purposes
as defined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 12, passed 8-8-2023)
Cross-reference:
   City boards and commissions, see §§
2-56 et seq.
§ 24-43 SAME—RESPONSIBILITIES GENERALLY.
   The advisory board will be responsible for providing policy recommendations
and information to the city manager and the city council about citizen needs
and requests that will improve the services of the department.
(1964 Code, § 2-52.2) (Ord. 7208, § 3, passed 8-11-1975)
§ 24-44 SAME—DUTIES.
   The advisory board may recommend to the city manager and the city council
plans for development of facilities and services to meet the needs of the city.
The board will review and comment upon the proposed annual operating budget and
capital improvement program requests. Recommendations made by the board will be
presented to the city manager and the city council for consideration.
(1964 Code, § 2-52.3) (Ord. 7208, § 3, passed 8-11-1975)
§ 24-45 ADDITIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS—APPOINTMENT; MEMBERS; DUTIES.
   The city council may create by ordinance additional advisory boards to be
comprised of citizens to act in an advisory capacity to the city manager and
city council in conjunction with the park and recreation department. The
members of any such advisory boards shall serve for designated terms, shall
serve without compensation and may be removed at any time by the city council.
The ordinance creating the board shall prescribe the duties and
responsibilities of the board.
(Ord. 11541, § 3, passed 4-12-1994; Ord. 21877-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-15-2015,
eff. 10-1-2015)
CHAPTER 25: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17522, § 1, adopted April 24, 2007, repealed Ch. 25, in its entirety,
which pertained to planning. Portions of former Ch. 25 have been readopted as
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 6 and
Ch. 2, Arts. XI and
XII. See also the Code Comparative Table.
CHAPTER 26: PLUMBING
Cross-reference:
   Buildings, see
Ch. 7
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Section
   
26-1   The 2021 Edition of the International Plumbing Code and the 2021 Edition
of the International Fuel Gas Code adopted
   
26-2   Amendments
   
26-3   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
26-4   Penalty for violation
§ 26-1 THE 2021 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE AND THE 2021 EDITION
OF THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   (a)   The plumbing code of the City of Fort Worth is hereby revised and
amended to conform, with certain exceptions as specified below, to the 2021
International Plumbing Code and the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code of the
International Code Council (ICC), and the same as amended are hereby adopted as
the City's Plumbing Code. One copy of the 2021 International Plumbing Code,
marked as Exhibit "A", and One copy of the 2021 edition of the International
Fuel Gas Code, marked Exhibit "B", is incorporated herein by reference and
shall be filed in the Office of the City Secretary for permanent record and
inspection.
   (b)   The following provisions of the Appendix to the 2021 International
Plumbing Code are hereby specifically adopted as amended as part of the
Plumbing Code of the City of Fort Worth:
      (1)   Appendix Chapter C, Structural Safety.
      (2)   Appendix Chapter E, Sizing of Water Piping Systems.
   (c)   The plumbing and fuel gas provisions of the International Residential
Code, as adopted elsewhere, shall be used as the plumbing and fuel gas
provisions for buildings and structures applicable to that code except as
provided for in that code.
   (d)   Any errata corrections published by the International Code Council for
the 2021 International Plumbing Code or the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code,
as they are discovered, are considered as part of this code.
(Ord. 9164, §§ 1, 6, passed 8-7-1984; Ord. 9918, § 1, passed 8-28-1987; Ord.
11280, § 1, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 13521, § 1, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 14648, §
1, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15951, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19604-03-2011, § 1,
passed 3-23-2011; Ord. 22521-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017;
Ord. 25385-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Electrical code, see §§
11-1 et seq.
   International Building Code, see §§
7-46 et seq.
   International Fire Code, see §
13-1
   International Mechanical Code, see §§
7-166 et seq.
   Minimum building standards code, see §§
7-66 et seq.
§ 26-2 AMENDMENTS.
   The 2021 edition of International Plumbing Code and of the 2021
International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amending to read as follows:
   (a)   Chapters 1 "Part I - Scope and Application" and "Part 2 -
Administration and Enforcement" of the 2021 International Plumbing Code and of
the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code shall be governed by the Fort Worth
Building Administrative Code;
   (b)   The remaining sections of the 2021 International Plumbing Code are
hereby amended as follows:
IPC TABLE OF CONTENTS
   *IPC Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 713; changed to read as follows:
Section 713   Engineered Drainage Design   7-12
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IPC SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
   *IPC Section 202; definitions are changed and new definitions are added to
read as follows:
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. A change in the purpose or level of activity within a
building that involves a change in application of the requirements of this
code. The definition shall also apply to usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
   FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   PLUMBING.
   For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, as adopted, shall
mean:
      The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing
appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to any structure, in
connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting
systems, and public or private water supply systems.
   For the purpose of complying with the Texas State Plumbing License Law,
shall mean:
      All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances, including disposal
systems, drain or waste pipes, or any combination of these that:
      supply, recirculate, drain, or eliminate water, gas, medical gasses and
vacuum, liquids, and sewage for all personal or domestic purposes in and about
buildings where persons live, work, or assemble; connect the building on its
outside with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or combinations
of these, on the premises, or the water main on public property; and carry
waste water or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service lateral on
public property or the disposal or septic terminal that holds private or
domestic sewage.
      The installation, repair, service, maintenance, alteration, or renovation
of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances on premises where
persons live, work, or assemble that supply gas, medical gasses and vacuum,
water, liquids, or any combination of these, or dispose of waste water or
sewage.
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM.
   For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, as adopted, shall
mean:
      Includes the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and
traps; water-treating or water-using equipment; soil, waste and vent pipes; and
sanitary and storm sewers and building drains, in addition to their respective
connections, devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
   PREMISES.
   1.   A single tract or platted lot.
   2.   Multiple adjacent tracts or platted lots under common ownership will be
deemed to be a SINGLE PREMISES if they meet the following requirements:
      a.   Lots or tracts are not separated by intervening streets, alleys,
utility or railroad rights-of-way or other interruption;
      b.   Property contains a single primary use; and
      c.   Property is not used for one- or two-family residential purposes.
   3.   Tracts or platted lots that are at cross comers or that are connected
by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency access easements shall
not be considered to be adjacent.
   PRIVATE. In the classification of plumbing fixtures, "private" applies to
fixtures-in residences and apartments, and to fixtures in nonpublic toilet
rooms of hotels and motels and similar installations in buildings where the
plumbing fixtures are intended for utilization by a family or an individual.
   PUBLIC OR PUBLIC UTILIZATION. In the classification of plumbing fixtures,
"public" applies to fixtures in general toilet rooms of schools, gymnasiums,
hotels, airports, bus and railroad stations, public buildings, bars, public
comfort stations, office buildings, stadiums, stores, restaurants and other
installations where a number of fixtures are installed so that their
utilization is similarly unrestricted.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REGULATIONS
IPC SECTION 301
GENERAL
   *IPC Section 301.6; changed to read as follows:
   301.6 Prohibited locations. Plumbing systems shall not be located in an
elevator shaft or in an elevator equipment room.
   Exception: Floor drains, sumps and sump pumps shall be permitted at the base
of the shaft, provided that they are indirectly connected to the plumbing
system and comply with Sections 317 and 1003.4.
   *IPC Section 301.8; added to read as follows:
   301.8 Location. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other
applicable ordinances, no plumbing system, drainage system, building sewer,
private sewage disposal system or parts thereof, shall be located in any lot
other than the lot which is the site of the building, structure, or premises
served by such facilities.
   No subdivision, sale, or transfer of ownership of existing property shall be
made in such manner that the area, clearance, and access requirements of this
Code are decreased.
IPC SECTION 305
PROTECTION OF PIPES AND PLUMBING SYSTEM COMPONENTS
   *IPC Section 305.1; changed to read as follows:
   305.1 Protection against contact. Metallic piping, except for cast iron,
ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with
steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry.
Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil.
Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a
thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing
shall be made of an approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that
penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be
installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing.
   *IPC Section 305.4; changed to read as follows:
   305.4 Freezing. Water, soil and waste pipes shall not be installed outside
of a building, in attics or crawl spaces, concealed in outside walls, or in any
other place subjected to freezing temperatures unless adequate provision is
made to protect such pipes from freezing by insulation (3/4" wall in attics or
under floor and 1/2" wall in exterior walls) or heat or both. Exterior water
supply system piping shall be installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below
the frost line and not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below grade.
   *IPC Section 305.4.1; changed to read as follows:
   305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304
mm) below grade.
   *IPC Section 305.7; changed to read as follows:
   305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing
system installed within 3 feet of alleyways, driveways, parking garages or
other locations in a manner in which they would be exposed to damage shall be
recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner.
IPC SECTION 312
TESTS AND INSPECTIONS
   *IPC Sections 312.10.1 and 312.10.2; changed to read as follows:
   312.10.1 Inspections. Annual inspections shall be made of all backflow
prevention assemblies and air gaps to determine whether they are operable and
air gaps exist. In the absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to
ensure that testing is performed.
   312.10.2 Testing. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer assemblies,
double check-valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breaker assemblies, reduced
pressure detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, double check
detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, hose connection
backflow preventers, and spill proof vacuum breakers shall be tested at the
time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation and at least
annually. The testing procedure shall be performed in accordance with
applicable local provisions. In the absence of local provisions, the owner is
responsible to ensure that testing is done in accordance with one of the
following standards:
   {'{'}list of standards unchanged{'}'}
IPC SECTION 314
CONDENSATE DISPOSAL
   *IPC Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows:
   314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and
evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of
disposal. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the
direction of discharge of not less than one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units
horizontal (1-percent slope). Condensate shall not discharge into a walking
surface such as a street, alley, sidewalk or other areas so as to cause a
nuisance. Rooftop units may be piped to discharge into roof drains when such
drains do not discharge onto a walking surface as listed above.
   *IPC Section 314.2.2; change to read as follows:
   314.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate
disposal system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper and copper-alloy, CPVC, cross-
linked polyethylene galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene, PVC,
or PVDR pipe or tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure,
temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections
shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7
relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line size shall be
not less than the discharge size of the pan but not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm)
pipe size and shall not decrease in size from the drain pan connection to the
place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are
manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized
in accordance with Table 314.2.2. All horizontal sections of drain piping shall
be installed in uniform alignment at a uniform slope.
   *IPC Section 314.2,3, item #2; add a sentence to read as follows:
   2.   A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan
provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a
conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of
the primary drain. The conspicuous point of disposal shall not create a hazard
such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a
nuisance. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher
level than the primary drain connection.
   *IPC Section 314.2,3; add #5 to read as follows:
   5.   A listed and labeled water detecting device shall be provided that will
shut off up-flow equipment in the event the primary drain is blocked. The
device shall be installed on all up flow equipment above the first floor and
shall be installed beneath and on the floor of the up-flow equipment it serves.
IPC SECTION 317
ELEVATOR DRAINAGE
   *IPC Section 317; added to read as follows:
   317.1 Elevator Drainage. Drainage shall be provided in the elevator pits as
required by the Elevator Code and as listed in this section. Drainage
discharge, whether drainage is required or voluntary, shall comply with Section
315.4.
   317.2 Pits. (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.2.1; Inquiry 07-50) A pit shall be
provided for each individual elevator.
   317.3 Drainage. (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.2.2.3 thru 2.2.2.6)
   2.2.2.3   Permanent provisions shall be made to prevent accumulation of
ground water in the pit.
   2.2.2.4   Drains and sump pumps, where provided, shall comply with the
applicable plumbing code, and they shall be provided with a positive means to
prevent water, gases, and odors from entering the hoistway.
   2.2.2.5   In elevators provided with Firefighters' Emergency Operation, a
drain or sump pump shall be provided. The sump pump/drain shall have the
capacity to remove a minimum of 11.4 m3/h (3,000 gal/h) per elevator.
   2.2.2.6   Sumps and sump pumps in pits, where provide, shall be covered. The
cover shall be secured and level with the pit floor.
   317.4 Discharge. Discharge shall comply with the following:
   1.   Where there is no expectation of hydraulic fluid or oil contamination,
the sump may discharge into the sanitary sewer system.
   2.   If installed in a location with possible contamination, a trap or
interceptor rated for the expected flow rate with a minimum "storage" capacity
equivalent to the volume of hydraulic fluid or oil that could be leaked into
the sump, will be required prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer.
   3.   In either situation, discharge to the storm drainage system is not
permitted.
   4.   Gravity drains that comply with the above provisions should be
discussed with the Plumbing Inspection Specialist before installation.
   5.   Drainage to a storage tank is not permitted without specific approval.
   317.5 Other pipes, ducts or electrical wiring. See Building Code, Sections
3004.4 and 3005.6 and the following:
   (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.8.2.2) Only such electrical wiring, raceways,
cables, coaxial wiring, and antennas used directly in connection with the
elevator, including wiring for signals, for communication with the car, for
lighting, heating, air conditioning, and ventilating the car, for fire
detecting systems, for pit sump pumps, and for heating and lighting the
hoistway and/or the machinery space, machine room, control space, or control
room shall be permitted to be installed inside the hoistway, machinery space,
machine room, control space, or control room.
   (ASME A17.1 - Section 2.8.3.4) Other pipes or ducts conveying gases, vapors,
or liquid and not used in connection with the operation of the elevator shall
not be installed in any hoistway, machinery space, machine room, control space
or control room. Where a machinery space, machine room, control space, control
room, or hoistway extend above the roof of a building, pipes shall be permitted
from roof drains to the closest point where they can be diverted out of this
space. Pipes shall be covered to prevent leakage or condensate from entering
the machine space, machine room, control space, control room, or hoistway.
CHAPTER 4 - FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND FIXTURE FITTINGS
IPC SECTION 403
MINIMUM FACILITIES
   *IPC Section 403.1; changed to read as follows:
   403.1 Minimum number of fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for
the type of occupancy and in the minimum number shown in Table 403.1, based on
the actual use of the building or space and as follows:
   1.   Self-service storage facilities: shall be provided with one unisex
accessible restroom for tenant usage.
   2.   Each Recreational Vehicle Park, or portion of a Manufactured Home Park
used for recreational vehicles, shall contain one (1) or more service buildings
providing separate sanitary facilities for men and women.
      a.   No lot space shall be located farther than five hundred (500) feet
from such a service building.
      b.   The entrances to such buildings shall be clearly marked to show
which gender the facilities serve.
      c.   Fixtures shall be provided at the following ratio per twenty (20)
lots or fraction thereof:
         Toilets:   Men (1) / Women (2)
         Urinals:   Men(l)
         Lavatories:   Men (1) / Women (1)
         Showers:   Men (1) / Women (1)
      d.   Each building providing sanitary fixtures shall contain at least one
(1) slop sink.
      e.   If male and female sanitary facilities are housed within the same
structure, they shall be separated by walls extending from the floor to the
ceiling.
      f.   Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with
self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be individual and equipped with self-
closing doors. If dressing compartments are provided, each compartment shall be
equipped with a stool or a bench. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct
view of the interior when the exterior doors are open.
   Uses not shown in Table 403.1 shall be considered individually by the code
official. The number of occupants shall be determined by the International
Building Code. In other than E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in
Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing, by the applicant stating
reasons for a reduced number and approved by the code official.
   *IPC Table 403.1; add a footnote "g" in the title and after the table as
follows:
 
DRINKING FOUNTAINS
(SEE SECTION 410)g
 
   g.   Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant
load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for
dining and/or drinking establishments.
   *IPC Section 403.1.4; added to read as follows:
   403.1.4 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to
the fixtures required in this Chapter 4, all food service facilities shall be
provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
   403.1.4.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be
provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food
dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be
required based on convenience of use by employees.
   403.1.4.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at
least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is
conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning
tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location
of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City of Fort
Worth Consumer Health Section.
   *IPC Section 403.2; changed to read as follows:
   403.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate
facilities shall be provided for each sex.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Separate facilities shall not be required for private dwelling units
or sleeping units.
      2.   Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant
spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of
50 or fewer.
      3.   Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies
in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or less.
      4.   Separate facilities shall not be required in business occupancies in
which the maximum occupant load is 25 or fewer.
      5.   Separate facilities shall not be required to be designated by sex
where single-user toilets rooms are provided in accordance with Section
403.1.2.
      6.   Self-service storage facilities need only provide one unisex
restroom for storage tenant usage. A single unisex employee restroom, when
permitted and when accessible by the tenants, may count for such restroom. Such
restroom shall be located near the facility entrance. Spaces converted to uses
other than self-service storage shall comply with other applicable restroom
provisions for that individual space.
      7.   Aircraft T-hangar facilities need not install tenant restrooms when
in compliance with the following:
         a.   Each such tenant hangar space is less than 2,000 square feet in
area.
         b.   There are restrooms located within 500 feet of the lease space.
   *IPC Section 403.3; change to read as follows:
   403.3 Required public toilet facilities. For structures and tenant spaces
intended for public utilization, customers, patrons, and visitors shall be
provided with public toilet facilities. Employees associated with structures
and tenant spaces shall be provided with toilet facilities. Facilities for
public and employee use may be located in adjacent structures on the same
property and under the same ownership, lease or control. The number of plumbing
fixtures located within the required toilet facilities shall be provided in
accordance with section 403 for all users. Toilet rooms or bathing rooms
accessed only through a private office shall not be counted toward compliance
with section 403 Employee toilet facilities shall be either separate or
combined employee and public toilet facilities.
   Exceptions: {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
IPC SECTION 413
FLOOR AND TRENCH DRAINS
   *IPC Section 413.4; changed to read as follows:
   413.4 Required location. Floor drains shall be installed in the following
areas:
   1.   In public laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple
family dwellings, the rooms containing the automatic clothes washers shall be
provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such
drains shall have a minimum outlet cross section of not less than 3 inches (76
mm) in diameter.
   2.   Commercial kitchens. (In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens,
the code official may accept floor sinks.)
   3.   Toilet rooms containing two (2) or more water closets or a combination
of one (I) water closet and one (1) urinal, except in a dwelling unit. The
floor shall slope toward the floor drains.
IPC SECTION 421
SHOWERS
   *IPC Section 421.5.2; changed to read as follows:
   421.5.2 Shower lining. Floors under shower compartments, except where
prefabricated receptors have been provided, shall be lined and made water tight
utilizing material complying with Sections 417.5.2.1 through 417.5.2.5. Such
liners shall turn up on all sides at least 3 inches (76 mm) above the finished
threshold level and shall extend outward over the threshold, where provided,
and fastened to the outside of the threshold jamb. Liners shall be recessed and
fastened to an approved backing ... {'{'}bulk of section unchanged{'}'} ...
shall be tested in accordance with Section 312.9.
IPC SECTION 424
URINALS
   *IPC Section 424.3; added to read as follows:
   424.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm)
in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2
feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth,
readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material.
   *IPC Section 424.4; added to read as follows:
   424.4 Waterless urinals. Installation of waterless urinals shall be
permitted when installed in accordance with the following:
   A person who installs a nonwater-supplied urinal shall install water
distribution and fixture supply piping sized to accommodate a water-supplied
urinal to an in-wall point immediately adjacent to the nonwater-supplied urinal
location so that the nonwater-supplied urinal can be replaced with a water-
supplied urinal if desired by the owner or required by a code enforcement
officer. (SL - HB 2667-2009, Section 372.006(c)).
CHAPTER 5 - WATER HEATERS
IPC SECTION 502
INSTALLATION
   *IPC Section 502.3; changed to read as follows:
   502.3 Water heaters installed in attics. Attics containing a water heater
shall be provided ... {'{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... side of the
water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20
inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are
large enough to allow removal of the water heater.
   Water heaters shall not be installed in residential attics.
   Exception: Tankless water heaters.
   *IPC Section 502.3.1; added to read as follows:
   502.3.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located
at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at
or near the equipment location in accordance with the electrical code.
IPC SECTION 504
SAFETY DEVICES
   *IPC Section 504.6; changed to read as follows:
   504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a
pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
   1.   Not be directly connected to the drainage system.
   2.   When the drain pipe is run exposed in an area outside of the room where
the water heater is located, in a manner that would make it subject to damage,
the drain shall discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the
water heater.
   3.   Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and
shall discharge full size to the point of disposal.
   4.   Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving
any other relief device or equipment.
      Exception: Multiple relief devices of a single tenant may be installed to
a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the code official and
permitted by the manufacture's installation instructions and installed with
those instructions. Relief devices of multiple tenants may only share the same
discharge system when approved by the code official and the discharge point is
in a common area under the building owner's control.
   5.   Discharge to the floor drain, to an indirect waste receptor or to the
outdoors. The point of disposal shall not be in another tenant area. Where
discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping
shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located
in a conditioned area. The discharge pipe shall not discharge into the pan
required in Section 504.7.
      Exception: When a water heater retrofit or replacement occurs on a slab
foundation and the line cannot be discharged to an approved location the T&P
discharge line can be piped to the water heater pan provided with all of the
following:
      1.   An approved mechanical device is installed that will shut off the
water supply to the water heater when water is detected inside the pan;
      2.   A device is installed that will sound an audible alarm when water is
detected inside the pan to alert the occupants that a leak has occurred.
   6.   Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural
damage.
   7.   Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the
building occupants.
   8.   Not be trapped.
   9.   Be installed so as to flow by gravity.
   10.   Not terminate more than 6 inches (152 mm) above the floor drain or
waste receptor. When discharging outside the building, the point of discharge
shall be with the end of the pipe not more than two (2) feet (610 mm) nor less
than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the ground or the floor level of the area
receiving the discharge and pointing downward.
   11.   Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping.
   12.   Not have valves or tee fittings.
   13.   Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials
tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME Al 12.4.1.
   14.   Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief valve outlet,
where the relief valve discharge piping is installed with insert fittings. The
outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place.
CHAPTER 6 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
IPC SECTION 602
WATER REQUIRED
   *IPC Section 602.4; added to read as follows:
   602.4 Manufactured Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks. The water
supply for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks shall be provided
in accordance with the following:
   1.   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water under
pressure shall be provided in each manufactured home park and recreational
vehicle parks for domestic purposes. Connection for manufactured homes shall be
made to the public water system.
   2.   The water supply system of a manufactured home park and recreational
vehicle park shall be connected by pipes to all manufactured homes, individual
recreational vehicles sites, buildings, and other facilities requiring water,
with water flowing under pressure to each connection at all times.
   3.   Service lines, valves, and riser pipes shall be insulated pursuant to
this code.
IPC SECTION 604
DESIGN OF BUILDING WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   *IPC Section 604.4 .1; added to read as follows:
   604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate
is more restrictive than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take
precedence.
   *IPC Section 604.9; add an exception to read as follows:
   Exception: Water-hammer arrestors shall not be required in residential
applications.
IPC SECTION 606
INSTALLATION OF BUILDING WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
   *IPC Section 606.1; delete items #4 and 5.
   *IPC Section 606.1; change item #8 to read as follows:
   8.   On the water supply pipe to every water heater or hot water storage
tank. Access to the valve shall be on the same floor, located near the
equipment and only serving the hot water storage tank or water heater. The
valve shall not interfere or cause a disruption of the cold water supply to the
remainder of the cold water system.
   *IPC Section 606.2, item #2; delete.
IPC SECTION 608
PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
   *IPC Section 608.1; changed to read as follows:
   608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed
and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from nonpotable
liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through
cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Back flow
preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table
608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.9.
   *IPC Section 608.17.5; changed to read as follows:
   608.17.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to
lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric
vacuum breaker, a pressure vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer. Valves ... {'{'}remainder of section
unchanged{'}'} ... backflow prevention assembly.
   *IPC Section 608.18; changed to read as follows:
   608.18 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply
shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination
in accordance with applicable local regulations. In the absence of other local
regulations, installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.18.1 through
608.18.8.
IPC SECTION 609
HEALTH CARE PLUMBING
   *IPC Section 609.2.1; changed to read as follows:
   609.2.1 Tracer wire for nonmetallic piping. An insulated tracer wire listed
for the purpose or other approved conductor shall be installed adjacent to
underground nonmetallic piping serving as a water service for a group I-2,
condition 2 facility. Access shall be provided to the tracer wire or the tracer
wire shall terminate above ground at each end of the nonmetallic piping. The
tracer wire size shall be not less than 18 AWG and the wire insulation type
shall be suitable for direct burial.
CHAPTER 7 - SANITARY DRAINAGE
IPC SECTION 701
GENERAL
   *IPC Section 701.8, 701.9 and 701.10; added to read as follows:
   701.8 Abandoned building sewers and private disposal systems. All abandoned
building sewers and private sewer disposal systems shall be plugged or capped
in an approved manner. All abandoned treatment tanks and seepage pits shall
have the contents pumped and discarded in an approved manner. The top or entire
tank shall be removed and the remaining portion of the tank or excavation shall
be filled immediately after connection to a public sewer system or after
abandonment of a private sewage disposal system. The permittee shall be
responsible for the filling of the tank.
   701.9 Manufactured Home Parks. The following provisions shall apply to
manufactured home parks shall:
   1.   Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sewage disposal
system that complies with all federal, state, and local laws. Septic tanks for
the disposal of sewage shall not be permitted.
   2.   Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with a sewer riser pipe
conforming to each of the following requirements:
      a.   The pipe shall have a minimum diameter of four (4) inches.
      b.   The pipe shall be located on each stand so that the sewer connection
to the manufactured home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
      c.   The pipe shall be plugged when no manufactured home occupies the
space.
      d.   Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the pipe.
   701.10 Recreational Vehicle Parks. The following provisions shall apply to
Recreational Vehicle Parks and Recreational Vehicle lots that occur in
Manufactured Home Parks.
   1.   Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a sewage disposal
system that complies with all federal, state, and local laws. Septic tanks for
the disposal of sewage shall not be permitted.
   2.   Individual sewer connections shall conform to the following:
      a.   If individual sewer connections are provided, they shall consist of
at least a four-inch (4") diameter sewer riser pipe. A sewer riser pipe located
at a lot shall be installed so that the sewer connection to the recreational
vehicle drain outlet will be functional and sanitary.
      b.   Sewer riser pipes shall be plugged when a recreational vehicle does
not occupy the lot.
      c.   Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser pipe.
   3.   Each recreational vehicle park shall contain waste disposal stations
for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of wastes from recreational
vehicle holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner. Except as
provided in subsection (4), waste disposal stations shall meet the following:
      a.   Each waste disposal station shall consist of a drainage basin
constructed of impervious material, containing a disposal hatch and self-
closing cover, and related washing facilities. Such units shall be provided on
the basis of one (1) for every one hundred (100) lots or fraction thereof.
      b.   Waste disposal stations shall be located a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from any lot. They shall be blocked from view by a screening device.
      c.   The disposal hatch of each waste disposal station unit shall be
connected to the park sewage disposal system. Facilities for washing holding
tanks and the station area shall be connected to the park water supply system.
   4.   In lieu of or in addition to community waste disposal stations, a
recreational vehicle park may provide waste disposal facilities at each lot.
The design of such facilities shall comply with all applicable city codes.
IPC SECTION 704
DRAINAGE PIPING INSTALLATION
   *IPC Section 704.5; added to read as follows:
   704.5 Single stack fittings. Drainage system utilizing single stack fittings
with internal baffles, PVC schedule 40 or cast-iron single stack shall be
designed by a registered engineer.
IPC SECTION 712
SUMPS AND EJECTORS
   *IPC Section 712.5; added to read as follows:
   712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and,
when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture
units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function
independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. (For storm drainage,
see Section 1113.)
IPC SECTION 713
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
   *IPC Section 713.1; changed to read as follows:
   ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN
   713.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the
drainage system shall be permitted to be designed by approved design methods
that are not in conflict with this code.
CHAPTER 8 - INDIRECT/SPECIAL WASTE
IPC SECTION 802
INDIRECT WASTES
   *IPC Section 802.4.3; change to read as follows:
   802.4.3 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be individually trapped. Standpipes
shall extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) but not greater than 42 inches
(1066 mm) above the trap weir. Access shall be provided to all standpipes and
drains for rodding. Standpipes serving automatic clothes washers shall have
their traps above the floor level. No standpipe shall be installed below the
ground.
IPC SECTION 804
CONDENSATE WASTE
   *Section 805; added to read as follows:
   804.1 Condensate waste. When the condensate waste from air conditioning
coils discharges by direct connection to a lavatory tailpiece or to an approved
accessible inlet on a bathtub overflow, the connection shall be located in the
area controlled by the same person controlling the air conditioned space.
CHAPTER 9 - VENTS
IPC SECTION 903
VENT TERMINALS
   *IPC Section 903.1.1; changed to read as follows:
   903.1 Roof extension unprotected. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof
shall be terminated not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof.
   *IPC Section 903.1.2; changed to read as follows:
   903.1.2 Roof used for any purposes. Where a roof is to be used for any
purpose other than weather protection or equipment and appliance maintenance,
open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
IPC SECTION 909
FIXTURE VENTS
   *IPC Section 909.1; delete the exception.
IPC SECTION 915
COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEM
   *IPC Section 915.1 changed to read as follows:
   915.1 Type of fixture. A combination waste and vent system shall not serve
fixtures other than floor drains, standpipes, indirect waste receptors, sinks,
lavatories and drinking fountains. Combination waste and vent systems shall not
receive the discharge from a clinical sink.
CHAPTER 10 - TRAPS, INTERCEPTORS AND SEPARATORS
IPC SECTION 1003
INTERCEPTORS AND SEPARATORS
   *IPC Section 1003.1; changed to read as follows:
   1003.1 Where required. Interceptors and separators shall be provided, as
required by applicable local provisions, to prevent the discharge of oil,
grease, sand and other substances harmful or hazardous to the public sewer, the
private sewage disposal system or the sewage treatment plant or processes. In
the absence of local provisions, interceptors and separators shall be provided
as required in this chapter.
   *IPC Section 1003.3.2; changed to read as follows:
   1003.3.2 Food waste disposers. Where food waste disposers connect to grease
interceptors, a solids interceptor shall separate the discharge as an integral
design of the grease interceptor when required by applicable local provisions,
or before connecting to the grease interceptor. Solids interceptors and grease
interceptors shall be sized and rated for the discharge of the food waste
disposers. Emulsifiers, chemicals, enzymes and bacteria shall not discharge
into the food waste grinder.
   *IPC Section 1003.3.5.1; changed to read as follows:
   1003.3.5.1 Grease interceptor capacity. Grease interceptors shall have the
grease retention capacity as required by applicable local provisions. In the
absence of local provisions, the capacity shall be as indicated in Table
1003.3.5.1 for the flow-through rates indicated.
   *IPC Section 1003.4; change the exception to read as follows:
   Exception: For oil separators in elevator pits, see Section 317.
CHAPTER 11 - STORM DRAINAGE
IPC SECTION 1101
GENERAL
   *IPC Section 1101.8; changed to read as follows:
   1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts shall be installed in the storm
drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary
drainage pipe cleanouts.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Subsurface drainage system.
   2.   Cleanouts and manholes as required by Sections 708.3.2 and 708.3.3 are
not required when the building storm drainage system is protected from
potential water backup from the yard lines by one of the following methods:
      a.   The building storm drainage systems connects to the yard storm
drainage piping through an air gap; or,
      b.   There is some form of relief such as a parking lot inlet or curb
inlet in which blocked storm water can discharge before backing up in the
building storm drainage system.
IPC SECTION 1106
SIZE OF CONDUCTORS, LEADERS AND STORM DRAINS
   *IPC Section 1106.1; changed to read as follows:
   1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building
storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains
or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate.
CHAPTER 12 - SPECIAL PIPING AND STORAGE SYSTEMS
IPC SECTION 1201
GENERAL
   *IPC Section 1202.1; delete exception #2.
   (c)   The remaining sections of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code are
hereby amended as follows:
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
IFGC SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS
   *IFGC Section 202; definitions are changed and new definitions are added to
read as follows:
   BUILDING CODE. Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction.
   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. A change in the purpose or level of activity within a
building that involves a change in application of the requirements of this
code. The definition shall also apply to the usage of the surrounding site and
access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the
purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances
of this jurisdiction.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to
NFPA 70 shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein.
   ENERGY CODE. Energy Code shall mean the International Conservation Energy
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FIRE PREVENTION CODE (FIRE CODE). Fire Prevention Code, or Fire Code, shall
mean the International Fire Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   FORT WORTH BUILDING ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The Fort Worth Administrative code
containing the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and
regulations for the Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes.
   FUEL GAS CODE. Fuel Gas code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted by this jurisdiction and shall be considered as part of the Plumbing
Code. (See Plumbing Code.)
   MECHANICAL CODE. Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   PLUMBING.
   For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, as adopted, shall
mean:
      The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, plumbing
appliances and plumbing appurtenances, within or adjacent to any structure, in
connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; venting
systems, and public or private water supply systems.
   For the purpose of complying with the Texas State Plumbing License Law,
shall mean:
      All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances, including disposal
systems, drain or waste pipes, or any combination of these that:
      supply, recirculate, drain, or eliminate water, gas, medical gasses and
vacuum, liquids, and sewage for all personal or domestic purposes in and about
buildings where persons live, work, or assemble; connect the building on its
outside with the source of water, gas, or other liquid supply, or combinations
of these, on the premises, or the water main on public property; and carry
waste water or sewage from or within a building to the sewer service lateral on
public property or the disposal or septic terminal that holds private or
domestic sewage.
      The installation, repair, service, maintenance, alteration, or renovation
of all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances on premises where
persons live, work, or assemble that supply gas, medical gasses and vacuum,
water, liquids, or any combination of these, or dispose of waste water or
sewage.
   PLUMBING CODE. Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code and
the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. The term
"Plumbing Code" applies to both codes as one combined code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM.
   For the purpose of using the International Plumbing Code, as adopted, shall
mean:
      Includes the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and
traps; water-treating or water-using equipment; soil, waste and vent pipes; and
sanitary and storm sewers and building drains, in addition to their respective
connections, devices and appurtenances within a structure or premise.
   RESIDENTIAL CODE. Residential Code shall mean the International Residential
Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
   TECHNICAL CODES. The Fort Worth Building, Residential, Plumbing, Fuel Gas,
Mechanical, Electrical, Sign and Existing Building codes which regulate the
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REGULATIONS
IFGC SECTION 301
GENERAL
   *IFGC Section 301.16 and 301.17; added to read as follows:
   301.16 Manufactured Home Parks. Gas services at manufactured home parks
shall be in accordance with the following:
   1.   At each lot provided with piped gas the outlet shall be equipped with
an approved cutoff when not in use so as to prevent accidental discharge of
gas.
   2.   Liquefied petroleum gas systems may be installed only if an available
natural gas system is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the manufactured
home park.
   301.17 Recreational Vehicle Parks. Each recreational vehicle park lot
provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve installed
upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved
cutoff to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
IFGC SECTION 303
APPLIANCE LOCATION
   *IFGC Section 303.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Access to equipment and appliances shall be provided through areas under the
control of the tenant, room or dwelling unit served, or provided in common
areas accessible without going through private tenant spaces, rooms or dwelling
units. The location shall not be such that permission from one occupant must be
obtained before another occupant can provide service to their equipment or
appliances.
   *IFGC Section 303.3; #6 changed to read as follows:
   303.3 Prohibited locations. Appliances shall not be located in sleeping
rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage closets or surgical rooms, or in a
space that opens only into such rooms or spaces, except where the installation
complies with one of the following:
   1.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   2.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   3.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   4.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   5.   {'{'}unchanged{'}'}
   6.   A clothes dryer is installed in a residential bathroom or toilet room
having a permanent opening with an area of not less than 100 square inches
(0.06 m2) that communicates with a space other than a sleeping room, bathroom,
toilet room or storage closet.
IFGC SECTION 305
INSTALLATION
   *IFGC Section 305.5; delete.
IFGC SECTION 306
ACCESS AND SERVICE SPACE
   *IFGC Section 306.3; changed to read as follows:
   306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided
... {'{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged{'}'} ... side of the appliance. The clear
access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm
by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow
removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, access to the attic space of
residential uses shall be provided by one of the following:
   1.   A permanent stair.
   2.   A pull down stair with minimum weight capacity of 300 lbs.
   3.   An access door from an upper floor level.
   4.   An access panel, only when the equipment is within 24" of the panel
opening and only with prior approval of the code official.
   Exceptions:
      1.   The passageway and level service space are not required where the
appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required
opening.
      2.   Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829
mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway
shall be not greater than 50 feet (15 250 mm) in length.
   Solid flooring as specified for the passageway of this section shall be
flooring that complies with the provisions as required for a floor or shall not
be less than one layer of 3/4" plywood.
   Water heaters shall not be installed in residential attics.
   Exception: Tankless water heaters.
   *IFGC Section 306.3.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
   *IFGC Section 306.4; amend exception #2 to read as follows:
   2.   Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm)
high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway shall be
not limited in length.
   *IFGC Section 306.4.1; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
   *IFGC Section 306.5; changed to read as follows:
   306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where
equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure
or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16
feet (4877 mm) above grade to access such equipment or appliance, an interior
or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders
providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (3658 mm) to the
finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment or
appliances' level service space. Such access shall ... {'{'}bulk of section to
read the same{'}'}... Where access involves climbing over parapet walls, the
height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall.
   Where an equipment or appliance has a serviceable area located at a height
exceeding 16 feet (4877 mm) above the access level, a permanent approved means
of access and a catwalk or working deck shall be provided on at least one side.
Such permanent exterior ladder need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to
the access level below.
   {'{'}Remainder of section unchanged{'}'}
   *IFGC Section 306.5.1.1; added to read as follows:
   306.5.1.1 Catwalk. On roofs having slopes greater than 4 in 12, a catwalk at
least 24 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches
apart shall be provided from the roof access to the working platform at the
appliance.
   *IFGC Section 306.5.2; add a sentence to read as follows:
   Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to
prevent physical damage.
IFGC SECTION 307
CONDENSATE DISPOSAL
   *IFGC Section 307.3; change to read and add a second paragraph to read as
follows:
   307.3 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal
system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper and copper alloy, CPVC, cross-linked
polyethylene, galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene, PVC or PVDF
pipe or tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature and
exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 of the International
Plumbing Code relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line
size shall be not less than the discharge size of the pan but not less than 3/
4-inch (19 mm) pipe size and shall not ... {'{'}bulk of paragraph unchanged
{'}'} ... in accordance with Table 314.2.2 of the International Plumbing Code.
All horizontal sections of drain piping shall be installed in uniform alignment
at a uniform slope.
CHAPTER 4 - GAS PIPING INSTALLATIONS
IFGC SECTION 401
GENERAL
   *IFGC Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
   Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel
tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag.
The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
   "WARNING
   1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
   Do Not Remove"
IFGC SECTION 404
PIPING SYSTEM INSTALLATION
   *IFGC Section 404.7.1; changed to read as follows:
   404.7.1 Piping through bored holes or notches. Where the piping is installed
through holes or notches in framing members and the piping is located less than
1-1/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall, roof, ceiling
or floor membranes will be attached, ... {'{'}Remainder of section unchanged
{'}'}.
   *IFGC Section 404.7.2; changed to read as follows:
   404.7.2 Piping installed in other locations. Where the piping is located
within a framing member and is less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing
members face to which wall, roof, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached,
... {'{'}Remainder of section unchanged{'}'}.
   *IFGC Section 404.9; changed to read as follows:
   404.9 Above-ground outdoor piping. Aboveground piping installed outdoors
shall be elevated ... {'{'}bulk of section unchanged{'}'} ... sleeve shall be
sealed.
   *IFGC Section 404.12; changed to read as follows:
   404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems, other than LP Gas
systems regulated by the Texas Railroad Commission, shall be installed a
minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) below grade.
   *IFGC Section 404.12.1; delete.
IFGC SECTION 406
INSPECTION, TESTING, AND PURGING
   *IFGC Section 406.1.3; delete.
   *IFGC Section 406.4, 406.4.1 and 406.4.2; changed to read as follows:
   406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a
diaphragm gauge designed and calibrated to read, record or indicate a pressure
loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure
shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Gauges shall be
calibrated per manufacturer's recommendation or at a minimum of one (1) time
per year, to insure accuracy.
   406.4.1 Test pressure. {'{'}no change{'}'}.
   406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time
satisfactory to the code official, but not less than 15 minutes.
   *IFGC Section 406.4.3; added to read as follows:
   406.4.3 Mixed gas piping systems. Welded and non-welded gas piping systems
shall not be mixed without the installation of cut-off devices so that each
system can be isolated and tested separately as required in this section.
   Existing mixed piping systems lawfully in existence at the time of the
adoption of this code may remain. Any retesting of such a mixed system shall be
at the lower testing pressure required for the piping involved. Such a system
shall be so labeled with the operating pressure in a manner as required by the
Code Official.
IFGC SECTION 410
FLOW CONTROLS
   *IFGC Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as
follows:
   Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to
appliances as specified in Section 306.
   Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the
regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic
opening.
CHAPTER 6 - SPECIFIC APPLIANCES
IFGC SECTION 614
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
   *IFGC Section 614.9.1; changed to read as follows:
   [M] 614.9.1 Material and Size. Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth interior
finish and shall be construed of metal a minimum of 0.016-inch (0.4 mm) in
thickness. The exhaust duct size shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in
diameter. The size of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length nor
at the point of termination.
   *IFGC Section 614.9.2; add a sentence to read as follows:
   [M] 614.9.2 Duct Installation. Exhaust ducts shall be support at 4-foot
(1219 mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall
extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Ducts
shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude into the
inside of the duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling
cavities, such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without
deformation.
IFGC SECTION 621
UNVENTED ROOM HEATERS
   *IFGC Section 621.2; changed to read as follows:
   621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as
the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit.
   Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in
dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when
installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is
determined to exist as described in the Fort Worth Building Administrative
Code.
IFGC SECTION 624
WATER HEATERS
   *IFGC Section 624.1.1; changed to read as follows:
   1.1.1.1 Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters
relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection
shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Water heaters,
other than tankless water heaters, shall not be installed in residential
attics.
(Ord. 9164, §§ 2—5, passed 8-7-1984; Ord. 9918, § 2, passed 8-28-1987; Ord.
9963, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-22-1987; Ord. 10158, § 1, passed 8-30-1988; Ord. 10548,
§§ 1, 2, passed 3-20-1990; Ord. 10696, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-16-1990; Ord. 10878,
§§ 1, 2, passed 7-16-1991; Ord. 11280, § 2, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 11616, § 1,
passed 7-12-1994; Ord. 11638, § 1, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 13521, § 2, passed 7-
14-1998; Ord. 13723, § 1, passed 3-2-1999; Ord. 13746, § 1, passed 3-23-1999;
Ord. 13813, § 1, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 14042, § 1, passed 1-4-2000; Ord.
14487, § 1, passed 1-16-2001; Ord. 14648, § 2, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15533, §
5, passed 4-29-2003; Ord. 15785, § 1, passed 12-9-2003; Ord. 15951, § 2, passed
4-13-2004; Ord. 16164, § 1, passed 10-12-2004; Ord. 16205, § 1, passed 11-16-
2004; Ord. 17203, § 1, passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007;
Ord. 18338-10-2008, §§ 2—4, passed 10-21-2008; Ord. 19119-04-2010, § 1, passed
4-20-2010; Ord. 19604-03-2011, § 2, passed 3-23-2011; Ord. 20403-09-2012, § 2,
passed 9-18-2012; Ord. 20427-09-2012, § 4, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012;
Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 4, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 21189-04-2014,
§ 4, passed 4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord. 22372-08-2016, § 4, passed 8-30-
2016; Ord. 22521-12-2016, § 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 22523-12-
2016, § 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-2017, § 4, passed
8-15-2017; Ord. 25385-03-2022, § 2, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 26-3 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the Code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (2015), affecting plumbing code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 9164, § 7, passed 8-7-1984; Ord. 9918, § 3, passed 8-28-1987; Ord. 11280,
§ 3, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 13521, § 3, passed 7-14-1998; Ord. 14648, § 3,
passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15951, § 3, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 19604-03-2011, § 3,
passed 3-23-2011; Ord. 22521-12-2016, § 3, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 1-1-2017;
Ord. 25385-03-2022, § 3, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
§ 26-4 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation and shall be fined not more than
$500 for all other violations of this ordinance. Each day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this ordinance occurs or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as
herein provided.
(Ord. 14648, § 4, passed 6-5-2001; Ord. 15951, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord.
19604-03-2011, § 4, passed 3-23-2011; Ord. 22521-12-2016, § 4, passed 12-6-
2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-
2019; Ord. 25385-03-2022, § 4, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 4-1-2022)
CHAPTER 27: POLICE
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   DEPARTMENT
      
III.   ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Charter reference:
   Council to provide by ordinance for establishment and regulation of
department of police, see
Ch. XI, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Administration generally, see
Ch. 2
   General penalty for code violations, see §
1-6
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, see
Ch. 23
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for police department, see Tex. Local Government Code
Ch. 341
Section
Article I: In General
   
27-1   Authority to provide law enforcement services to other municipalities
   
27-2   Police identification number keeper register
   
27-3   Police reserve force
   
27-4—27-20   Reserved
Article II: Department
   
27-21—27-23   Reserved
   
27-24   Police appointees
   
27-25   Police officer selection procedure; oath
   
27-26   Appointment of special officers
   
27-27   Powers and duties generally; city jail
   
27-28   Assignment pay; bilingual personnel
   
27-29   Community development officers
   
27-30   Reserved
   
27-31   Assignment pay; traffic investigation unit
   
27-32   Assignment pay—Rangemaster of police department weapons range
   
27-33   Assignment pay—Field training officers
   
27-34   Shift differential pay
   
27-35   Reserved
   
27-36—27-40   Reserved
Article III: Abandoned or Unclaimed Property
   
27-41   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
27-42   List of saleable property; delivery of property to purchasing agent
   
27-43   Notice of sale; assignment of property to city departments
   
27-44   Place, hour of auction; non-cash sales
   
27-45   Conduct of auction; statement of articles sold, price bid and paid;
delivery of proceeds to treasurer
   
27-46   Disposition of funds
   
27-47   City officers, employees not to submit bids or purchase property
   
27-48   Penalty for violation
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 27-1 AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE LAW ENFORCEMENT SERVICES TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   Except where the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the words
MUNICIPALITY and LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER are defined as follows, for the
purposes of this section.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any police officer, sheriff or deputy sheriff,
constable or deputy constable, marshal or deputy marshal.
      MUNICIPALITY. Any city or town, including home rule city or city
operating under the general law or special charter.
   (b)   The chief of police or his or her duly authorized assistant chief is
hereby authorized to detail regularly employed law enforcement officers of the
city police department to assist any other county or municipality when, in the
opinion of the mayor or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil
emergency in such other county or municipality, there exists in such other
county or municipality, there exists in such other county or municipality a
need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the
health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants
and visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the
use of force and violence or threat thereof by three or more persons acting
together or without lawful authority, or during a time of natural disaster or
human-made calamity, and a request for additional law enforcement officers is
made to the city’s chief of police by the mayor or officer authorized to
declare a state of emergency in such other county or municipality.
   (c)   While any law enforcement officer regularly employed as such in the
city is in the service of another county or municipality pursuant to this
section, he or she shall be a peace officer of such other county or
municipality and be under the command of the law enforcement officer therein
who is in charge in that county or municipality, with all of the powers of a
regular law enforcement officer in such other county or municipality, as fully
as though he or she were within the city where regularly employed, and his or
her qualifications for office in the city shall constitute his or her
qualifications for office in such other county or municipality and no other
oath, bond or compensation need be made.
   (d)   Any law enforcement officer who is ordered by the chief of police to
perform police and peace duties outside the territorial limits of the city
shall be entitled to receive the same wage, salary, pension, all other
compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death
benefits, the same as though the services had been rendered within the limits
of the city where he or she is regularly employed, and he or she shall also be
paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food or lodging which he or she may
incur while on duty outside such limits.
   (e)   Unless otherwise expressly agreed to by the city pursuant to a law
enforcement interlocal assistance agreement duly executed by the city and other
counties or municipalities, all wages and disability payments, pension
payments, payments for damage to equipment and clothing, medical expenses and
expenses of travel, food and lodging shall be paid by the city and shall be
reimbursed by the county or municipality whose authorized official requested
the services.
(1964 Code, § 29A-12) (Ord. 6597, §§ 1—5, passed 12-13-1971; Ord. 8433, § 1,
passed 9-19-1981; Ord. 9029, § 1, passed 2-7-1984; Ord. 20678-03-2013, § 1,
passed 3-26-2013)
Statutory reference:
   Interlocal assistance, see V.A.C.S. Art. 999b
§ 27-2 POLICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER KEEPER REGISTER.
   (a)   There is hereby created a police identification number keeper register
which shall be maintained by the police department of the city for the purpose
of registering and recording identification numbers which have been assigned by
the police department to private individuals or businesses in the city for use
in identifying their articles of personal property for protection against loss,
theft or burglary and as a means of identification and recovery of such items
if lost or stolen. Participation in the police identification number keeper
program shall be on a voluntary basis and at the option of the citizen.
   (b)   As used in this section, the term POLICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER shall
mean a number or a combination of digits and letters which has been assigned by
the police department of the city to a particular person or business for the
purpose of identifying articles of personal property, which number shall have
been recorded and registered in the police identification number keeper
register, and which has been permanently inscribed, etched, affixed or attached
to an item of personal property by the owner for the purpose of identifying
same.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change, deface, erase or
mutilate, for the purpose and intent of changing the identity, any police
identification number which has been permanently inscribed, etched, affixed or
attached to any article of personal property by the owner for the purpose of
identification. It shall also be unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession any article of personal property, knowing that the police
identification number placed on same by the owner for the purpose and intent of
identification has been altered, changed, defaced, erased or mutilated, for the
purpose and intent of changing the identity of such article of personal
property.
   (d)   Any person or any agent or employee thereof who violates any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
1-6 of this code.
(1964 Code, § 29A-13) (Ord. 6639, §§ 1—4, passed 3-6-1972; Ord. 8433, § 1,
passed 9-19-1981)
§ 27-3 POLICE RESERVE FORCE.
   (a)   The city council hereby provides for the establishment, training,
equipping and maintenance of a volunteer police reserve force (the “reserve
force”).
   (b)   The qualifications and standards of training required of the members
of the reserve force shall be consistent with those qualifications and
standards of training promulgated by the Texas commission on law enforcement
officer standards and training for reserve peace officers.
   (c)   The chief of police shall appoint the members of the reserve force.
Members shall serve at the chief’s discretion and without compensation.
   (d)   The chief of police may call any or all members of the reserve force
into service at any time the chief considers it necessary to have additional
officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law.
   (e)   Members of the reserve force shall serve as peace officers during the
actual discharge of their official duties.
   (f)   An appointment to the reserve force must be approved by the city
council before the person appointed may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a
peace officer. After the appointment is approved, the person appointed may
carry a weapon only when authorized to do so by the chief of police and only
when discharging official duties as a peace officer.
   (g)   Reserve police officers may act only in a supplementary capacity to
the regular police force and may not assume the full-time duties of regular
police officers without complying with the requirements for regular police
officers.
(1964 Code, § 29A-14) (Ord. 7452, § 1, passed 12-20-1976; Ord. 8433, § 1,
passed 9-19-1981; Ord. 13898, § 1, passed 8-17-1999)
§§ 27-4—27-20 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DEPARTMENT
Cross-reference:
   City departments, see §§
2-96 et seq.
§ 27-21—27-23 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 27-21
through 27-23, which pertained to Established; Duties Generally, Office of the
Chief, and Executive Assistant Chief. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 27-24 POLICE APPOINTEES.
   (a)   Classification immediately below that of department head (assistant
chiefs).
      (1)   The police chief shall have the authority to select and appoint
persons to the classification immediately below that of police chief, to be
referred to as the classification of assistant chief.
      (2)   Each person appointed under this subsection (a) shall serve at the
pleasure of the police chief and without civil service protection. Eligibility
for appointment and the rights of appointees hereunder shall be in accordance
with Tex. Local Government Code § 143.014.
   (b)   Deputy chiefs.
      (1)   The police chief shall have the authority to select and appoint
persons to the classification immediately below that of assistant chief, to be
referred to as the classification of deputy chief.
      (2)   Each person appointed under subsection (b)(1) above shall serve at
the pleasure of the police chief and without civil service protection.
Eligibility for appointment and the rights of appointees hereunder shall be in
accordance with the then-current meet and confer agreement between the City of
Fort Worth and the police officers association, as allowed by Tex. Local
Government Code § 143.307.
   (c)   Commanders.
      (1)   The police chief shall have the authority to select and appoint
persons to the classification immediately below that of deputy chief, to be
referred to as the classification of commander.
      (2)   Each person appointed under Section
27-24(c)(1) above shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief and without
civil service protection. Eligibility for appointment and the rights of
appointees hereunder shall be in accordance with the then-current meet and
confer agreement between the City of Fort Worth and the Police Officers
Association, as allowed by Texas Local Government Code § 143.307.
   (d)   Number of appointed positions. The city council can authorize, and the
police chief can appoint, up to a total of 16 appointed positions, including up
to ten appointed positions as between the ranks of assistant chief and deputy
chief and up to six appointed positions in the rank of commander.
(Ord. 20678-03-2013, § 4, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 22998-11-2017, § 1, passed 11-
14-2017)
§ 27-25 POLICE OFFICER SELECTION PROCEDURE; OATH.
   The members of the police department, other than the chief of police, shall
be selected from a list of eligibles prepared by the civil service commission,
and in accordance with such rules and regulations as the civil service
commission may prescribe; provided, that in case of riot or emergency the city
manager or the chief of police may appoint additional patrol officers and
officers for temporary service, who need not be in the classified service. Each
member of the department of police, both rank and file, shall have issued to
him or her a warrant of appointment, signed by the city manager and the police
chief, in which the date of his or her appointment shall be stated, and such
shall be his commission. Each member of the department of police shall, before
entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to an oath that he or she will
faithfully, without fear or favor, perform the duties of his or her office, and
such oath shall be filed and preserved with the records of the department.
(1964 Code, § 29A-3) (Ord. 8433, § 2, passed 9-19-1981; Ord. 21710-04-2015, §
1, passed 4-7-2015)
§ 27-26 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL OFFICERS.
   No person, except as otherwise provided by general law or ordinance, shall
act as special police or special detective, except upon written authority from
the city manager. Such authority, when conferred, shall be exercised only under
the direction and control of the chief of police and for the time specified in
the appointment.
(1964 Code, § 29A-3.1) (Ord. 8433, § 2, passed 9-19-1981)
§ 27-27 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY; CITY JAIL.
   (a)   The officers constituting the department of police of the city shall
be and they are hereby invested with all the power and authority given to them
as peace officers under the laws of the state in taking cognizance of, and in
enforcing the criminal laws of the state and the ordinances and regulations of
the city within the limits of the city, and it shall be the duty of each such
officer to use his or her best endeavors to prevent the commission within the
city of offenses against the laws of the state, and against the ordinances and
regulations of the city; to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and
regulations; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to preserve the
good order of the city, and to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence,
and the property therein from injury. Such police officers shall have no power
or authority in civil matters, but shall execute any criminal warrant or
warrant of arrest that may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted
authorities of the city. Such police officer shall receive only such
compensation as is determined by the city council in accordance with all state
and local enactments controlling the same. However, this provision shall not
prevent a member of the police department from accepting an award from a
nonprofit police award foundation.
   (b)   Subject to the direction of the city manager, the chief of police
shall have control and management of the city jail so long as the city operates
a jail.
(1964 Code, § 29A-3.2) (Ord. 8433, § 2, passed 9-19-1981)
§ 27-28 ASSIGNMENT PAY; BILINGUAL PERSONNEL.
   (a)   The chief of police may designate certain police officers in the
police department as bilingual personnel who, in addition to their regular
duties, will perform certain specialized functions. Bilingual personnel so
assigned will comply with the following for the department:
      (1)   BILINGUAL PERSONNEL means a police officer who, in the performance
of the officer's duties, is capable of effectively translating a language used
by the residents of Fort Worth into English and English into the same language,
orally and/or in writing.
      (2)   To be eligible for bilingual skills pay, the officer must take and
pass a language proficiency test administered by the human resources
department. If a language proficiency test is not available through human
resources, employees must provide an appropriate certification from an
accredited agency or institution to be eligible for bilingual skills pay.
      (3)   Upon request, employees receiving bilingual pay are expected to
assist other departments with translation. Refusal to assist may result in the
loss of bilingual pay. Bilingual pay can be discontinued at any time at the
discretion of the chief of police or designee as long as the employee no longer
uses bilingual skills in the performance of their essential job functions.
   (b)   A Bilingual personnel who has been designated by the chief of police
will be compensated the sum of $100 per month for the use of verbal skills and
an additional $25 per month for the use of writing skills for a total of $125
per month as assignment pay, in addition to that individual's regular pay.
(Ord. 9865, § 1, passed 4-27-1987; Ord. 21708-03-2015, § 1, passed 3-24-2015)
§ 27-29 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS.
   (a)   The police chief may designate officers from the classification of
police officer, who, in addition to their regular duties, will be assigned the
duties of community relations officers, and who will perform the following
functions with the department:
      (1)   Conduct or participate in citizen meetings for the purpose of
providing information, answering questions and explaining department procedures
or actions;
      (2)   Provide for citizens’ expertise and guidance in crime prevention
techniques;
      (3)   Represent the police department at public functions; and
      (4)   Perform other specialized duties as assigned by the police chief.
   (b)   Police officers who perform the above specialized functions shall each
receive pay in addition to their regular pay the sum of $120 per month as
assignment pay.
(Ord. 9972, § 1, passed 9-29-1987)
Editor’s note:
Ord. 9972, § 1, adopted Sept. 29, 1987, added provisions designated as §
27-28. Said provisions have been redesignated as §
27-29 in order to avoid duplication of section numbers, at the editor’s
discretion.
§ 27-30 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Ord. 19712-06-2011, § 1, adopted June 7, 2011, effective June 25, 2011,
repealed §
27-30, which pertained to assignment pay for captains of field operations
divisions. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 27-31 ASSIGNMENT PAY; TRAFFIC INVESTIGATION UNIT.
   (a)   The police chief may designate individuals in the department for
assignment to the specialized duties of the traffic investigation unit. Police
officers so assigned will perform the following additional and specialized
functions within the unit:
      (1)   Plan, direct, supervise and manage the daily operations of the
traffic investigation unit;
      (2)   Acquire and demonstrate a significant amount of specialized
expertise in automobile accident reconstruction, investigation of fatality
accidents, DWI’s involving fatalities, hit and run accidents, auto-pedestrian
accidents, reckless driving offenses, failure to stop and render aid accidents
and driving with license suspended accidents;
      (3)   Investigation of motor vehicle accidents involving city vehicles or
city property;
      (4)   Assist the district attorney’s office in the investigation,
preparation and prosecution of motor vehicle offenses; and
      (5)   Perform other specialized duties as assigned by the police chief.
   (b)   Police officers who perform the above specialized functions in the
traffic investigation unit shall receive in addition to their regular base
salary an additional sum of $120 per month. BASE SALARY shall be the amount as
shown in the city’s salary schedule for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. 11342, § 1, passed 6-22-1993)
§ 27-32 ASSIGNMENT PAY—RANGEMASTER OF POLICE DEPARTMENT WEAPONS RANGE.
   (a)   The police chief may designate individuals in the police department
for assignment to the specialized duties as the rangemaster of the police
weapons range. A police officer so assigned will perform the following
additional and specialized functions:
      (1)   Plan, direct, supervise and participate in the daily operations of
the weapons range and the department’s overall program of firearms training and
qualification;
      (2)   Acquire and demonstrate a significant amount of specialized
technical expertise relating to firearms, the training of new personnel in the
use of firearms, as well as the subsequent in-service qualification of police
officers; and
      (3)   Perform other specialized duties relating to the operation of the
weapons range as assigned by the police chief.
   (b)   A police officer who performs the above specialized functions as the
rangemaster shall receive in addition to their regular base salary an
additional sum of $120 per month. BASE SALARY shall be the amount as shown in
the city’s salary schedule for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. 12458, § 1, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 27-33 ASSIGNMENT PAY—FIELD TRAINING OFFICERS.
   (a)   The police chief or his or her designee may expressly designate
individuals from the classification of officer who have attained at least D-
step (third year) for assignment to the duties of a field training officer of
the department. Officers so assigned will perform the following functions with
the department:
      (1)   Provide on a one-to-one basis on-the-job training to probationary
police officers;
      (2)   Monitor, evaluate and document the performance of probationary
officers; and
      (3)   Correct and counsel performance deficiencies during the training of
probationary officers and report their progress to the appropriate superior
officer.
   (b)   Officers who are assigned the duties of a field training officer shall
receive, for each day they are so assigned and perform those functions, in
addition to their regular pay an additional sum equal to 10% of the assigned
officer’s base pay and applicable step pay as shown in the city’s salary
schedule for the current fiscal year (“assignment pay”). Assignment pay shall
not accrue or be payable to an individual once that person is no longer
assigned to perform the specialized duties of field training officer.
(Ord. 16191, § 1, passed 11-2-2004)
§ 27-34 SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL PAY.
   (a)   All full-time police civil service employees up through the rank of
lieutenant are eligible for shift differential pay.
   (b)   Only eligible police employees working approved, assigned shifts will
be paid shift differential pay.
   (c)   Only eligible police employees who work a defined shift in which more
than 50% of its time worked is between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) shall receive shift differential pay of 3% of their hourly step rate
of pay in addition to their hourly step rate of pay.
   (d)   Only eligible police employees who work a defined shift in which more
than 50% of its time worked is between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
shall receive shift differential pay of 5% of their hourly step rate of pay in
addition to their hourly step rate of pay.
   (e)   Police employees who work a shift in which more than 50% of its time
worked is between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. are not eligible for
shift differential pay.
   (f)   Employees working pursuant to an emergency call back order will not
receive shift differential pay.
   (g)   Shift differential pay will be paid only for time worked. Shift
differential pay will not be paid to an employee for holiday pay or any type of
leave pay.
(Ord. 19504-01-2011, § 1, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 27-35 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20724-05-2013, § 1, adopted May 7, 2013, repealed §
27-35 (adopted by Ord. 19713-06-2011, § 1, passed June 7, 2011), which
pertained to assignment pay for overnight duty captains. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 27-36—27-40 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16784, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2006, amended the title of Art. III to
read as herein set out.
§ 27-41 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   All abandoned or unclaimed property of every kind which shall remain
unclaimed with the police department for a period of four months without being
claimed or reclaimed by the owners, whether known or not, may be sold at public
auction or appropriated to the city’s use, as provided in this article.
(1964 Code, § 29A-4) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977; Ord. 16784, § 2, passed
1-24-2006)
§ 27-42 LIST OF SALEABLE PROPERTY; DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO PURCHASING AGENT.
   The chief of police shall give to the purchasing agent of the city a list of
all property subject to sale under this article and shall thereafter deliver
such property to the purchasing agent before the date of sale and take a
receipt from such purchasing agent showing in detail all property so delivered.
(1964 Code, § 29A-5) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977)
§ 27-43 NOTICE OF SALE; ASSIGNMENT OF PROPERTY TO CITY DEPARTMENTS.
   Notice of sale shall be given pursuant to the requirements of Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure Article 18.17. Thereafter, property shall be offered for
sale at public auction to the highest bidder. Such property may be sold as
individual items or assembled in lots at the discretion of the purchasing
agent. Provided, however, that the head of any department of the city may
request, in writing, that any items offered or to be offered for sale be
assigned to his or her department. The purchasing agent may, at his or her
discretion, assign such item or items to such department or sell such item or
items at public auction.
(1964 Code, § 29A-6) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977; Ord. 16784, § 3, passed
1-24-2006)
§ 27-44 PLACE, HOUR OF AUCTION; NON-CASH SALES.
   The public auction provided for in the preceding section shall be conducted
at the place and hour designated in the notice. Non-cash sales will be allowed
only to buyers with a bank letter or a third-party guarantee.
(1964 Code, § 29A-7) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977; Ord. 16784, § 4, passed
1-24-2006)
§ 27-45 CONDUCT OF AUCTION; STATEMENT OF ARTICLES SOLD, PRICE BID AND PAID;
DELIVERY OF PROCEEDS TO TREASURER.
   The purchasing agent shall conduct the public auction and he or she shall
keep an accurate statement of each article sold and the price bid and paid
therefor, and shall make a complete report in writing to the city treasurer of
the time, place and manner of conducting such sale. All funds received on
account of such auction shall be delivered to the city treasurer who shall give
his or her receipt therefor.
(1964 Code, § 29A-8) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977)
§ 27-46 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The city treasurer shall place all funds received by him or her under and by
virtue of this article to the credit of the general fund, to be thereafter
disbursed as the city council shall order.
(1964 Code, § 29A-9) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977)
§ 27-47 CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES NOT TO SUBMIT BIDS OR PURCHASE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city, either
directly or indirectly, to submit bids or to purchase at any sale any property
sold pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(1964 Code, § 29A-10) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977)
§ 27-48 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to the penalties otherwise provided, any
officer or employee of the city violating any provision of this article shall
forfeit his or her office or employment.
(1964 Code, § 29A-11) (Ord. 7671, § 1, passed 12-8-1977)
CHAPTER 28: PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   OFFICE OF UTILITIES SUPERVISION
Charter reference:
   Authority generally relative to public utilities, see
Ch. II, § 1
   Franchises and public utilities, see
Ch. XXVI
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
   Cable television regulations, see
Ch. 8
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Emergency reporting equipment and procedures, see
Ch. 12
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Powers of cities relating to utilities, see Tex. Local Government Code Chs.
551 through 580
Section
Article I: In General
   
28-1   Definition
   
28-2   Recordkeeping
   
28-3   Franchise required for use of streets for service outside city
   
28-4   Annual reports required
   
28-5—28-15   Reserved
Article II: Office of Utilities Supervision
   
28-16   Creation; appointment of supervisor
   
28-17   General duties of supervisor
   
28-18   Examination of books, records, etc., of utilities
   
28-19   Records kept by supervisor
   
28-20   Investigation of utilities’ policies
   
28-21   Right of entry
   
28-22   Annual reports of utilities
   
28-23   Examination and testing of measuring devices; adjustments of complaints
   
28-24   Record of city’s utility expenses
   
28-25   Rate analyses
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 28-1 DEFINITION.
   The term PUBLIC UTILITY, when used in this chapter, shall include persons,
firms, corporations or their lessees, trustees or receivers, owning or
operating within the city equipment or facilities for the following services:
   (a)   Transmitting, delivering, furnishing, transporting or conveying water,
gas, electricity or electric energy for the production of light, heat or power
to or for the public for compensation, or for the purposes of supplying or
selling gas or electric energy to any other public utility;
   (b)   Conveying or transmitting messages by telephone where such service is
offered to the public for compensation; and
   (c)   Accommodating and transporting passengers for hire.
(1964 Code, § 30-1)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 28-2 RECORDKEEPING.
   Each public utility, its agents, servants or employees, serving the
consumers in the city shall keep a separate record of the physical properties,
accounts, income and disbursements for that portion of its business serving
consumers within the corporate limits of the city, and shall not include
therein any accounts, records or property that may be used to serve consumers
in any city, town or village that may be hereafter incorporated under the laws
of the state.
(1964 Code, § 30-2)
§ 28-3 FRANCHISE REQUIRED FOR USE OF STREETS FOR SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY.
   No public utility, its agents, servants or employees, serving the consumers
within the corporate limits of the city shall build, install or use any of its
property, equipment or lines in the streets or thoroughfares of the city for
the purpose of conveying, transporting or transmitting any utility service to
any person in any city, town or village that may be hereafter incorporated
under the laws of the state; nor shall any such utility use, install or
construct any property, equipment or lines in the streets or thoroughfares of
the city for the purpose of conveying, furnishing, transporting or transmitting
any utility service, or any service produced by such utility, to any person
residing or located in any city, town or village that may be hereafter
incorporated under the laws of the state, without first securing a right,
privilege or franchise in writing from the city.
(1964 Code, § 30-3)
§ 28-4 ANNUAL REPORTS REQUIRED.
   All public service corporations operating within the corporate limits of the
city are hereby required to file a sworn annual report of the receipts from the
operation of such business for the current year, how expended, how much
therefor for betterments or improvements, the rate of tolls or charges for
services rendered to the public, and any other facts or information that the
council may deem pertinent for its use in intelligently passing upon any
questions that may arise between the city and such public service corporations;
reports to be filed with the city secretary, and preserved for the use of the
city council.
Charter reference:
   Council to pass ordinance requiring public service corporations to file
annual reports, see
Ch. XXVI, § 6
§ 28-5—28-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: OFFICE OF UTILITIES SUPERVISION
Cross-reference:
   City boards and commissions, see §§
2-56 et seq.
   City departments, see §§
2-96 et seq.
   Human resources, §§
2-176 et seq.
§ 28-16 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF SUPERVISOR.
   There is hereby created an office of utilities supervision. This office
shall be headed by the utilities supervisor who shall be appointed by the city
manager.
(1964 Code, § 30-4) (Ord. 5700, § 1, passed - -)
§ 28-17 GENERAL DUTIES OF SUPERVISOR.
   The utilities supervisor shall act as agent and adviser in all matters
relevant to the operation of public utilities operating within or through the
corporate limits of the city, under the direction of the city manager. The
utilities supervisor shall employ such assistants, technical or otherwise, as
may be authorized by the city council upon the recommendation of the city
manager.
(1964 Code, § 30-5) (Ord. 5700, § 2, passed - -)
§ 28-18 EXAMINATION OF BOOKS, RECORDS, ETC., OF UTILITIES.
   The utilities supervisor shall at all reasonable times be given access to
and have authority to inspect, examine and verify all accounts, vouchers,
documents, books, ledgers, property, records, investment accounts, corporate
structure and financial structure of all public utilities operating within or
through the corporate limits of the city.
(1964 Code, § 30-6) (Ord. 5700, § 3, passed - -)
§ 28-19 RECORDS KEPT BY SUPERVISOR.
   The utilities supervisor shall keep a detailed record of plant investment
and property used and useful in providing public utility service to customers
in the city, showing additions, retirements, transfers and adjustments of
utility plant in service. Additional records pertaining to revenues and
expenses associated with such public utilities shall be kept by the utilities
supervisor in sufficient detail to properly reflect each utility company’s
financial condition. Such information shall be available to the city manager
and the city council at all times.
(1964 Code, § 30-7) (Ord. 5700, § 4, passed - -)
§ 28-20 INVESTIGATION OF UTILITIES’ POLICIES.
   It shall be the duty of the utilities supervisor to inquire into and
ascertain the reasonableness of all rules, regulations and standards relating
to service as prescribed by the public utilities operating within or through
the city, and to establish a consistent policy between the consumer and the
public utility with reference to extensions of service and charges for such
extensions. Any such policy as to rules, regulations and standards as may be
found discriminatory shall be reported to the city manager and the public
utility shall be given opportunity for a hearing by the city council prior to
any change in policy.
(1964 Code, § 30-8) (Ord. 5700, § 5, passed - -)
§ 28-21 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The utilities supervisor, his or her aides or employees may, during all
reasonable hours, enter upon the premises occupied by any public utility for
the purpose of making examinations or tests, or exercising any power provided
in this article.
(1964 Code, § 30-9) (Ord. 5700, § 6, passed - -)
§ 28-22 ANNUAL REPORTS OF UTILITIES.
   The utilities supervisor shall prescribe forms for reporting of utility
revenues, expenses and earnings associated therewith as well as other operating
information from utility companies on an annual basis. Such forms shall be
completed by each utility company and submitted to the utilities supervisor who
shall analyze the reports and advise the city manager and the city council as
to trends and developments relating to operations of the utility companies. The
utilities supervisor shall prescribe the manner in which such accounts shall be
kept, and any other special form of report that may be necessary in the course
of investigation that may be authorized by the city manager or city council.
(1964 Code, § 30-10) (Ord. 5700, § 7, passed - -)
§ 28-23 EXAMINATION AND TESTING OF MEASURING DEVICES; ADJUSTMENTS OF
COMPLAINTS.
   It shall be the duty of the utilities supervisor, at the request of any
citizen who is, in fact, a customer of any public utility operating within or
through the city, to examine, and if necessary order the removal of any
measuring or recording devices in use by the public utility. He or she shall
supervise a test as to accuracy of such measuring or recording devices, and if
necessary recommend an equitable adjustment between the complainant and the
utility involved.
(1964 Code, § 30-11) (Ord. 5700, § 8, passed - -)
§ 28-24 RECORD OF CITY’S UTILITY EXPENSES.
   The utilities supervisor shall keep and maintain current, comparative and
detailed data relative to utility expenses of the city government.
(1964 Code, § 30-12) (Ord. 5700, § 9, passed - -)
§ 28-25 RATE ANALYSES.
   It shall be the duty of the utilities supervisor to submit to the city
manager and the city council a detailed analysis of any new or proposed rate or
rate change. He or she shall make such recommendations as to rates or
combinations of rates as will be equitable to the city. The rates to be
regulated by the city council shall apply to natural gas, electrical power and
light, transportation, communication or any other enterprise serving the
general public as a utility.
(1964 Code, § 30-13) (Ord. 5700, § 10, passed - -)
CHAPTER 29: SIGNS
Cross-reference:
   Buildings, see
Ch. 7
   Cable television, see
Ch. 8
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Fire prevention and protection, see
Ch. 13
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
   Posting of handbills and signs in certain places prohibited, see §§
23-14,
23-15
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Traffic-control devices, signs and signals, see §§
22-36 et seq.
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15953, § 1, adopted April 13, 2004, repealed former Ch. 29, in its
entirety, and enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 29 to read as herein
set out in §§
29-1 through
29-3. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion.
Section
   
29-1   Sign code
   
29-2   Effect of conflict with other ordinances
   
29-3   Penalty for violation
§ 29-1 SIGN CODE.
   The 2004 edition of the Fort Worth Sign Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
ARTICLE I: ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER A: SCOPE
SECTION A01: GENERAL
A01.1 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Fort Worth Sign Code,” may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
A01.2 PURPOSE.
   (a)   Practical safeguarding. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of
materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of signs; and by
regulating and licensing those persons who will install or maintain such signs.
This code applies to on-premises and off-premises signs in the City of Fort
Worth and to off-premises signs in the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   (b)   Adequacy. This code contains provisions considered necessary for
safety. Compliance therewith and proper maintenance is expected to result in an
installation essentially in compliance with the minimum standards, but not
necessarily efficient, convenient or adequate for good service or future
expansion of any sign installation.
   (c)   Intent. This code is not intended as a design specification nor an
instruction manual for untrained persons.
   (d)   Purpose. The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise
establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or
should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this code.
A01.3 SCOPE.
   (a)   Application. The provisions of this code shall apply to the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use, location, maintenance and removal of every sign or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such sign. The provisions shall also
apply to the sign structure.
   (b)   Covered. Signs and sign structures, unless exempted under subsection
(c) below, shall comply with the provisions of this code, except that all signs
and sign structures must comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   
A04.5 (Unsafe signs declared nuisances; abatement);
      (2)   
3.02 (Temporary signs: generally);
      (3)   
3.03 (Cloth signs);
      (4)   
4.01 (Encroachments in public right-of-way: requirements);
      (5)   
4.01.4 (Removal of encroachments constituting obstruction);
      (6)   
4.02.1 (Traffic location restrictions);
      (7)   
4.02.2 (Traffic location - prohibited signs); and
      (8)   
4.03 (Prohibited signs).
   (c)   Not covered. Except for compliance with subsection (b) above, the
following signs and sign structures are exempt from the provisions of this
code:
      (1)   Signs on vehicles or trailers, provided, however, signs on vehicles
or trailers that are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying
the sign are prohibited pursuant to §
4.03;
      (2)   Temporary signs, as follows:
         a.   Temporary decorative flags; and
         b.   Temporary signs erected in accordance with temporary banner
policy administered by the transportation and public works department for signs
in the public right-of-way, large banner policy administered by the park and
recreation department for signs on park property, policy governing erection of
banners on Main Street and other temporary banner policies administered by city
departments or their designees.
      (3)   Warning, security and directional signs for parking or vehicle
access;
      (4)   Government signs, flags, insignia, legal notices or informational,
directional or traffic signs;
      (5)   Political signs referring to the candidates or issues involved in a
public election, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Political signs shall be permitted on private property only with
the consent of the property owner and provided the signs:
            1.   Do not exceed eight feet in height;
            2.   Do not have an effective area greater than 36 square feet;
            3.   Do not contain any moving elements; and
            4.   Are not illuminated.
         b.   Political signs, including those with messages on both sides of
the sign, shall be permitted on public property during the time the public
property is used as an election polling location provided the signs:
            1.   Are not located within 100 feet of an outside door through
which a voter may enter the building of a polling location or such other
distance as required by the Texas Election Code;
            2.   Are on individual posts, stakes or holders placed into the
ground or are attached to vehicles lawfully parked at the premises of a polling
location;
            3.   Do not have an effective area greater than four square feet;
            4.   Are not more than two feet in height;
            5.   Are posted only during the period beginning the first day the
polls are open for voting and ending 24 hours after the polls close or the last
voter has voted on election day;
            6.   Are not placed within ten feet of driveways of a polling
location;
            7.   Are not illuminated;
            8.   Do not block or obscure other signs; and
            9.   Are not attached, placed or affixed to any building, tree,
shrub, planting or landscaping areas, parking areas, driveways on medians with
parking areas, pole, fence or other improvement on the public property used as
a polling location.
         c.   Signs located in violation of subsection (c)(5)b. above may be
removed by the entity in control of the public property.
      (6)   Other than electrical signs, signs in windows subject to the
following:
         a.   Signs shall not exceed 10% of the window area; and
         b.   The window area shall be calculated by multiplying the window
width times the height of the window, with a maximum calculated height of 15
feet.
      (7)   Other than electrical signs, all signs not visible from off the
property;
      (8)   Nameplate and street address signs not exceeding one square foot in
area;
      (9)   One non-illuminated real estate sign, temporary in nature,
advertising the sale or lease of real property on which the sign is located or
announcing contemplated improvements of real property on which the sign is
located; provided, however, that said sign shall not exceed eight square feet
in any one- or two-family dwelling district or 60 square feet in area and eight
feet in height in any other district; provided, further, however, on corner
lots and through lots, one such sign shall be allowed for each street on which
the lot has frontage. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after the sale
or occupancy of the property;
      (10)   One non-illuminated estate or garage sale sign, not to exceed two
square feet in area, temporary in nature, advertising the sale of items on
property for which a garage sale permit has been obtained. The sign shall be
removed within 24 hours after the sale ends;
      (11)   One construction sign, not exceeding four square feet in area in
any one- or two-family dwelling district or 40 square feet in area and 12 feet
in height in any other district, denoting the owner, architect, financial
institution, general contractor, subcontractor or any statement pertaining to
the project on the real property on which the sign is located; provided,
however, on corner lots and through lots, one such sign shall be allowed for
each street on which the lot has frontage. The sign shall be removed within 30
days after completion of the project;
      (12)   “No dumping,” “No Trespassing,” and “No Solicitation” signs;
      (13)   Noncommercial residential signs. In addition to the other
noncommercial signs permitted by the zoning code, a maximum of four signs not
exceeding a total of 16 square feet in area may be erected on any lot used for
residential purposes and may contain noncommercial copy. No one sign shall
exceed eight square feet in area.;
      (14)   Signs depicting or relating to a national, local or religious
holiday or season if installed, maintained or displayed for not more than 45
consecutive days;
      (15)   Signs designed and used for display upon or within lighter than
air objects, such as balloons, or in conjunction with aircraft;
      (16)   Signs of not more than two square feet with a ground clearance
(total height) of not more than four feet within 20 feet of a driveway or other
ingress/egress to private property which restricts parking on said property.
Corners of this type of sign shall be mitered or rounded corner signs; and
      (17)   Signs erected by public utility or transportation organization
operating pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city, where such signs are
erected or displayed for the purpose of public instruction, traffic control and
similar uses incidental to the public interest.
A01.4 SEVERABILITY.
   If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this code.
SECTION A02: APPLICABILITY
A02.1 GENERAL.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating
to structures and premises, as set forth in §
A01. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
A02.2 EXISTING INSTALLATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this code, signs and sign structures
lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code may have their
use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in
accordance with the original design, if no hazard to life, health or property
has been created by such sign or sign structure or electrical system and
equipment, and if the electrical system and equipment are maintained in good
repair.
A02.3 MAINTENANCE.
   Signs and sign structures, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be
maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design
and in a safe, hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards that are required
by this code shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under
which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the signs and sign structures. To determine compliance
with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require
that the sign or sign structure be reinspected.
A02.4 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS.
   (a)   Additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to signs and sign
structures shall conform to that required for new installation without
requiring that the existing sign or sign structure to comply with all of the
requirements of this code. Additions, alterations, renovations and repairs
shall not cause existing sign or sign structure to become unsafe, hazardous or
overloaded.
   (b)   Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing
electrical systems and equipment shall be permitted in the same manner and
arrangement as was in the existing system, provided that such repairs or
replacement are not hazardous and are approved.
A02.5 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE.
   For any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper
operation of an existing or proposed electrical system, or for the public
safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, the
electrical code or the building code shall be determined by the building
official.
A02.6 ZONING CODE.
   The provisions of the zoning code shall also apply to signs and sign
structures. When provisions are duplicated in the zoning code and this code,
staff shall determine who is the appropriate interpretation official and board
of appeals using the following guidelines:
   (a)   Provisions based upon location, size, appearance and content would
normally fall under the zoning code;
   (b)   Provisions based upon permits, construction requirements and life
safety issues would normally fall under this code; and
   (c)   If no clear authority exists, the zoning board of adjustment will be
the default forum since it offers a more public notification and input process.
A02.7 ENFORCEMENT BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
   Enforcement of these sections may be performed by other departments or
divisions of the City of Fort Worth. However, as provisions of this code, final
interpretation, appeals of interpretation, requests for variances, etc. shall
be handled as described in this code.
SECTION A03: APPROVAL
A03.1 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to
grant modifications for individual cases, provided the building official shall
first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and that the modification is in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this code and does not lessen health, life and fire-safety
requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded
and entered in the files of the inspection department.
A03.2 ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, METHODS, EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES.
   (a)   The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has
been approved by the building official.
   (b)   The building official may approve any alternate, provided that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this code
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
A03.3 REQUIRED TESTING.
   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of
this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the
requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative
materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require
tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction.
A03.3.1 TEST METHODS.
   Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building
official shall approve the testing procedures.
A03.3.2 TESTING AGENCY.
   All tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
A03.3.3 TEST REPORTS.
   Reports of tests shall be retained by the building official for the period
required for retention of public records.
A03.4 MATERIAL, EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCE REUSE.
   Materials, equipment, appliances and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements have been reconditioned, tested and placed in good and proper working
condition and approved.
SECTION A04: VIOLATIONS
A04.1 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize any sign or sign
structure, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of
the provisions of this code.
A04.1.1 UNSAFE SIGN OR SIGN STRUCTURE.
   Failure to correct an unsafe sign or sign structure as provided for in §§
A04.5,
C06.4.1 or
C06.4.2 shall constitute a violation of this code.
A04.2 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation in accordance with §
1-6(c) and shall be fined not more than $500 for all other violations of this
ordinance. Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this
ordinance occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
A04.3 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   Upon notice from the building official, work on any sign or sign structure
that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner’s agent, or to the
person doing the work or causing such work to be done. Where an emergency
exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice
prior to stopping the work. Such work shall not resume until authorized by the
building official to proceed.
A04.4 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or
to prevent illegal usage, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the sign on or about any premises.
A04.5 UNSAFE SIGN OR SIGN STRUCTURE.
   (a)   (1)   Any sign or sign structure that is structurally unsafe and any
electrical system or equipment regulated by this code that is unsafe or that
constitutes a fire or health hazard, insanitary condition, or is otherwise
dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Any use of a sign or sign
structure or an electrical system or equipment regulated by this code
constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of improper
installation, inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard,
disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Any such
unsafe sign or sign structure or equipment is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be abated by repair (when permitted by this and other city
codes), rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
      (2)   Exception: When allowed by §
6.405 of the zoning ordinance or §
5.02.3 and when done in compliance with other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations, the nuisance may be abated by repair, rehabilitation or removal
and replacement.
   (b)   Should the building official determine that any sign is not properly
maintained, is unsafe or insecure or has otherwise been constructed, erected or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this code, he or she shall give
written notice to the permittee or owner thereof. Such notice and order shall
contain substantially the following:
      (1)   The registration number, if available, location and business name
of the sign, sufficient for identification of such sign;
      (2)   A statement that the building official has found such sign to be in
violation of this code or other laws, together with a general description of
such violation; and
      (3)   The amount of time required to bring the sign into compliance with
this code or any other law, said time not to exceed ten days. The building
official may extend the time of notice when it is shown that such corrections
cannot be accomplished within the original ten-day time period.
   (c)   In addition to the above, the building official may issue citations or
pursue any other administrative or legal remedy in order to abate any sign
which is in violation of this code or any other law.
   (d)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
building official may cause any sign which is dangerous to persons or property
to be removed summarily and without notice.
   (e)   All buildings or structures subjected to damage by deterioration or by
fire shall be inspected by the building official, and all unsafe sign or sign
structure or wiring or electrical equipment shall be repaired or replaced.
   (f)   Any work covered or concealed without inspection shall be considered
to constitute and unsafe sign or sign structure. Such consideration as an
unsafe structure shall exist every day until the work is inspected and approved
as being in compliance with this code. Inspections will not be performed until
a valid active permit is obtained in accordance with this code.
A04.5.1 AUTHORITY TO CONDEMN.
   Whenever the building official determines that any sign or sign structure or
electrical system or equipment, or portion thereof, regulated by this code has
become hazardous to life, health or property or has become insanitary, or is
otherwise dangerous to human life, the building official shall order in writing
that such sign or sign structure or electrical system or equipment either be
removed or restored to a safe or sanitary condition. A time limit for
compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. No person
shall use or maintain defective sign or sign structure or electrical after
receiving such notice.
A04.5.2 AUTHORITY TO ORDER DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.
   The building official shall have the authority to order disconnection of any
energy source or utility service supplied to a building, structure or equipment
regulated by this code when it is determined that the equipment or any portion
thereof has become hazardous or insanitary. Written notice of such order to
disconnect service and the causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to
the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises, provided,
however, that in cases of immediate danger to life or property, such
disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. If not notified
prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or
service systems shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
A04.5.3 CONNECTION AFTER ORDER TO DISCONNECT.
   No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or
water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment
regulated by this code that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected
by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be
discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes
the reconnection and use of such equipment.
   *Chapter B is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
CHAPTER B: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION B01: GENERAL
   The Administrative and Enforcement provision of this Code shall be listed in
the Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
CHAPTER C: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
SECTION C01: PERMITS
C01.1 WHEN REQUIRED.
   (a)   Except as provided for in §
C01.2, no sign shall hereafter be constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
moved, removed or demolished, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first
make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for
the work.
   (b)   A separate permit shall be obtained for each sign or group of signs on
any single supporting structure. No permit shall be issued except to a duly
licensed and registered sign erector as provided in
Chapter D of this code.
   (c)   No permit shall be issued for a nonconforming sign, except as allowed
by §
6.405 of the zoning ordinance or §
5.02.3 as a permitted alteration. When repairs of a nonconforming sign are not
permitted pursuant to §
6.405 or §
5.02.3, the sign shall be subject to the provisions of §
A04.5.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued for the erection of new off-premises signs
in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, which is prohibited under §
5.02.2; provided, however, subdivision directional signs, homebuilder signs and
temporary public interest signs may be erected without a permit, in accordance
with §
5.02.2.
C01.1.1 UNLAWFUL WIRING.
   No permit shall be issued for installing, altering, extending or replacing
any electrical wiring or equipment on any sign, if any unlawful electrical
wiring or equipment exists on the sign, until a permit to correct such
conditions is first obtained and all necessary corrections are made.
C01.2 EXEMPT WORK.
   A sign permit shall not be required for the following:
   (a)   Complete removal of an attached on-premises sign when the removal is
performed by the owner of the premises or the owner s agent (property manager).
(A third party company hired to remove the sign does not constitute “the
owner’s agent”);
   (b)   Changing of non-electrical advertising copy or message on marquee
signs and other signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy;
   (c)   Maintenance work when limited to the painting (including the retracing
of existing advertising copy), repair or replacement of nonstructural trim, and
replacement of nonstructural minor parts;
   (d)   Kiosk signs erected in accordance with §
6.414 of the comprehensive zoning ordinance;
   (e)   Subdivision directional signs, homebuilder signs and temporary public
interest signs erected in the extraterritorial jurisdiction in accordance with
§
5.02.2; and
   (f)   Those otherwise in conformance with the provisions of the
comprehensive zoning ordinance and molded, chiseled, etched or otherwise
indented into walls or structural members of buildings or structures.
SECTION C02: WHOM PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED TO - WHO MAY DO THE WORK
C02.1: WHOM PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED TO.
C02.1.1 NON-ELECTRICAL SIGNS.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued for the erection of a non-electrical sign
except to a duly licensed and registered sign erector as provided in
Chapter D of this code.
   (b)   Exceptions: An owner may install the following non-electrical signs on
his or her own property without meeting the requirements of
Chapter D, provided that:
      (1)   The non-electrical signs are no more than seven feet to the highest
point above grade when mounted in or upon the ground;
      (2)   A non-electrical sign containing no more than a three-quarter-inch
thick display panel may be mounted flat against a building provided any trim or
portion of the sign does not project more than four inches from the building
and provided, further, that the sign shall be no larger than 32 square feet;
      (3)   Banners, when in compliance with both of the following limitations:
         a.   Sixty square feet or less in size; and
         b.   Twenty feet or less above grade, measured to the top of the
banner.
      (4)   Such signs meet the requirements for zoning and structural design.
C02.1.2. ELECTRICAL SIGNS.
   No permit shall be issued to any person or contractor to do or cause to be
done any work on an electrical sign, except to a person or contractor as listed
below:
   (a)   A person holding valid a Fort Worth master sign license and
registered, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter D of the electrical code;
   (b)   A State of Texas electrical sign contractor that has a valid Fort
Worth registration, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter D of the electrical code.
C02.2: WHO MAY DO THE WORK.
C02.2.1. ELECTRICAL SIGNS.
   No person may perform electrical work on signs except as specified in §
C02.2 of the electrical code.
SECTION C03: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
C03.1 APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall
make application on forms provided for that purpose. Every such application
shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
address and by legal description, or similar description, that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed sign or work;
      (3)   Contain the registration number if available;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications
and other data as required in §
C03.2;
      (5)   Be signed by the applicant or an authorized agent of the applicant;
and
      (6)   Give such other data and information as may be required by the
building official.
   (b)   An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from an
authorized representative to inspect the premises.
C03.2 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, soil
investigation reports, special inspection and structural observation programs
and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be submitted
in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The plans shall
indicate all necessary information required, including but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   On a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet;
      (2)   Show the egress and ingress, distance from curb to sign, and all
buildings on the property; and
      (3)   Show size and height of the sign and designate whether the sign is
an electrical.
   (b)   When such plans are not prepared by an architect or engineer, the
building official may require the applicant submitting such plans or other data
to demonstrate that state law does not require that the plans be prepared by a
licensed architect or engineer. The building official may require plans,
computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or
architect licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by
state law.
   (c)   Exception: The building official may waive the submission of plans,
calculations, construction inspection requirements and other data if it is
found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans
is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
   (d)   All plans, specifications and accompanying data involved with the
practice of engineering or architecture shall comply with all state and local
laws governing the practice of engineering or architecture.
C03.3 INFORMATION ON PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or
cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
C03.4 EXPIRATION OF PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   Applications for which no permit is issued within 90 days following
the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data
submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed
by the building official.
   (b)   The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant
for a period not exceeding 90 days on request by the applicant showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from
being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew
action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans
and pay a new application fee.
   (c)   Exception: Applications for temporary signs shall expire within 60
days and may be extended for a period not to exceed 60 days.
SECTION C04: PERMIT ISSUANCE
C04.1 ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data
filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official.
Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify
compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the building
official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the
plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the
fees specified in §
C05 have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the
applicant.
   (b)   When the building official issues the permit where plans are required,
the building official shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and
specifications approved. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be
changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official,
and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the
approved plans.
   (c)   The building official may issue a permit for the construction of a
portion of a sign before the entire plans and specifications for the complete
sign or sign structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of a partial permit shall
proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire sign or sign structure
will be granted.
C04.2 WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS.
   (a)   The building official is authorized to withhold permits to any person
for the reasons set forth herein upon written notice to such person. The
determination of the building official may be appealed to the board as provided
in §
B03.
   (b)   The building official is authorized to withhold the issuance of sign
permits to:
      (1)   Any person until such time as the sign for which a permit was
previously issued has been completed or is being performed in an efficient
manner in a reasonable length of time;
      (2)   Any person who is delinquent in the payment of fees owed the City
of Fort Worth; and
      (3)   Any person who has performed previous jobs which remain in
violation of this code.
C04.3 VALIDITY.
   (a)   The issuance of a permit or approval of construction documents shall
not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of
the provisions of this code or of other ordinance of the jurisdiction. No
permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this
code shall be valid.
   (b)   The issuance of a permit based upon construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said construction documents and other data or from
preventing sign operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of
this code or of other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
C04.4 EXPIRATION.
   (a)   Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of
this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within 90 days from the date of such
permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 120 days. Before such work
can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee therefor
shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided
no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction
documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit
after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
   (b)   If work does not commence within 90 days of the date of such renewal
permit, or if work is suspended for a period of 90 days, the renewal permit
shall become null and void and a new permit must be obtained.
C04.4.1 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Every permit issued for a temporary sign or banner shall expire 30 days from
the date of issuance and such sign shall be removed immediately by the
permittee. All permits for temporary signs shall also be limited to the time
constraints as specified in §
3.02.
C04.5 EXTENSIONS.
   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit, for other than temporary signs,
shall have the right to apply for an extension of the time within which the
permittee will commence work under that permit when work is unable to be
commenced within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory
reasons. The building official shall extend the time for action by the
permittee for a period not exceeding 90 days if there is reasonable cause. No
permit shall be extended more than once.
C04.6 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance
or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
C04.7 ADMINISTRATIVE HOLD.
   Any administrative discrepancy including but not limited to, delinquency in
payments, returned checks, failure to pay for reinspection, investigation or
registration fees, and failure to keep registration, insurance or bond up-to-
date, may result in a hold being placed on issuance of permits and performance
of inspections of existing permits until the administrative discrepancy is
corrected. For the purpose of this section, the term “up-to-date” shall mean
that whenever any of these items is required by this or any other code to
obtain a permit covered by this code, it shall be maintained current and in
effect until the permit is finaled.
C04.8 RETENTION OF PLANS.
   One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained
by the building official for a period of not less than 90 days from date of
completion of the work covered therein. One set of approved construction
documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the
site of the sign or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby
is in progress.
C04.9 JOB ABANDONMENT.
   If, after a permit is issued under the provisions hereof, the applicant
abandons the job, becomes incapacitated or his or her services are terminated
prior to final inspection and approval thereof by the building official and
before the permit has expired, the applicant or his or her lawful/legal
representative shall immediately notify the office of the building official in
writing. Upon such notification, the building official shall immediately have
an inspection made of the work completed to that time, and may revoke the
outstanding permit and require that a new permit with the payment of fees be
obtained before the work is allowed to resume.
SECTION C05: FEES
C05.1 GENERAL.
   Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section or
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction.
C05.2 PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in Table 1-K in the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   Any person obtaining a permit application required by this code shall,
at the time of filing, pay a permit and a non-refundable application fee as
required by this section for the installation, relocation or replacement of any
of the listed items.
   (c)   Exceptions:
      (1)   Sign and sign structures owned and occupied by a federal, state, or
county entity on property owned by the federal, state or county entity shall be
exempt from the permit fees. This exception does not apply to public school
districts or county community colleges;
      (2)   Work by non-city personnel on property under the control of the
City of Fort Worth shall be exempt from the permit fees only if the work is for
action under a contract approved by city council with notes in the contract
packages stating the fee is waived; and
      (3)   When permitted by this code, work by city personnel on property
under the control of the City of Fort Worth shall be exempt from the permit
fees only if the application is accompanied by a copy of the work order for the
project.
   (d)   Exemption or reduction of the permit fees under this section shall not
waive the requirements to pay a full investigation fee for doing work without a
permit as required under §
C05.3.
C05.3 INVESTIGATION FEES: WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.
C05.3.1 INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be
made before a permit may be issued for such work.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be
proved to the satisfaction of the building official that such work was urgently
necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefore before the
commencement of the work. In all cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it
is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such
permit, an investigation fee as herein provided shall be charged.
      (2)   The investigation fee required shall be charged for work for which
an inspection has been requested and no permit has been obtained.
C05.3.2 FEE.
   (a)   An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by
this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the application
fee set forth in Table 1-K of the Administrative Code. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
   (b)   The applicant may appeal the amount of an investigation fee to the
city council by filing a written appeal showing the reason why the fee should
be lowered. The city council may, upon a finding that the investigation fee is
unreasonable based upon the facts presented, reduce the investigation fee, but
in no case may the fee be reduced to less than the actual investigation costs
incurred by the city.
C05.4 CHANGE OF RECORD.
   (a)   Any request for a record change, or any mistake made by an applicant
that requires a record change, including but not limited to name or address
changes, whether computer or paper record, must be requested in writing by the
original applicant with a fee as specified in Table 5.01.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For record changes that affect the permit fee, such as adding
equipment, fixtures, height or square footage, the code official may require a
separate permit for the extra items with the appropriate fees.
      (2)   The fee will not be required for those applicants meeting
exceptions in §
C05.2.
C05.5 FEE REFUNDS.
   (a)   The director of planning and development or his or her designee may
authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or
collected. Where work for which a permit has been issued does not commence, and
a request is made for a cancellation of such permit within a 60-day time limit,
the permit fee may be returned, upon request, minus an administration charge of
$5. After the 60-day time limit, no fee shall be returned.
   (b)   Exceptions:
      (1)   When the investigation fee of §
C05.3 has been collected, it shall not be refunded unless paid by another
party.
      (2)   No refund will be given for the application fee.
SECTION C06: INSPECTIONS
C06.1 GENERAL.
   All work for which a permit is required by this code, except for banners,
shall be inspected by the building official. No portion of any sign, sign
structure or electrical system shall be concealed until inspected and approved.
Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of material required to permit
inspection. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of
such inspections. Electrical systems regulated by this code shall not be
connected to energy supply until authorized by the building official.
C06.1.1.
   Under ground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in
place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and
other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action,
clean backfill shall be on the job site.
C06.1.2.
   Rough-in inspection shall be made after the components to be concealed are
complete, and prior to the installation of cover materials.
C06.1.3.
   Final inspection shall be made after the sign is complete, all electrical
systems are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for
use.
C06.1.4.
   (a)   A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify
that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans.
   (b)   Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an
approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances
of this jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or
cancel provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall
not be valid.
C06.2 OTHER INSPECTIONS.
   In addition to the called inspections specified above, the building official
may make or require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with
the provisions of this code and other laws which are enforced.
C06.3 TESTING.
   Electrical systems shall be tested when required by the building official.
Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official.
C06.3.1.
   New, altered, extended or repaired systems. New electrical systems and parts
of existing systems, which have been altered, extended or repaired, shall be
tested when required by the building official.
C06.3.2 EQUIPMENT, MATERIAL AND LABOR FOR TESTS.
   All equipment, material and labor required for testing an electrical system
or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder.
C06.3.3 REINSPECTION AND TESTING.
   Where any work or installation does not pass any initial test or inspection,
the necessary corrections shall be made to comply with this code. The work or
installation shall then be resubmitted to the building official for inspection
and testing.
C06.4 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a
permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection.
The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at
least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in
writing or by telephone, at the option of the building official.
   (b)   The person doing the work authorized by the permit shall make sure
that the work will stand tests prescribed elsewhere in this code, before giving
the above notification.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required by
this code to provide access to and means for proper inspection of such work.
When the work is within a residence where access is dependent upon the occupant
being home, it shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make
arrangements for inspections. Failure to make arrangements within a timely
manner or the inability for the inspector to do the inspections at the arranged
times will result in reinspection fees being assessed to the person doing the
work.
   (d)   Exception: If the reinspection fee was for a “Final Inspection” for a
residence where access is dependent upon the occupant, after the fee has been
paid by the person doing the work additional arrangements for the final
inspection and penalties for not receiving such inspection shall fall on the
occupant.
   (e)   This shall not relieve the person doing the work from having to
correct improper work and such accompanying penalties should the work fail
reinspection.
C06.4.1 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The
building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and
shall either indicate that portion of the construction is satisfactory as
completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder
wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not
comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed
until authorized by the building official. There shall be a final inspection
and approval of all signs and sign structures when completed and ready for use.
C06.4.2 COVERED WORK.
   Any work covered or concealed without inspection shall be considered to
constitute an unsafe structure and subject to the corrective provisions of §
A04.5. Such consideration as an unsafe structure shall exist every day until
the work is inspected and approved as being in compliance with this code.
Inspections will not be performed until a valid active permit is obtained in
accordance with this code.
C06.5 INSPECTION CARD.
   No requirements.
C06.6 REINSPECTIONS.
   (a)   A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or
when corrections called for are not made.
   (b)   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees
the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
   (c)   Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the
approval of the building official.
   (d)   To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose and pay the
reinspection fee in accordance with
Table C05.2 or as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the jurisdiction.
   (e)   In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional
inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been
paid.
SECTION C07: CONNECTION APPROVAL
C07.1 ENERGY CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make connections from a source of energy or fuel to any
electrical system or equipment regulated by this code and for which a permit is
required until approved by the building official.
C07.2 TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS.
   The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary
connection of the system to the utility source for the purpose of testing
electrical systems.
   *Chapter D is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
CHAPTER D: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
SECTION D01: GENERAL
   The Licensing and Registration provision of this Code shall be listed in the
Fort Worth Building Administrative Code.
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS
2.01 SCOPE.
   (a)   For the purpose of this code, certain words and terms shall be
construed as defined in this section and as defined elsewhere in this code;
however, any such words and terms not so specifically defined shall be
construed in light of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, the building code or
as a trade term.
   (b)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms
shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings indicated in this code.
2.02 INTERCHANGEABILITY.
   Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural
and the plural, the singular.
2.03 TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES.
   Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in other city
adopted codes and ordinances, such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them
as in those codes.
2.04 TERMS NOT DEFINED.
   Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section,
such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
   ADVERTISED MESSAGE AREA. That portion of a sign used or intended to be used
to display commercial copy, convey information or to attract attention to the
subject matter of such sign.
   APPROVED PLASTICS. Any thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced
thermosetting plastic material that conforms to combustibility classifications
specified in the section applicable to the application and plastic type. See
building code § 402.14.4 and
Chapter 26.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized
representative. For the purpose of this code, the CODE OFFICIAL shall be the
BUILDING OFFICIAL, and his or her regularly authorized deputy shall be the
chief electrical inspector.
   COMMERCIAL COPY. A message or logo displayed on a sign which relates solely
to the economic interests of the advertiser and its audience; a message
pertaining to price and product advertising, goods and services.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure which is attached to and supported by
a building and which projects over public property.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign projecting over public property displayed as a part of
a marquee.
   NON-ADVERTISED MESSAGE AREA. That portion of a sign not used or intended to
be used to display commercial copy, convey information or to attract attention
to the subject matter of such sign.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Materials tested in accordance with ASTM E 136; or
materials having a structural base of noncombustible material in accordance
with ASTM E 136 with a surfacing not more than 0.125 inch thick that has a
flame spread index not greater than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E
84.
   NONSTRUCTURAL TRIM. The moldings, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing
or base and walkways that are attached to a sign.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PREMISES.
      (1)   A single tract or platted lot. In addition, multiple adjacent
tracts or platted lots under common ownership will be deemed to be a single
premises if they meet the following requirements:
         a.   Lots or tracts are not separated by intervening streets, alleys,
utility or railroad rights-of-way or other interruption;
         b.   Property contains a single primary use; and
         c.   Property is not used for one- or two-family residential purposes.
      (2)   Tracts or platted lots that are at cross corners or that are
connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency access
easements shall not be considered to be adjacent.
   SIGN. Any surface, fabric, device, display or visual medium, including the
component parts, which bears letters, pictorial forms or sculptured matter,
including logos, used or intended to be used to convey information or to
attract attention to the subject matter of such sign. Graphics painted upon the
side of a building which carry no advertising shall not be construed to be a
SIGN, except where such graphics pictorially display products or business that
convey an advertising intent. The term SIGN includes the sign structure.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign employing visible moving parts or the changing of
colors.
   SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign which is affixed to, or supported by or painted on a
building.
   SIGN, BANNER. A temporary banner is a sign which is constructed of pliable
materials such as canvas, fabric, vinyl plastic or similar materials which will
withstand exposure to wind and rain without significant deterioration.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign that is characterized by changeable copy,
letters, symbols or numerals that are not permanently affixed to the structure,
framing or background allowing the letters, characters or graphics to be
modified from time to time manually or by electronic or mechanical devices,
such as but not limited to, a bulletin board or electronic message board.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS may not be used to display commercial messages relating
to products or services that are not offered on the premises.
   SIGN, DETACHED. A sign which is supported by structures, supports or
foundations in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building.
   SIGN, ELECTRICAL. Any sign containing electrical wiring in or upon such sign
or its sign structure, but not including any sign illuminated by an exterior
light source not attached to such sign or sign structure.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing
light source.
   SIGN, FREEWAY. A sign which is oriented to be viewed primarily from an
adjacent non-signalized freeway.
   SIGN, ILLEGAL. Any sign erected, constructed, enlarged or altered which does
not conform to the provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, the sign
code or other applicable ordinances in effect at the time of erection,
construction, enlargement or alteration.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign illuminated an any manner by an artificial light
source.
   SIGN, KIOSK. Freestanding sign structure located in or adjacent to public
right-of-way that features a City of Fort Worth identification panel at the top
of each structure and displays directional information to new homes and
municipal facilities and parks.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. Any sign in which a majority of the structure’s width is in
contact with the ground.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign that was lawfully installed in compliance with
all city ordinances applicable at the time of installation, but that does not
comply with the current provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, the
sign code of the City of Fort Worth, or other applicable ordinances.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign which advertises businesses, commodities,
activities, services or persons which are not usually available or present upon
the premises upon which such sign is located, or which directs persons to any
location not on the premises. Any sign with more than 10% of the sign devoted
to such use shall be deemed to be an OFF-PREMISES SIGN.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which advertises the business name, owner and/or
commodities, activities or services offered on the premises where such sign is
located and where at least 90% of the sign is devoted to the advertisement of
such business name, owner, commodities, activities or services.
   SIGN, POLE. A detached sign which is supported by one or more poles in or
upon the ground.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended by
design, use or construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support
and which may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. PORTABLE SIGNS shall
include but not be limited to signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon
a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure with
or without wheels.
   SIGN, PYLON. A freestanding sign, which has at least 50% of the sign
structure width in contact with the ground and in which the sign face is
separated from ground level by means of one or more supports such as poles,
pole covers or columns.
   SIGN, REVOLVING. A sign which revolves on, around, or about a structural
support. A structural support includes, but not limited to, a pole, building or
other type of support. Revolving parts within the sign shall not be construed
as a REVOLVING SIGN.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on the roof of a
building.
   SIGN, RUNNING LIGHT OR TWINKLE. A sign with low wattage outline lighting
that runs or twinkles.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports or is intended to support any
sign.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of
time only, including by way of example but not of limitation, any sign, banner,
pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light
fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames
or wheels.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any commercial copy sign located on the internal and or
external surface of a window or a glass door, or is located less than ten feet
from the window or a glass door of any establishment for the purpose of being
visible to and read from the outside of the building.
ARTICLE III: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION 3.01: GENERAL
3.01.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   As specified in this section, signs shall be designed and
constructed to resist wind forces. All bracing systems shall be designed and
constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundation. The dead and lateral
loads of building signs shall be transmitted through the structural frame of
the building to the ground so as to not over-stress any of the elements
thereof.
      (2)   The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no
case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to
overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or
to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over
footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth
shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted.
   (b)   Wind loads. Signs shall be designed and constructed to resist wind
forces as specified in
Chapter 16 of the Building Code. (basic wind speed Vfm = 75 mph, three-second
gust wind speed V3S = 90 mph).
   (c) Height. Signs over 25 feet in height above grade shall be designed by an
engineer licensed by the State of Texas. Plans of such designs shall have
affixed thereto the seal of such engineer.
   (d)   Allowable stresses.
      (1)   The design of concrete, steel or wood members shall conform,
respectively, to the requirements of Chapters 19, 22 and 23 of the building
code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not
produce stresses exceeding those specified in the building code.
      (2)   The working stresses of wire ropes and fastenings shall not exceed
25% of the ultimate strength of such ropes or fastenings.
      (3)   Working stresses for windloads combined with dead loads may be
increased as specified in the building code.
3.01.2 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   (a)   General. The supports of all signs shall be placed in or upon private
property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance
with the requirements of this code.
   (b)   Materials. Materials of construction for signs shall be of the quality
and grade specified for buildings by the building code. In the absence of
specified requirements, the materials and details of construction of all signs
shall conform to the following:
      (1)   a.   Structural steel shall be of that quality specified by AISC-
LRFD, AISC 335 or AISC-HSS. Secondary members in contact with or directly
supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided
such members are galvanized and are designed in accordance with the
specifications of the design of light gauge steel in accordance with Standard
for Cold-Formed Steel Framing - General Provisions, American Iron and Steel
Institute (AISI - General) and AISI-NASPEC. Secondary members, when formed
integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than No. 24 gauge in
thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum
thickness of the secondary members shall be No. 12 gauge.
         b.   The minimum thickness of hot-rolled steel members furnishing
structural support for signs shall be one-fourth inch except that, if
galvanized, such members shall be not less than three-sixteenths-inch thick.
         c.   Steel members may be connected with one galvanized bolt provided
the connection is adequate to transfer the stresses to the members.
      (2)   Anchors and supports, when wood and embedded in the soil or within
six inches of the soil, shall be completely heartwood of a durable species or
shall be pressure-treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be
marked or branded by an approved agency.
   (c)   Restrictions on combustible materials.
      (1)   All signs erected in the “H” central business district shall have
structural members of noncombustible materials. In other than “H” central
business district, detached signs may be constructed of any material meeting
the requirements of this code.
      (2)   Combination signs, attached signs, projecting signs and marquee
signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, except as provided in
subsection (d) of this section. No combustible materials other than approved
plastics shall be used in the construction of signs containing electrical
wiring.
   (d)   Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surfaces
may be wood, metal, plastics or any combination thereof, or other approved
materials.
   (e)   Anchorage.
      (1)   Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the
bearing loads imposed on the soil, either horizontally or vertically, shall not
exceed the safe values. Braced detached signs shall be anchored to resist the
specified wind load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be
designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance-to-
pull-out amounting to a force 25% greater than the required resistance- to-
overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground
greater than that of the frost line.
      (2)   Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and
securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved
expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads
applied.
      (3)   No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection
with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case
of signs attached to wood framing.
      (4)   No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or
supported by, any unbraced parapet wall, unless such wall is designed for such
load as required by the building code.
   (f)   Display surfaces.
      (1)   Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal, glass,
plastics or other approved materials. Glass display surfaces shall conform to
the following specifications:
 
Size, Thickness and Type of Glass Panels in Signs
Any Dimension (in Area (in square Minimum Thickness of Type of Glass
inches)           inches)         Glass (in inches)
30                500             1/8                  Plain, plate or wired
45                700             3/16                 Plain, plate or wired
144               3,600           1/4                  Plain, plate or wired
Over 144          Over 3,600      1/4                  Wired glass
 
      (2)   Sections of approved plastic on wall signs shall not exceed 150
square feet in area. Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall be
separated three feet laterally and six feet vertically by required exterior
wall construction.
      (3)   Upon the approval of the building official, sections of approved
plastics on signs other than wall signs may be of unlimited area. Sections may
not be required to be separated by required exterior wall construction if
approved by the building official.
   (g)   Approved plastics. The building official may require that technical
data be submitted to substantiate the safety and feasibility of the proposed
use of any plastic sign material as a condition of approval of such proposed
use. Such data shall include information concerning the strength of such
material.
3.01.3 MINIMUM CLEARANCES.
   (a)   Clearance from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located so as
to provide the minimum clearances in the following table. The term OVERHEAD
CONDUCTORS as used in this section means any electrical conductor, either bare
or insulated, installed above the ground, except such conductors as are
enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering of equal strength.
 
Clearance From Overhead Electrical Conductors
Voltage of Supply Conductors Minimum Clearances (feet) Horizontal, Vertical or
                             Radial
300 to 8,700                 8
8,700 to 15,000              8
15,000 to 50,000             10
50,000 to 138,000            20
138,000 to 345,000           30
 
   (b)   Clearance from fire escapes, exits or standpipes. No sign shall be
erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will
interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe.
   (c)   Obstruction of openings. No sign shall obstruct any opening to such an
extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by
law or ordinance. No such sign shall be within 24 inches of such opening. Signs
erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within
the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material or
approved plastics.
SECTION 3.02: TEMPORARY SIGNS
3.02 GENERAL.
   All temporary signs not previously exempted under §
A01.3(c), including portable signs, portable signs on trailers and banners,
shall require a permit and be subject to the following.
   (a)   Signs shall be a maximum size of 60 square feet. Portable signs and
portable signs on trailers shall not exceed seven feet in height.
   (b)   Only one such sign shall be allowed per business, not to exceed two
signs per platted lot. On lots with more than 300 feet of street frontage, one
sign shall be allowed per business, not to exceed three signs.
   (c)   No temporary signs shall be located within 100 feet of another
temporary sign.
   (d)   Temporary portable signs, portable signs on trailers and banners shall
be allowed to be displayed for 30 consecutive days, starting from the date of
permit issuance, provided only one sign or banner shall be permitted during the
30-day period. After the expiration date of the permit, the sign or banner
shall be immediately removed. There must be at least 30 days between the
display of each sign or banner.
   (e)   Temporary signs may remain in place only so long as they remain in a
good state of repair, not to exceed the time limits specified above.
SECTION 3.03: CLOTH SIGNS
3.03 CLOTH SIGNS.
   (a)   Every temporary cloth sign shall be supported and attached with wire
rope of three-eighth-inch minimum diameter. No strings, fiber ropes or wood
slats shall be permitted for support or anchorage of such sign. Cloth signs and
panels shall be perforated on at least 10% of their area in order to reduce
wind resistance.
   (b)   Exception: Temporary cloth signs not exceeding 60 square feet erected
on or over private property shall be supported and attached with wire rope so
as to be in compliance with the requirements of
Article III of this code.
SECTION 3.04: ELECTRICAL
3.04.1 GENERAL.
   All electrical installation relating to signs, outline lighting or other
equipment under the authority of this code shall be installed, replaced,
removed, altered, repaired or maintained in accordance with the provisions of
the electrical code.
3.04.2 SPECIFIC.
   Article 600.10 of the electrical code, as it is related to this code, is
amended as noted herein:
   *Article 600.10 of the Electrical Code, as it is related to this code, is
amended as noted herein:
   600.10. Portable or Mobile Signs.
   Interior - Shall be those signs that are small in nature, usually hung from
hooks in the wall or ceiling with an electrical cord for plug in or direct
connection to an electrical source. These signs shall not be permitted to be
installed in an outside location.
   Exterior - Shall be those signs that are set on the exterior, usually but
not always in the parking lot, limited in size as described in the zoning and
sign code, some of which may have wheels installed to permit the towing behind
a vehicle.
   600.11. Interior.
   (a)   Support. Portable or mobile signs shall be adequately supported and
readily movable without the use of tools.
   (b)   Attachment plug. An attachment plug shall be provided for each
portable or mobile sign.
   (c)   Wet or damp location. Portable or mobile signs in wet or damp
locations shall comply with §§ 600.10(c)(1) and (c)(2).
      (1)   Cords. All cords shall be junior hard service or hard service types
as designated in Table 400.4, and have an equipment grounding conductor.
      (2)   Ground-fault circuit interrupter. Portable or mobile signs shall be
provided with factory-installed ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for
personnel. The ground-fault circuit interrupter shall be an integral part of
the attachment plug or shall be located in the power-supply cord within 12
inches (300 mm) of the attachment plug.
   (d)   Dry location. Portable or mobile signs in dry locations shall meet the
following.
      (1)   Cords shall be SP-2, SPE-2, SPT-2, or heavier, as designated in
Table 400.4.
      (2)   The cord shall not exceed 15 feet (4.5 m) in length.
   600.12. Exterior.
   (a)   Exterior portable or mobile signs shall not be illuminated by any
electrical source. Those signs equipped with an electrical cord shall have it
removed.
   (b)   Signs shall be adequately secured to prevent overturning by wind.
SECTION 3.05: MARKERS
3.05 MARKERS IDENTIFYING SIGN OWNERS AND REGISTRATION NUMBERS.
   (a)   On-premises signs. There shall be placed and maintained in plain view
on each detached on-premises sign not specifically exempt herein a three-inch
by five-inch marker that identifies the person, firm or corporation owning or
controlling the sign. The marker shall be placed on the detached sign not to
exceed 11 feet above ground level.
   (b)   Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs shall display a placard on
the lower portion of the message or edging board that identifies the person,
firm or corporation owning or controlling the sign. Those signs required to be
registered in accordance with §
5.01 shall also display the sign registration number in the same location. The
placard shall be placed in a location with letters and numbers that are visible
from the street and are at least five inches high.
SECTION 3.06: MAINTENANCE
3.06 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   (a)   Each sign, together with its support braces, guys, anchors and footing
shall be kept in repair and maintained in good condition. The display surface
of each sign shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
   (b)   For alterations and maintenance of off-premise signs, see §§
5.02.3 and
6.405 of the zoning ordinance.
ARTICLE IV: ENCROACHMENTS, TRAFFIC HAZARDS AND PROHIBITED SIGNS
SECTION 4.01: ENCROACHMENTS
4.01.1 REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall post, fasten, erect, display or locate any sign on any
structure, tree, pole, curb or elsewhere within the right-of-way of any public
street or upon any public property without the permission of the city council,
with the exception of directional and warning signs installed in the public
right-of-way by a government agency. Except as provided in subsection (d)
below, no sign shall encroach into a public right-of-way until an encroachment
agreement has been executed with the city and a policy of public liability
insurance for such encroachment has been secured as provided in the building
code.
   (b)   No sign with a clearance of less than 11 feet (measured from the
bottom of the sign) shall encroach over street right-of-way. A sign with a
clearance of 11 feet or more may project a maximum of two feet over the street
right-of-way if approved by the building official as provided in the building
code.
   (c)   No sign with a clearance of less than 16 feet shall project into a
public alley. A sign with a clearance of 16 feet or more may project a maximum
of six inches into a public alley if approved by the building official as
provided in the building code.
   (d)   The city council may authorize the city traffic engineer under
specified guidelines to permit temporary public interest signs which encroach
into the public right-of-way. Temporary cloth signs which extend over a public
street shall have a minimum clearance of 20 feet.
   (e)   Hospitals and hospital districts proposing to erect signs prohibited
by subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be permitted to erect same,
provided that such signs are for the purpose of public instruction, traffic
control and similar uses incidental to the public interest and are not business
signs, and provided further that the city council has approved the location of
such signs and that the hospital or hospital district has executed an
encroachment agreement with the city and has secured a policy of public
liability insurance for such encroachment as provided in the building code.
4.01.2 EXISTING SIGN ENCROACHMENTS.
   The owner of any existing sign which encroaches into the public right-of-way
shall apply for and execute an encroachment agreement with the city and furnish
public liability insurance coverage within six months from the effective date
of this code. The owner of any such encroaching sign who fails to comply with
this section shall be deemed to be in violation of this code and shall be
subject to the penalties contained herein. In addition, any such sign that is
not subject to a valid encroachment agreement within the time stated above
shall be deemed an illegal sign and shall be subject to removal at any time.
4.01.3 FEE.
   In addition to those fees otherwise required by this chapter, an initial
application fee and annual inspection fee shall be levied for all approved sign
encroachments. Such fees shall be as provided in the building code.
4.01.4 REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT CONSTITUTING OBSTRUCTION.
   Any sign encroachment that does not meet the requirements of this code or
the building code shall be deemed an obstruction into such right-of-way. The
building official shall notify in writing the record owner of such sign or
record owner of that property upon which such sign is located to correct the
violation or to remove such obstruction within 30 days, after which time the
city may abate such obstruction and affix a lien against the property for the
cost involved.
SECTION 4.02: TRAFFIC HAZARDS
4.02.1 TRAFFIC LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No sign with a ground clearance of less than 11 feet may be
erected within 20 feet of a driveway or other ingress/egress to the property;
nor shall any such sign be erected within any corner clip or public open space
easement (P.O.S.E.). No sign pole shall be greater than ten inches in diameter
within such a corner clip or P.O.S.E. See
Figure 4.02.1.
      (2)   Exception: In one- and two-family yards, a sign may be within 20
feet of a driveway. When the sign is within ten feet of the back of the curb,
or street edge when without a curb, it must be in compliance with all of the
following provisions.
         a.   No sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way.
         b.   When not in the right-of-way, no sign shall be permitted within
three feet of the back of the curb, or street edge when without a curb.
         c.   Signs that are not in the right-of-way may be more than three
feet and within ten feet of the back of the curb, or street edge when without a
curb, provided the maximum height is four feet and the size does not exceed
eight square feet.
   (b)   Hospitals and hospital districts proposing to erect signs prohibited
by subsection (a) of this section shall be permitted to erect same, provided
that such signs are for the purpose of public instruction, traffic control and
similar uses incidental to the public interest, and are not business signs, and
provided further that the city council has approved the location of such signs
and, if applicable, that the hospital or hospital district has executed an
encroachment agreement with the city and has secured a policy of public
liability insurance for such encroachment as provided in the building code.
4.02.2 TRAFFIC LOCATION - PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Signs with the following characteristics shall not be erected within that
cross-hatched area as indicated by
Figure 4.02.2.
   (a)   Revolving signs;
   (b)   Signs obscuring or interfering with the operation of traffic-control
devices;
   (c)   Signs employing lights colored similarly to those used in traffic
control and emergency devices. Such colors shall include by way of example but
not limitation, red, amber, green and blue.
SECTION 4.03: PROHIBITED SIGNS
4.03.1 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited:
   (a)   Off-premise signs, unless provisions for such signs are contained
within these regulations and the comprehensive zoning ordinance;
   (b)   Signs erected in violation of the building code, electrical code,
zoning code, this code or other applicable local regulations;
   (c)   Signs erected in violation of federal or state law;
   (d)   Pole signs;
   (e)   Portable signs, except those allowed under §
3.02;
   (f)   (1)   Animated signs, flashing signs, running message, twinkle or
running light signs, and revolving signs or any other sign that moves, except
electronic changeable copy signs when permitted by the zoning code.
      (2)   For those electronic changeable copy signs, the message rate shall
not change at a rate faster than one message every 20 seconds and the interval
between messages shall be a minimum of one second.
   (g)   Signs illuminated to such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or
impair vision. Lighting shall be shielded upward to prevent beams or rays from
being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied residential
area. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the lighting of signs near
airports which would conflict with any regulations adopted by the Federal
Aviation Administration in the furtherance of air safety. This requirement
shall not apply to internally lit signs with a lighting intensity of less than
150-foot lamberts.
   (h)   Signs erected in or projecting into the public right-of-way except as
permitted in §
4.01.
   (i)   Signs on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the
primary purpose of displaying the sign. It shall be prima facie evidence that
the primary purpose of a vehicle or trailer is to display a sign if the vehicle
or trailer is parked on a site for a continuous period exceeding 72 hours.
   (j)   “V” type signs with a face that protrudes from the opposite face at an
interior angle greater than 25 degrees. This restriction shall not be construed
to prevent oval, cylindrical or box type signs.
   (k)   Signs with sign structure larger than is reasonably necessary to
support the sign.
   Figure 4.02.1 Traffic Hazard Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7171.jpg]
   Traffic Hazard Clearance
   Figure 4.02.2 Traffic Hazard Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7173.jpg]
   Traffic Hazard Clearance
ARTICLE V: OFF-PREMISE SIGNS
SECTION 5.01: REGISTRATION OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
5.01 REGISTRATION OF OFF-PREMISE SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   The owner of any off-premises sign existing within the City of
Fort Worth on November 5, 1997, shall register such sign with the building
official and pay the registration fee as required in
Table 5.01 on or before January 2, 1998. The owner of any off-premises sign in
the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall register such sign with the building
official and pay the registration fee as required in
Table 5.01 on or before October 1, 2000.
      (2)   Exceptions: Signs listed in §
6.402 of the zoning ordinance or §
5.02.2 and signs subject to a unified sign agreement shall be exempt from the
registration requirements.
   (b)   (1)   The owner of any off-premise sign installed after November 5,
1997, shall submit an application for registration simultaneously with the sign
permit application. This initial registration shall be exempt from the
registration fee as required in
Table 5.01. If the sign permit is approved and the sign constructed, this
initial registration shall expire three years after the date of permit
application.
      (2)   Exceptions: Signs listed in §
6.402 of the zoning ordinance and signs subject to a unified sign agreement
shall be exempt from the registration requirements.
   (c)   (1)   Registrations approved under subsections (a) and (b) above and
all renewals shall expire after three years. Before such registration or
renewal expires the registration must be renewed and the registration fee must
be paid in accordance with
Table 5.01. It is the owner’s responsibility to monitor expiration dates and to
renew the registration in a timely manner.
      (2)   Exceptions: Based upon staffing and work loads, the building
official may adjust expiration dates to be less than three years as long as the
fees are appropriately prorated.
   (d)   (1)   Registration shall be applied for on forms provided by the
building official. The building official may require the filing of plans or
other pertinent information when, in his or her opinion, such information is
necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
      (2)   Whenever information on the form changes, including but not limited
to names and addresses, a new registration form shall be filled out by the
owner and submitted to the building official within 30 days, along with a
change of record fee as required by
Table 5.01.
   (e)   (1)   A late fee shall be assessed against the owners of off-premises
signs who fail to register as required by this section. The late fee as shown
in
Table 5.01 shall be assessed if the registration fee is not received within ten
calendar days after the due date.
      (2)   Failure to register or renew registration of a sign within 30
calendar days after the due date in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall constitute a violation of this code.
 
Table 5.01
Sign registration, per 3 years $337.50
Late fee                       $56.25
Change of record               $28.12
 
SECTION 5.02: OFF-PREMISES SIGNS IN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
5.02.1 GENERAL.
   Off-premises signs in the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall comply with
this code, with the exception of exempt signs identified in §
A01.3. This code does not apply to on-premises signs in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
5.02.2 CONSTRUCTION OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS PROHIBITED IN EXTRATERRITORIAL
JURISDICTION.
   The construction of off-premises signs is hereby prohibited in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction, with the following exceptions, which may be
constructed in the extraterritorial jurisdiction without obtaining a permit
pursuant to
Chapter C.
   (a)   Subdivision directional signs are permitted, subject to the following.
      (1)   Signs shall be a maximum size of 64 square feet.
      (2)   Signs may placed only on unimproved property, with the permission
of the owner.
      (3)   Signs must be placed at least 100 feet from any other subdivision
or developer signs.
      (4)   Signs may be erected for a maximum of one year unless an additional
one-year extension is given by the city council. The city council may approve a
maximum of two one-year periods.
   (b)   Homebuilder signs are permitted, subject to the following.
      (1)   Signs will be allowed between noon Friday and noon Monday only.
      (2)   Signs shall not exceed 24 inches by 30 inches in size, nor shall
they be installed more than four feet above grade.
      (3)   Signs shall have a minimum separation of 25 feet and signs for any
one advertiser must be at least 200 feet apart.
      (4)   Signs shall not be located closer than 40 feet to street
intersection.
      (5)   Signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way.
      (6)   Signs shall not be located more than three miles from the subject
property.
      (7)   Signs shall be rigid, two-dimensional displays that advertise only
new one- and two-family properties for sale.
      (8)   Written permission shall be obtained from owners of property where
sign is located.
   (c)   Temporary public interest signs, including portable signs and banners,
announcing activities or other events of a public, civic, philanthropic or
religious organization, are permitted, subject to the following.
      (1)   Signs shall be a maximum of 60 square feet.
      (2)   Only one such sign shall be allowed per platted lot per street
frontage.
      (3)   No piggy-backing of signs is allowed.
      (4)   No temporary sign shall be located within 100 feet of another
temporary signs.
      (5)   Temporary signs shall be maintained for no more than three weeks.
5.02.3 ALTERATION OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS IN EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   Off-premises signs in the extraterritorial jurisdiction may be altered only
as follows.
   (a)   Advertising copy, including letters, symbols, or other matter on the
sign, may be changed, including the exchange of display faces that are designed
to be interchangeable to facilitate the display of advertising copy; provided,
however, display faces that are designed to be permanently attached to the
supporting sign structure may be replaced only with display faces composed of
like materials, e.g., a plywood display face may be replaced only with a
plywood display face. Display faces may be replaced only with display faces
that are the same size or smaller than the size initially registered in
accordance with §
5.01, plus cut-out extensions that do not exceed 20% of the registered sign
area. The temporary use of a sign with a display face that is smaller than the
size that was initially registered shall not bar the replacement of the display
face with a larger display face, provided that it shall not exceed the size
reflected in the initial registration. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, vinyl, paint or pasted paper may be affixed to a display face
composed of any material.
   (b)   A sign which has been blown down or otherwise destroyed by wind, fire
or damages from any other source, may be repaired, provided that the cost of
repairing the sign is 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type
at the same location, or less. If the cost of repairing the sign is more than
60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location,
the sign may not be altered, reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and the owner
shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance with this chapter and all
other applicable ordinances.
   (c)   (1)   Maintenance operations may be performed on the sign.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS means the
process of keeping a sign in good repair.
      (3)   Maintenance operations include:
         a.   Cleaning;
         b.   Painting;
         c.   Repair of parts with like materials in a manner that does not
alter the basic design or structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all
repairs performed during any consecutive 365-day period is not more than 60% of
the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location; and
         d.   Replacement of parts with like materials in a manner that does
not alter the basic design or structure of the sign, provided that the cost of
all replacement of parts performed during any consecutive 365-day period is not
more than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same
location.
      (4)   The 365-day period limitation shall not apply to a sign that has
been blown down or otherwise destroyed as described in subsection (b) above.
      (5)   Examples of actions that are not maintenance operations and are
therefore prohibited include, without limitation:
         a.   Converting a sign from a multiple pole structure to a monopole
structure;
         b.   Replacing wooden components with metal components;
         c.   Increasing the area or height of a sign, except for increases in
area permitted under subsection (a) above;
         d.   Adding illumination to a non-illuminated sign;
         e.   Adding additional display faces; and
         f.   Converting a sign to utilize animated display or moveable copy
technology, including but not limited to signs featuring tri-vision technology.
      (6)   If a sign is dismantled for any purpose other than an alteration or
maintenance operation permitted hereunder, the sign may not be altered,
reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and the owner shall remove the sign or
bring it into compliance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances.
   (d)   All other alterations of any nature whatsoever in connection with
nonconforming signs are prohibited. If any such alteration is performed, the
owner shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance with this chapter and
all other applicable ordinances. The cost of any accessory use to a sign,
including without limitation a communication antenna and support facilities,
shall not be included in calculating the cost of erecting a new sign at the
same location pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above.
SECTION 5.03: RELOCATION OF CERTAIN OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
5.03 RELOCATION OF CERTAIN OFF-PREMISE SIGNS.
   Certain legal nonconforming detached off-premises signs located on or
overhanging a parcel of land acquired by Texas Department of Transportation for
the I-35W Segment 3A Corridor (see attachment A, attached to Ord. 21163-03-2014
and adopted by reference as if codified herein) or (extending from I-30 to Loop
820NE) may be relocated subject to the following restrictions.
   (a)   Location and size standards.
      (1)   To qualify for relocation, a sign must be legally registered with
the city;
      (2)   To qualify for relocation, a sign must be able to be relocated to a
non-designated scenic area or corridor in an industrial zoning district within
the I-35W Segment 3A Corridor;
      (3)   Maximum sign face area is limited to the original sign face area or
672 square feet, whichever is less; and
      (4)   Maximum sign height is limited to the original sign height or 50
feet, whichever is greater.
   (b)   Calculation of credits for relocation of off-premise signs.
      (1)   Each sign structure with one or two faces counts as one sign;
      (2)   In order to relocate one off-premises sign with the I-35W Segment
3A Corridor, the owner of the sign must remove at least four off-premises signs
and the associated structures, which are separate from the sign to be
relocated. The signs may be removed from the I-35W Segment 3A corridor or from
any designated scenic area or scenic corridor as identified in the zoning
ordinance. Credit will not be given for signs that have not been registered in
accordance with §
5.01; and
      (3)   The total square footage of the sign faces to be removed must equal
four times the square footage of the sign face to be relocated.
(Ord. 15953, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 16166, § 1, passed 10-12-2004; Ord.
16765, § 1, passed 1-19-2006; Ord. 17205, § 1, passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 17522, §
5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17960, § 1, passed 1-29-2008; Ord. 20427-09-2012, §
6, passed 9-25-2012, eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 20428-09-2012, § 6, passed 9-25-2012,
eff. 11-5-2012; Ord. 21149, § 1, passed 3-4-2014, eff. 3-11-2014; Ord. 21163-
03-2014, § 1, passed 3-18-2014, eff. 3-25-2014; Ord. 21189-04-2014, § 6, passed
4-1-2014, eff. 4-8-2014; Ord. 22372-08-2016, § 6, passed 8-30-2016; Ord. 22523-
12-2016. § 7, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 12-18-2016; Ord. 22837-08-2017, § 8,
passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019;
Ord. 24448-09-2020, § 2, passed 9-22-2020, eff. 4-1-2021; Ord. 25772-09-2022, §
1, passed 9-27-2022, eff. 10-1-2022; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed 9-24-2024,
eff. 10-1-2024)
§ 29-2 EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances of the code
of the City of Fort Worth, Texas (1986), affecting sign code provisions, as
amended, and shall not repeal any of the provisions of such ordinances, except
in those instances where provisions of such ordinances are in direct conflict
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 15953, § 1, passed 4-13-2004)
§ 29-3 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for all violations involving
fire safety, or public health and sanitation in accordance with §
1-6(c) and shall be fined not more than $500 for all other violations of this
ordinance. Each day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this
ordinance occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 15953, § 1, passed 4-13-2004; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019,
eff. 2-23-2019)
CHAPTER 29.5: SMOKING
Cross-reference:
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 13009, adopted May 20, 1997, amended in its entirety former Chapter
29.5, consisting of §§ 29.5-1 through 29.5-7, relative to smoking, and re-
enacted §§ 29.5-01 through 29.5-30 to read as herein set out. The provisions of
former §§ 29.5-1 through 29.5-7 derived from Ord. 9572, § 1(31A-1 through 31A-
7), adopted February 25, 1986; Ord. 10315, § 1(1) through (4), adopted May 30,
1989; Ord. 11285, § 1(1) through (5), adopted March 30, 1993. Subsequently,
Ord. 17719, § 1, adopted August 21, 2007, amended Ch. 29.5, in its entirety, to
read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 29.5
pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
Section
   
29.5-01   Title, purpose
   
29.5-1   Definitions
   
29.5-2   Smoking prohibited
   
29.5-3   Exceptions
   
29.5-4   Designation of smoking rooms by hotel and motel restricted
   
29.5-5   Owner/operator responsibilities
   
29.5-6   Employer responsibilities
   
29.5-7   Voluntary designation of a non-smoking facility
   
29.5-8   Retaliation prohibited
   
29.5-9   Sale of cigarettes or tobacco products to persons younger than
eighteen years of age prohibited; proof of age required
   
29.5-10   Vendor assisted sales required
   
29.5-11   Vending machines
   
29.5-12   Sale of cigarettes or tobacco products to persons younger than 27
years of age
   
29.5-13   Notification of employees and agents
   
29.5-14   Distribution and sale of cigarettes or tobacco products
   
29.5-15   Possession, purchase, consumption and receipt of tobacco products by
minors prohibited
   
29.5-16   Advertisement of cigarettes and tobacco products
   
29.5-17   Structural modification
   
29.5-18   Enforcement
   
29.5-19   Culpability
   
29.5-20   Other applicable laws
   
29.5-21   Violation and penalty
   
29.5-22   Permit suspension or revocation; hearing
   29.5-23—29.5-30   Reserved
§ 29.5-01 TITLE, PURPOSE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “smoke free ordinance.” The purpose
of this chapter is to improve and protect the public health by eliminating
smoking in public places and places of employment. It is also the intent of
this chapter to define distinct and separate areas for smoking and nonsmoking
use, to assure a smoke-free atmosphere in public places and prohibit the
commingling of air between smoking and nonsmoking areas.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section.
   BILLIARD HALL. A place of amusement whose chief purpose is providing the use
of billiard/pool tables to the public for a fee.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation
or other business entity formed for profit-making or non-profit purposes,
including, but not limited to, banks, laundromats, hotels, motels, retail
establishments, professional corporations and other entities where legal,
medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are
delivered.
   CIGAR LOUNGE. An establishment where onsite sales of cigar products and
cigar accessories for consumption or use on the premises is at least 30% of its
gross annual sales and is restricted to individuals 18 years of age and above.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   CUSTOMER DIRECT ACCESS. That a customer has access to a product without the
assistance of the vendor.
   DELIVER. To actually or constructively transfer possession of a tobacco
product from one person to another and includes an offer to transfer possession
from one person to another.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine or
any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person
in any manner for the purpose of inhaling vapor or aerosol from the product.
The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed,
or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any
other product name or descriptor.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed for the consideration of direct or
indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her
services for a profit or non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, non-
profit entity or other entity who employs the services of one or more
individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate
openings for ingress and egress.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Any institution that provides medical, surgical and
overnight facilities for patients, including, but not limited to, hospitals,
clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor’s offices, dentist’s offices,
nursing homes, adult care facilities, convalescent homes and residential
treatment centers/homes.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   PARK. The areas of land dedicated and used as parkland, or city-owned land
used for a park or recreational purpose that is under the administrative
control of the park and recreation department. The term includes the botanic
garden, buildings, playgrounds, athletic fields, nature preserves, swimming
pools and parking lots, driveways, pathways, trails and other areas within a
park. The term does not include the outdoor areas of a city golf course or the
unenclosed areas of Will Rogers Memorial Center.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative, association, corporation
or venture.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of an employer
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, rest rooms,
conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private
residence shall not be considered a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A building or portion thereof that is owned, leased or
otherwise occupied by an organization, whether incorporated or not, exclusively
for use at all times solely for the recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent or athletic purpose of the organization, but not for
pecuniary gain, and at which alcoholic beverages are sold only incidentally in
connection with such operations; provided that this term only applies to an
organization (i) whose affairs and management are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by its members at an
annual meeting; (ii) whose activities are governed by established bylaws, a
constitution, or other published articles; and (iii) which has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C.
Section 501.
   PRIVATE FUNCTION. The rental of a ballroom, private club or other facility
for the sole purpose of entertaining, private parties, events or other social
functions that the general public is not able to attend.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area in which the public is invited or permitted,
including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health
facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, bars, bingo parlors, marketing establishments, retail service
establishments, retail stores, theaters, waiting rooms, bowling alleys and
billiard halls.
   RETAIL SMOKE SHOP. A store that derives 90% or more of its gross annual
sales from the sale of tobacco, cigarettes, smoking and electronic smoking
devices, or related products and accessories and does not sell alcoholic
beverages for onsite consumption.
   RETAILER. A person who sells goods or services to the general public.
   SELL. To offer for sale, convey, exchange, barter or trade.
   SERVICE LINE. Any line or area where persons wait for goods or services of
any kind, regardless of whether or not an exchange of money will occur. Such
service includes, but is not limited to, sales, giving of information,
directions, advice and the transfer of money or goods.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, tobacco product, electronic smoking device, weed, plant or other
combustible substance whose smoke is intended to be inhaled.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco, which may be utilized for smoking,
chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion or absorption.
   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-serving
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payments,
dispenses tobacco products.
   VALID PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION. A driver’s license or an identification card
issued by Texas or another state, a passport or an identification card issued
by a state or the federal government and that contains a physical description
and a photograph consistent with the person’s appearance.
   VENDOR-ASSISTED SALE. A sale in which only the vendor has had access to a
tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product to the
customer when it is purchased.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 23047-12-2017, § 1, passed 12-12-2017,
eff. 3-12-2018; Ord. 23221-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018, eff. 8-13-2018)
§ 29.5-2 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a public place.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area
in a building or facility owned, leased or operated by the city.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area
of a place of employment.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person smokes within 20 feet from a
primary entrance or openable window of an enclosed area in which smoking is
prohibited.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a park. This
prohibition does not apply to those areas of a park to which an outdoor special
event permit was issued under the rules and regulations set by the director of
the parks and recreation department.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager or any other person who controls any establishment or
facility may declare the entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking
establishment.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 23221-05-2018, § 2, passed 5-15-2018,
eff. 8-13-2018)
§ 29.5-3 EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking prohibitions in §
29.5-2.
      (1)   Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day
care or health care facility;
      (2)   A private or semi-private room in a nursing home or long term
health care facility that is occupied by persons who smoke and have requested
in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted;
      (3)   Hotel and motel rooms that comply with §
29.5-4;
      (4)   Retail smoke shops and cigar lounges in stand alone physical
facilities or that operate an air ventilation system that prevents the
migration of smoke into neighboring facilities;
      (5)   Hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and public facilities
while being used for a private function. This exception shall not include
restaurants or bars;
      (6)   Private clubs, as defined in this chapter, as long as the facility
is used or operated by the members and is not open to the general public;
      (7)   An outdoor dining area and/or patio, as long as the section of the
outdoor dining area and/or patio where smoking is permitted, is more than 20
feet from a primary entrance or openable window of an enclosed area; and
      (8)   Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any stage,
drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, when smoking is
part of a stage production.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in
this section may designate the entire establishment as a nonsmoking
establishment.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 23047-12-2017, § 2, passed 12-12-2017,
eff. 3-12-2018)
§ 29.5-4 DESIGNATION OF SMOKING ROOMS BY HOTEL AND MOTEL RESTRICTED.
   A hotel and motel may not designate more than 25% of its rooms that are
rented for temporary overnight occupancy by the public as smoking rooms.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-5 OWNER/OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The owner and/or operator of a public place shall conspicuously post a
“No Smoking” sign, the international “No Smoking” symbol (depiction of a
burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) or other
sign containing words or pictures that prohibit smoking:
      (1)   In each public place and workplace where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter; and
      (2)   At each entrance to a public place or workplace.
   (b)   The owner/operator of a public place shall conspicuously post signs in
areas where smoking is permitted under §
29.5-3.
   (c)   The owner/operator of a public place and an employer shall remove any
and all ashtrays or other smoking accessories from a place where smoking is
prohibited.
   (d)   An owner/operator commits an offense if he or she violates any
provision of this section.
   (e)   An owner/operator commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a
person to remain in a place under the owner/operator’s control while such
person is smoking in violation of this chapter. This offense is punishable,
upon conviction, by a fine of an amount not to exceed $2,000 for each offense.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (f)   It is not a defense to prosecution of any offense under this chapter
that an owner/operator failed to post a sign required under this section.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-6 EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
29.5-3, an employer shall provide a smoke-free place of employment.
   (b)   Employers shall designate all areas of the place of employment
including, but not limited to, conference rooms, break rooms, rest rooms and
dining areas as nonsmoking.
   (c)   If an employer requires employees to work in an area described in §
29.5-3, the employer shall make reasonable accommodations for an employee who
requests an assignment to a smoke free area.
   (d)   An employer shall notify each employee and applicant for employment in
writing that:
      (1)   Smoking in the place of employment is prohibited; or
      (2)   Smoking is permitted in the place of employment because it is
exempted from the prohibition of smoking under §
29.5-3.
   (e)   A person, employer, building manager, building owner or lessee commits
an offense if he or she violates any provision of this section.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-7 VOLUNTARY DESIGNATION OF A NON-SMOKING FACILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner/operator of an enclosed area
or public place from designating the entire facility and/or area as non-
smoking.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-8 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if the person discharges, refuses to hire or
retaliates against a customer, employee or applicant for employment because the
customer, employee or applicant for employment reports a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-9 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS YOUNGER THAN
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED; PROOF OF AGE REQUIRED.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person with criminal negligence:
      (1)   Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given a cigarette or tobacco
product to someone who is younger than 18 years of age; or
      (2)   Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given a cigarette or tobacco
product to another person who intends to deliver it to someone who is younger
than 18 years of age.
   (b)   A retailer commits an offense if:
      (1)   An agent or employee of the retailer commits an offense under
subsection (a) above; or
      (2)   The retailer, with criminal negligence, failed to prevent the
offense through adequate supervision and training of the agent or employee.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) above that the
person to whom the cigarette or other tobacco product was sold or given
presented an apparently valid proof of identification.
   (d)   Proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection (c)
above if it contains a physical description and photograph consistent with the
person’s appearance, purports to establish that the person is 18 years of age
or older and was issued by a governmental agency. The proof of identification
may include a driver’s license issued by Texas or another state, a passport or
an identification card issued by a state or the federal government.
   (e)   An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine of an amount not to exceed $2,000 for each offense. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-10 VENDOR ASSISTED SALES REQUIRED.
   (a)   Except as provided by subsection (b) below, a retailer or other person
may not offer cigarettes or tobacco products for sale in a manner that permits
a customer direct access to the cigarettes or tobacco products.
   (b)   Subsection (a) above does not apply to:
      (1)   A facility or business that is not open to persons younger than 18
years of age at any time; or
      (2)   A retail tobacco stores as defined in this chapter.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person violates subsection (a)
above.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-11 VENDING MACHINES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if that person sells, offers for sale,
allows the sale of, allows the offer for sale of or allows the display for sale
of tobacco products by use of a vending machine.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   It is an exception to subsection (a) above that a cigarette vending
machine is located within an enclosed facility which does not admit any persons
under the age of 18 years. The establishment shall post a sign at each entrance
of the enclosed facility that persons under the age of 18 years are prohibited
from the enclosed facility. ENCLOSED FACILITY means an area surrounded by a
wall and which area may not be accessed except by doorway.
      (2)   It shall also be an exception to subsection (a) above that a
cigarette vending machine is located in a portion of a facility to which the
general public or members of a private club do not have access. The
establishment shall post a sign at the entrances to the area to which the
general public or members of a private club are prohibited.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-12 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 27
YEARS OF AGE.
   (a)   A retailer may not sell, give or cause to be sold or given a cigarette
or tobacco product to someone who is younger than 27 years of age unless the
person to whom the cigarette or tobacco product was sold or given presents an
apparently valid proof of identification showing the person’s age to be 18
years of age or older.
   (b)   A retailer shall adequately supervise and train the retailer’s agents
and employees to prevent a violation of subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Proof of identification described in §
29.5-9(d) satisfies the requirements of subsection (a) above.
   (d)   A retailer commits an offense if the person violates this section.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-13 NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS.
   Each retailer shall notify each individual employed by the retailer who is
to be engaged in retail sales of cigarettes or tobacco products that state law:
   (a)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of cigarettes or tobacco products
to any person who is younger than 18 years of age as provided in §
29.5-9 and that a violation of this provision is a Class C misdemeanor; and
   (b)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of cigarettes or tobacco products
to any person who is younger than 27 years of age unless the person to whom the
cigarette or tobacco product is sold or given presents an apparently valid
proof of identification as provided by §
29.5-12.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-14 DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he or she distributes to persons
younger than 18 years of age:
      (1)   A free sample of a cigarette or tobacco product; or
      (2)   A coupon or other item that the recipient may use to receive a free
or discounted cigarette or tobacco product or a sample cigarette or tobacco
product.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person sells cigarettes in
quantities less than an individual package containing at least 20 cigarettes.
   (c)   Retail smoke shops shall be prohibited within 300 feet of schools,
universities and hospitals.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 23047-12-2017, § 3, passed 12-12-2017,
eff. 3-12-2018)
§ 29.5-15 POSSESSION, PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION AND RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY
MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person who is younger than 18 years of age commits an offense if
that person:
      (1)   Possesses, purchases, consumes or accepts receipt of a cigarette or
tobacco product; or
      (2)   Falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or
older by displaying proof of age that is false, fraudulent or not actually his
or her own for the purpose of possessing, purchasing, consuming or receiving a
cigarette or tobacco product.
   (b)   It is an exception to this section that the minor possessed,
purchased, consumed or received the cigarette or tobacco product in the
presence of the minor’s parent, guardian or spouse.
   (c)   It is an exception to this section that the minor possessed or
received the cigarette or tobacco product in the presence of the minor’s
employer, if possession or receipt of the tobacco product is required in the
performance of the employee’s duties as an employee.
   (d)   It is exception to the application of this section that the individual
younger than 18 years of age is participating in an inspection or test
compliance of the ordinance.
   (e)   In addition to assessing a fine, the court may require the minor to
attend a smoking awareness course and the court may require the parent or
guardian of the minor to attend the course with the minor.
   (f)   If a smoking awareness course is not readily available, the court may
require the minor to perform additional tobacco-related community service
hours.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-16 ADVERTISEMENT OF CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   (a)   A sign containing an advertisement for cigarettes or tobacco products
may not be located closer than 1,000 feet to a school.
   (b)   The measurement of the distance between the sign containing an
advertisement for cigarettes or tobacco products is from the nearest property
line of the school to a point on a street or highway closest to the sign, along
street lines and in direct lines across intersections.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a sign located on or in a facility
owned or leased by a professional sports franchise or in a facility where
professional sports events are held at least ten times during a 12- month
period.
   (d)   A SIGN in this section shall mean an outdoor medium, including a
structure, display, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque,
poster or billboard that is:
      (1)   Used to advertise or inform; or
      (2)   Visible from the main-traveled way of a street or highway.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-17 STRUCTURAL MODIFICATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall require the owner, operator, manager or other
persons in control of any building, facility, room, establishment to make any
structural modifications to comply with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-18 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The public health department shall be primarily responsible for the
implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   A citizen may file a complaint with the public health department.
   (c)   Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment
regulated by this chapter must inform persons violating this chapter of the
appropriate provisions thereof.
   (d)   The public health department shall investigate complaints and may
issue warnings and citations to persons violating this chapter.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-19 CULPABILITY.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, there shall be no requirement
of a culpable mental state for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-20 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable law.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-21 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (a)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, a person who violates the
provisions of this chapter commits a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.
   (b)   Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 29.5-22 PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; HEARING.
   (a)   Upon notice and a hearing, the city manager may suspend or revoke a
permit or license issued by the city to the operator of a public place or place
of employment where a violation of this chapter occurs.
   (b)   Prior to the revocation or suspension of a permit or license, the city
manager or his or her designee shall set a hearing to determine if grounds
exist to revoke or suspend a permit or license due to a violation of this
chapter.
   (c)   The city manager or his or her designee shall act as the hearings
officer.
   (d)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the petitioner/
violator at least 15 business days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served
in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (e)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing. The
petitioner/violator must request the hearing be rescheduled within five
business days of receiving the written notice if the petitioner/violator cannot
attend the hearing at the originally scheduled time.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, the hearing officer shall be empowered
to administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
   (g)   The hearing officer shall base the decision to revoke or suspend the
permit or license on a preponderance of the evidence. The petitioner shall bear
the burden of proof to show that the permit or license should not be revoked or
suspended.
   (h)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written
decision without undue delay.
   (i)   A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the petitioner/
violator.
(Ord. 17719, § 1, passed 8-21-2007)
CHAPTER 30: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   PARKWAY CONTRACTORS
      
III.   STREET AND STORM DRAIN CONTRACTORS
      
IV.   EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
      
V.   RESERVED
      
VI.   VALET PARKING
      
VII.   NEWSRACKS
      
VIII.   TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
Charter reference:
   Authority to regulate and control use of streets and other public places,
see
Ch. II, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Discharge of liquid waste on streets, etc., see
App. B, §
11A-23
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Vehicles for hire, see
Ch. 34
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Provisions authorizing cities to grant use of portions of streets and
sidewalks for private purposes, see Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 316
   Provisions authorizing home rule cities to open, improve, control, regulate,
etc., streets, sidewalks and public places generally, see Tex. Transportation
Code Chs. 311 through 317
   Provisions in regard to streets, alleys and street improvements generally,
see Tex. Transportation Code Chs. 311 through 317
   Street improvements generally, see Tex. Local Government Code Ch. 273
Section
Article I: In General
   
30-1   Construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, driveways, etc.; defective
sidewalks, driveways, etc., declared nuisance; duty of owner or tenant to
repair, upon notice; right to appeal
   
30-2   Distributing, selling or soliciting on medians and traffic islands
   
30-3   Displaying goods, wares, etc.
   
30-4   Soliciting trade or patronage
   
30-5   Obstructing free use of streets, sidewalks
   
30-6   Obstructing entrances, alcoves, steps
   
30-7   Solicitations
   
30-8   Driving or riding on streets under repair
   
30-9   Vehicles with lugs, cleats, etc., on paved streets
   
30-10   Establishment of line and grade
   
30-11   Supervision of work in changing grade
   
30-12   Private use of streets and sidewalks
   
30-13   Parkways established
   
30-14   Painting house numbers on curbs or driveways—License and bond required;
license fee; permission from property owners
   
30-15   Same—Application; term, display and revocation of license; amount and
term of bond; statement of qualifications
   
30-16   Aggressive panhandling or solicitation
   
30-17   Reserved
   
30-18   Climbing utility poles
   
30-19   Use of city rights-of-way for small cell infrastructure
   
30-20   Damage to and in public right-of-way
   
Appendix A:   Design Manual
   30-21—30-30   Reserved
Article II: Parkway Contractors
   
30-31   Definition
   
30-32   License; bond; permit
   
30-33   License application; required information; conditions
   
30-34   Work permit; certificate of compliance with specifications
   
30-35—30-50   Reserved
Article III: Street and Storm Drain Contractors
   
30-51   Definitions
   
30-52   License; bond; permit—Required
   
30-53   Same—License application; required information; conditions
   
30-54   Same—Exceptions to license requirement
   
30-55—30-65   Reserved
Article IV: Excavations and Obstructions
   
30-66   Permit required to open
   
30-67   Deposit required; refund procedure
   
30-68   Restoration of surface; inspection
   
30-69   Lights and barricades
   
30-70   Only necessary material to be removed; exception
   
30-71   Disposal of excavated material
   
30-72   Condition re surplus material included in bond
   
30-73   Erection of wire-bearing poles, etc.—Permit required
   
30-74   Same—Submittal of plans, specifications; fee; permit issuance
   
30-75   Temporary obstruction of public ways with building materials or rubbish
   
30-76   Building extensions over streets and sidewalks
   
30-76.1—30-76.10   Reserved
Article V: Reserved
   
30-76.11—30-88   Reserved
Article VI: Valet Parking
   
30-89   Definitions
   
30-90   Purpose and applicability
   
30-91   Valet parking license required; application; issuance; renewals
   
30-92   Violations
   
30-93   Fees
   
30-94   Denial or revocation of valet parking license; temporary suspension
   
30-95   Appeal of denial or revocation of a valet parking license
   
30-96   Standards for operation of a valet parking service
   
30-97   Valet parking service stands
   
30-98   Location of a valet parking service
   
30-99   Insurance
   
30-100   Indemnification and hold harmless
   
30-101   Signs and markings
Article VII: Newsracks
Division 1: Purpose
   
30-102   Purpose
Division 2: Definitions
   
30-103   Definitions
Division 3: Applicability
   
30-104   Applicability
Division 4: Permits
   
30-105   Permits
Division 5: Prohibited Locations
   
30-106   Newsracks prohibited
Division 6: Reserved
Division 7: Location, Placement and Number
   
30-107   Location, placement and number
Division 8: Lettering, Signs and Logos
   
30-108   Lettering, signs and logos
Division 9: Standards for Maintenance and Installation
   
30-109   Standards for maintenance and installation
Division 10: Seizure, Removal of Newsracks in Violation, Right to Hearing
   
30-110   Seizure, removal of newsracks in violation, right to hearing
   
30-111—30-150   Reserved
Article VIII: Transportation Impact Fees
Division 1: General Provisions
   
30-151   Short title
   
30-152   Purpose
   
30-153   Authority
   
30-154   Definitions
   
30-155   Applicability
   
30-156   Computation of maximum impact fees per service unit
   
30-157   Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts
   
30-158   Establishment of accounts
   
30-159   Establishment, composition and functions of capital improvements
advisory committee for transportation impact fees
   
30-160   Use of other financing mechanisms
   
30-161   Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation
   
30-162—30-170   Reserved
Division 2: Assessment and Collection of Impact Fees
   
30-171   Assessment and collection schedules for impact fees
   
30-172   Assessment of impact fees
   
30-173   Collection of impact fees
   
30-174—30-180   Reserved
Division 3: Credits Against Impact Fees
   
30-181   Credits against transportation impact fees
   
30-182   Agreement for credits
   
30-183—30-190   Reserved
Division 4: Update and Relief Procedures
   
30-191   Updates to plans and revision of fees
   
30-192   Appeals
   
30-193   Refunds
   
30-194   Rebates
   
30-195   Waivers and exemptions
   
30-196   Relief procedures
   
30-197   Annexations
   
30-198—30-200   Reserved
Division 5: Transportation Impact Fees
   
30-201   Transportation service areas
   
30-202   Transportation improvements plan
   
30-203   Transportation impact fees
   
Appendix B:   Schedule 1 - Maximum Assessable Transportation Impact Fees Per
Vehicle- Mile
   
Appendix C:   Schedule 2 - Transportation Impact Fees Per Vehicle-Mile
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 30-1 CONSTRUCTION OR RECONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, ETC.; DEFECTIVE
SIDEWALKS, ETC., DECLARED NUISANCE; DUTY OF OWNER OR TENANT TO REPAIR, UPON
NOTICE; RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   (a)   Installation of sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb and gutter. An owner
of property abutting any existing street shall install sidewalk, parkway,
driveway or curb and gutter along said frontage when sidewalk, parkway,
driveway or curb and gutter is absent. A property owner shall install sidewalk,
parkway, driveway and curb and gutter in accordance with the then-current
design standards of the city. The requirement to install sidewalk, parkway,
driveway and curb and gutter applies only if the owner of the property is
building new construction or redeveloping the property where construction will
equal or exceed 50% of the assessed value of the then-existing improvements, as
determined by the appraisal district in which the property is located.
   (b)   Maintenance of defective sidewalk, driveway or curb. Any sidewalk,
parkway, driveway or curb which has become or is defective, unsafe or hazardous
is declared a nuisance. It shall be the duty of the owner or the agent in
charge, or the tenant, of the property abutting on any street, avenue, public
alley, place, square, section or part thereof along which a sidewalk, curb or
driveway is ordered by the director of the department of public works to be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired within 30 days from the receipt of
notice from the director of public works, to construct, reconstruct or repair
such sidewalk, curb or driveway. The failure of any owner or the agent of any
owner, or the tenant, to construct, reconstruct or repair any such sidewalk,
curb or driveway ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired by the
director of public works shall be a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Appeal. Any owner or the agent of any owner, or the tenant, required
to install, construct, reconstruct or repair any such sidewalk, parkway,
driveway or curb and gutter under this section may appeal such requirement to
the director of the transportation and public works department or his/her
designee. An appeal of a decision by the director or his/her designee may be
brought to the city manager responsible for overseeing the department of
transportation and public works.
(1964 Code, § 33-1) (Ord. 23658-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-2019)
§ 30-2 DISTRIBUTING, SELLING OR SOLICITING ON MEDIANS AND TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or to sell or offer for
sale any goods, wares, merchandise or thing of value on any median or traffic
island within any right-of-way for any street, alley or thoroughfare in the
city.
(1964 Code, § 33-2.1) (Ord. 5892, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 7419, § 1, passed 9-13-
1976; Ord. 14875, § 2, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 30-3 DISPLAYING GOODS, WARES, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or display any goods,
wares or merchandise of any kind or character whatsoever on, over or upon any
street or sidewalk in the city, except as otherwise permitted by this code,
other ordinance or law.
(1964 Code, § 33-3)
§ 30-4 SOLICITING TRADE OR PATRONAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person while upon any public street or sidewalk
in the city, or while in any doorway, stairway, window or opening of any kind
abutting thereon, or adjacent to such street or sidewalk, to solicit trade or
patronage for any business of any kind or character whatsoever, or to molest,
or seek or attempt to molest persons on such streets or sidewalks by such
solicitation.
(1964 Code, § 33-4)
§ 30-5 OBSTRUCTING FREE USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any grouping or assemblage of persons, whose
standing, remaining or congregating upon any public street or sidewalk shall
obstruct, prevent or interfere with the free or unobstructed use of such street
or sidewalk by other persons, to fail or refuse to move on or to disperse upon
being ordered to do so by any police officer of the city or other peace
officer.
(1964 Code, § 33-5)
§ 30-6 OBSTRUCTING ENTRANCES, ALCOVES, STEPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, grouping or assemblage of persons,
whose standing, remaining or congregating upon any entrance, alcove or steps
leading from a public street or sidewalk to the entrance or exit of any public
or private building or structure in the city shall obstruct, prevent or
interfere with the free or unobstructed use of such entrance or exit, or of the
street or sidewalk adjacent thereto, by other persons, to fail or refuse to
move on or to disperse upon being ordered to do so by any police officer of the
city or other peace officer.
(1964 Code, § 33-6)
§ 30-7 SOLICITATIONS.
   (a)   General. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the city code, a
person 18 years of age or older may solicit contributions while standing on a
traffic median, shoulder, improved shoulder, sidewalk, or the improved portion
of the roadway from occupants of any vehicle on a roadway, street or
thoroughfare under the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   All solicitors must be 18 years of age or older;
      (2)   No solicitor may impede traffic at any time;
      (3)   All solicitors must enter or remain in a roadway, street or
thoroughfare only while the controlling traffic signal prohibits vehicular
movement;
      (4)   All solicitors must remain within 100 feet of or from the
intersection approved under the permit;
      (5)   No person may solicit without the required insurance coverage as
outlined in subsection (d) of this section;
      (6)   All solicitors must wear a city approved florescent orange or
yellow vest at all times while soliciting;
      (7)   No person may solicit until:
         a.   A sign approved by the city is posted, no less than 500 feet from
the intersection, in the right parkway for each approaching lane of traffic up
to two lanes wide; or
         b.   Two signs approved by the city are posted, no less than 500 feet
from the intersection, in both the left and right side parkway of approaching
lanes of traffic of three or more lanes.
      (8)   No person may solicit until a permit is issued from the
transportation and public works department per the terms of this section.
   (b)   Signs and vests. Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicant must
obtain approval from the city transportation and public works department of all
signs and vests to be used by the solicitors. All signs must be removed from
each intersection at the end of each day of the permit period.
   (c)   Permits.
      (1)   Each person or organization, whose application meets the
requirements of this section, may be issued one permit per calendar year, for
no more than two specified days. Each permit shall allow solicitation only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and one hour before sunset, as determined by the
official newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the city.
      (2)   Only one permit will be issued for an intersection on any given
day. Permits will be issued on a first come basis to those applicants who
submit a completed application form, required certificate of insurance and
approval by the city of the signs and vests to be used by the solicitors.
      (3)   The application for a solicitation permit shall state the name,
mailing address and telephone number of the person or organization registering
to solicit and the location(s) and times the solicitation will take place.
      (4)   Permit applications must be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance as outlined in subsection (d) of this section.
      (5)   The city transportation and public works department shall review
the application and issue a permit to a person or organization whose
application meets the requirements of this section.
   (d)   Insurance. The certificate of insurance must be signed by an agent
authorized to bind coverage and indicate that the applicant has obtained, at
his or her sole expense, the following insurance coverage:
      (1)   That is written by an insurance company with an A- or better rating
by AM Best and that is admitted or approved to do business in the State of
Texas;
      (2)   That is in full force and effect for the duration of the permit
period;
      (3)   That provides $1,000,000 of liability coverage per occurrence with
no deductible;
      (4)   That insures the applicant and all persons who will be soliciting;
      (5)   That names the City of Fort Worth, its officers, agents, employees
and elected representatives as an additional insured;
      (6)   That provides that any insurance or self-insurance maintained by
the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it;
      (7)   That is written on an occurrence basis; and
      (8)   That is otherwise acceptable to and approved by the City of Fort
Worth.
   (e)   Prohibited intersections. No person shall engage in the acts set forth
in this section at any time within 1,000 feet (measured to and from the nearest
corner of the intersecting street, highway, roadway, measured along the curb,
shoulder, improved shoulder) of the following intersections:
7th Street and Henderson Street
Altamesa Boulevard and McCart Avenue
Altamesa Boulevard and Westcreek Drive
Belknap and N. Henderson
Berry Street and Bishop Street
Calmont Avenue and Alta Mere Drive
Camp Bowie Boulevard and Horne Street
Clinton Avenue and N.W. 25th Street
Commerce Street and East Weatherford Street
East Lancaster and Main Street
Granbury Road and South Hulen Street
Hemphill Street and West Rosedale Street
Highway 170 and Independence Parkway
Highway 360 and Trinity Boulevard
Highway 80 and Alta Mere Drive
Houston Street and West 4th Street
Hulen Street and Oakmont Street
Interstate Highway 30 and Ashland Avenue
Interstate Highway 30 and Beach Street
Interstate Highway 30 and Eastchase Parkway
Interstate Highway 30 and Hulen Street
Interstate Highway 35 West and Altamesa Boulevard
Interstate Highway 35 West and East Everman Parkway
Interstate Highway 35 West and East Hattie Street
Interstate Highway 35 West and East Rosedale Street
Interstate Highway 35 West and East Seminary Drive
Interstate Highway 35 West and East Allen Avenue
Interstate Highway 35 West and Golden Triangle Boulevard
Interstate Highway 35 West and N.E. 28th Street
Interstate Highway 35 West and Sycamore School Road
Interstate Highway 35 West and Western Center Boulevard
Interstate Highway 35 West SR and East Berry Street
Lancaster Avenue and Jennings Avenue
Lancaster Avenue and Riverside Drive
Montgomery Street and Lovell Avenue
N.E. 28th Street and Commerce Street
N.E. 28th Street and Decatur Avenue
N.E. 28th Street and North Main Street
N.E. Loop 820 and Mark IV Parkway
N.E. Loop 820 and North Beach Street
N.W. 28th Street and Clinton Avenue
North Main Street and Long Street
Riverside Drive and East Berry Street
Rosedale Street and Forest Park Boulevard
Rosedale Street and South Beach Street
S.W. Loop 820 and Bryant Irvin Road
S.W. Loop 820 and Crowley Road
S.W. Loop 820 and Granbury Road
S.W. Loop 820 and McCart Avenue
S.W. Loop 820 and South Hulen Street
Seminary Drive and Hemphill Street
Seminary Drive and McCart Avenue
Southwest Boulevard SR and Bryant Irvin Road
Throckmorton Street and West 7th Street
University Drive and West Rosedale Street
West Rosedale Street and 8th Avenue
Western Center Boulevard and North Beach Street
Western Center Boulevard and North Riverside Drive
 
(Ord. 14875, § 1, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 30-8 DRIVING OR RIDING ON STREETS UNDER REPAIR.
   All persons shall be prohibited from riding or driving upon, across or over
any part of any street or alley in the city while such part of such street or
alley is being paved, surfaced, excavated or repaired.
(1964 Code, § 33-8)
§ 30-9 VEHICLES WITH LUGS, CLEATS, ETC., ON PAVED STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, run, propel or direct
any traction engine, the surface of whose wheels have cogs on them or are
otherwise rough or uneven, or other vehicles with lugs, cleats or cogs, on,
along or across any paved street within the city, unless the surfaces of the
wheels of such traction engine be so protected and covered as to avoid actual
contact with or injury to the surface of such paved street.
(1964 Code, § 33-9)
§ 30-10 ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE AND GRADE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to grade any street, alley or sidewalk
in the city, either by cutting into or filling upon the surface of same, until
the director of public works shall have established the line and grade for such
street, alley or sidewalk.
(1964 Code, § 33-17)
§ 30-11 SUPERVISION OF WORK IN CHANGING GRADE.
   All work necessary and required in the changing of the grade as provided in
this chapter, shall be done subject to the approval of the director of public
works of the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-18)
§ 30-12 PRIVATE USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enclose, build upon or make any other
private use of any part of the street, sidewalk or other right-of-way, without
first obtaining the express authorization of the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-19)
§ 30-13 PARKWAYS ESTABLISHED.
   That portion of any street, other than sidewalks and driveways, on each side
of the roadway, and extending to the property line and existing by virtue of
the establishment of the roadway, are hereby set apart as parkways and the
care, control and management of same is placed under the direction and
supervision of the park and recreation department of the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-20) (Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994)
§ 30-14 PAINTING HOUSE NUMBERS ON CURBS OR DRIVEWAYS—LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED;
LICENSE FEE; PERMISSION FROM PROPERTY OWNERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or print any house number or
street address on any curb or driveway approach within the city without first
having obtained, from the city’s department of transportation and public works,
a license to do such work, having made and executed a bond to the city in the
sum of $500, having paid a license fee of $25 and having obtained from the
owner, lessee or other person responsible for the premises written permission
and approval, which shall state the price to be paid, both to paint or print
the number of the curb or driveway approach and to obliterate, mark out, damage
or otherwise remove any existing markings on the curb.
(1964 Code, § 33-20.1) (Ord. 5419, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 19977-11-2011, § 1A,
passed 11-15-2011)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 30-15 SAME—APPLICATION; TERM, DISPLAY AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE; AMOUNT AND
TERM OF BOND; STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The license required by the preceding section shall be issued and
approved by the city’s department of transportation and public works, which may
establish the size, type of letters, paint and other particulars of the work to
be done. Before the issuance of such license, the applicant shall file in the
office of the city’s department of transportation and public works a statement
of his or her qualifications, together with a surety company bond in the penal
sum of $500, conditioned that such applicant will indemnify and save harmless
the city from directly or indirectly by any negligence in the doing of such
work or for any imperfect or inadequate work done by the applicant and further
conditioned upon compliance with the terms of §
30-14 and this section. All such bonds shall run for a period of one year from
date or until revoked as hereinafter provided. A statement of qualifications
approved by the city’s department of transportation and public works together
with the bond, license number and date of issuance, shall be maintained by the
city’s department of transportation and public works.
   (b)   The applicant shall also state in his or her application for license,
his or her place of business and the name and address under which the business
is to be transacted. Each licensee shall notify the city’s department of
transportation and public works immediately of any and every change of address
or style of his or her firm. Such license may be revoked by the city’s
department of transportation and public works for violation by the licensee of
any provision of §
30-14 or this section or for failure of the licensee to have an approved bond
in force at all times as aforesaid. All such licenses shall run for a period of
one year from date or until revoked as herein provided.
   (c)   The licensee shall not permit the use of such license by any person
not in his or her employ, nor shall be sublet any work for which a license is
issued to him or her to any other person. The licensee shall have such license
or a photostatic copy thereof available on the job at all times, and same shall
be subject to inspection upon request.
(1964 Code, § 33-20.2) (Ord. 5419, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 19977-11-2011, § 1B,
passed 11-15-2011)
§ 30-16 AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING OR SOLICITATION.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following definitions apply:
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER, AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR or AGGRESSIVELY. As related to
soliciting, begging and panhandling means:
         a.   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited;
         b.   Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a
negative response to such soliciting;
         c.   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another
person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting;
         d.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including causing a pedestrian
or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact;
         e.   Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line for tickets,
for entry to a building or for any other purpose;
         f.   Approaching or following a person for solicitation individually
or as part of a group of two or more persons, in a manner and with conduct,
words, or gestures intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or damage to or loss of property or otherwise to be
harassed or intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; or
         g.   Soliciting, begging or panhandling of minors less than 16 years
of age.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A device, linked to a bank or financial
institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions,
including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals,
balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments which are made available to
banking customers.
      BANK. A bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union,
trust company, or similar financial institution.
      CHECK CASHING BUSINESS. An entity in the business of cashing checks,
drafts, or money orders for consideration.
      PARKING METER or PARKING PAY STATION. A location on a street, parking lot
or parking garage where persons pay, for parking by either cash or credit, to a
person or at a machine or other device designed to accept payment for parking.
      PRIVATE BUILDING. Shall be deemed to include, but is not limited to,
retail or service establishments, such as restaurants, convenience food stores,
laundromats, service stations, hotels, offices, and similar privately owned
establishments open to the public. This term does not include any building
owned, leased or operated by the federal or state government, political
subdivisions thereof, municipalities, special districts, any public
administration board or authority of the state.
      PUBLIC AREA. An area to which the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, the common area of a hospital, apartment house, office
building, transport facility, shop, basement, building entrance or doorway,
lobby, hallway, stairway, mezzanine, elevator, foyer, public restroom or
sitting room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants,
occupants or guests situated in any private building.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which a governmental entity has title to which
the public has access, including, but not limited to: any street, highway,
sidewalk, walkway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place
of amusement, park, or playground.
      SOLICIT, ASK, BEG or PANHANDLE. To request, by the spoken, written, or
printed word, or by other means of communication an immediate donation or
transfer of money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of
the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value,
and regardless of whether consideration is offered.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person solicits:
      (1)   In an aggressive manner in a public area or public place; or
      (2)   Within 20 feet of the following areas where the public is
considered vulnerable or where solicitation would interfere with the flow of
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic:
         a.   An automated teller machine;
         b.   The entrance or exit of a bank;
         c.   The entrance or exit of a check cashing business;
         d.   An authorized charitable contribution activity;
         e.   A parking meter or parking pay station on a street;
         f.   A public parking garage or parking lot pay station;
         g.   The entrance or exit of a restaurant or the service area of an
outdoor eating establishment;
         h.   In a bus, at a bus station or stop, or at a facility operated by
a transportation authority for passengers including but not limited to any
school bus stop;
         i.   A marked crosswalk; or
         j.   An entrance of a commercial or government building.
      (3)   Within five feet of a curb or edge of a street;
      (4)   Within 50 feet from any land owned by a public or private school
and used in whole or in part for providing education services to elementary age
children;
      (5)   Within ten feet of a gas station, liquor store, or convenience
store property;
      (6)   In a public restroom; or
      (7)   At a public event that is operating by permit issued by the city at
city parks as defined in the city code;
   (c)   Private property.
      (1)   No person may solicit, ask, beg or panhandle on private property or
residential property without permission from the owner or occupant.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Solicit, ask, beg or panhandle, as those terms are defined in
this chapter, in any public room in any private building, without the written
permission or consent of the building's owner or managing and authorizing
agent. For the purpose of enforcement of this subsection, it is presumed that
if the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in charge of a building
prominently displays a sign as provided in subsection (c), then the activities
declared unlawful in this section are deemed to be without the permission or
consent of the building's owner, lessee, managing agent or other person.
         b.   Solicit, ask, beg or panhandle, as those terms are defined in
this chapter, on any private property where the owner, lessee, managing agent
or other person in charge of such property displays a sign as provided in
subsection (c).
         c.   Conspicuous notice. To invoke the protections afforded under this
section, each owner, lessee, managing agent or person in charge of the
operation of a private building or private property shall prominently display a
sign on the premises, such as the lobby or entrance of the private building or
private property, where it may be read by any person going in or out of the
building or private developed property stating generally: "NO PANHANDLING
PERMITTED SEC.
30-16, FORT WORTH CODE OF ORDINANCES" "NO SOLICITORS" or "NO SOLICITATION."
   (d)   For purposes of subsection (b) in this Section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point at which an unlawful act is conducted to the nearest
portion to the items listed in subsection (b).
   (e)   The solicitation of contributions while standing on a traffic median,
shoulder, improved shoulder, sidewalk, or the improved portion of the roadway
from occupants of any vehicle on a roadway, street or thoroughfare shall only
be permitted in compliance with the terms and conditions set out in Section
30-7, "Solicitation" of the city code, provided they are not in an aggressive
manner as defined in this section.
   (f)   Any person who engages in any activity specified in subsection (b),
maybe subject to prosecution for a Class C misdemeanor and a fine not to exceed
$500.
(1964 Code, § 27-49) (Ord. 7211, § 1, passed 8-11-1975; Am. Ord. 22573-01-2017,
§ 1, passed 1-24-2017)
§ 30-17 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   At the request of the city, former §
30-17, conducting or soliciting trade without a permit, has been transferred to
§
20-2.
§ 30-18 CLIMBING UTILITY POLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb any telegraph, telephone,
street railway, electric light or electric power pole or tower or electric wire
strung thereon, or attached thereto, or connected therewith, situated in or
upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the city;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be so construed as to
prohibit any employee of any telephone, street railway, telegraph, electric
light, electric power or electric current company from climbing any such pole
or tower of any such company in the proper discharge of his or her duties.
(1964 Code, § 27-21)
§ 30-19 USE OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR SMALL CELL INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (a)   Design Manual.  In accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local
Government Code, the installation and construction of network nodes and new
node support poles in the public rights-of-way is subject to the design manual
that is set out in
Appendix A to this Article I and hereby incorporated into the City Code.
   (b)   Public Parks. For purposes of Chapter 284 of the Texas Local
Government Code, recreational public parks within the City of Fort Worth
include those areas, lands, or properties within the territorial jurisdiction
of the City of Fort Worth that are (1) designated as parkland by the Fort Worth
City Council, (2) identified as parkland in the city's most recently adopted
Comprehensive Plan, including the most recently adopted Parks, Recreation, and
Open Space Master Plan, or (3) held out, used, set aside, or otherwise
designated for public enjoyment and recreation, either actively or passively.
   (c)   Fees and rates. Pursuant to Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government
Code, there is hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected the
application fees and public rights-of-way use rates set forth in the table
below:
 
Application Fees   Amount
                   $500 per application for up to 5 network nodes, and $250 for
Network node       each additional network node on a single application; up to
                   30 network nodes are allowed on each application.
Node support pole  $1,000 per application for each pole
                   $500 for up to 5 network nodes and $250 for each additional
Transport Facility network node on a single permit; up to 30 network nodes are
                   allowed on each permit.
 
 
Annual Public Rights-of-Way Use Rates Amount
Network node                          $250 per network node site.
                                      No separate rate from the network node
Node support pole                     annual fee (each support pole should have
                                      a network node attached)
                                      $28 monthly for each network node site,
                                      unless an equal or greater amount is paid
Transport Facility                    the city, e.g., under Chapter 283, Tex.
                                      Loc. Gov. Code or Chapter 66, Tex. Util.
                                      Code.
                                      $20 per year to collocate a network node
Service Pole Attachment               on a service pole in the public right-of-
                                      way
 
(Ord. 22839-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-26-2017)
§ 30-20 DAMAGE TO AND IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if he:
      (1)   Performs, authorizes, directs, or supervises construction,
excavation, any type of cutting or opening, or any work whatsoever in, on or
along any public street, alley, sidewalk or public ground without a valid
permit or agreement as required under the City of Fort Worth, Texas Code of
Ordinances or City of Fort Worth's Charter.
      (2)   Fails to comply with restrictions or requirements of a permit or
agreement as required under the City of Fort Worth, Texas Code of Ordinances or
the City of Fort Worth's Charter.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he, performs, authorizes, directs, or
supervises construction, excavation, any type of cutting or opening, or any
work whatsoever in, on or along any public street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground and:
      (1)   Damages the public street, alley, sidewalk or public ground beyond
what is incidental or necessary to the performance of the construction,
excavation, any type of cutting or opening, or any work whatsoever in, on, or
along any public street, alley, sidewalk or public ground; or
      (2)   Damages public or private facilities in, on, or along any public
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground.
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(2) if the person
complied with all of the requirements with a permit or agreement, and state law
and caused the damage because the facilities in question:
      (1)   Were not shown or indicated in a plan document, plan of record,
record construction drawing, or field survey, staking, or marking; and
      (2)   Could not otherwise be discovered in the public street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground through the use of due diligence.
   (d)   An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500. A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, authorized, directed, or permitted.
   (e)   This section may be enforced by civil court action in accordance with
state or federal law, in addition to any other remedies, civil or criminal, the
city has for a violation of this article.
   (f)   The Director of Transportation and Public Works or designee has the
authority enforce the violations under this section.
(Ord. 26196-06-2023, § 1, passed 6-13-2023, eff. 6-23-2023)
APPENDIX A: DESIGN MANUAL
   (a)   Purpose and applicability. The City of Fort Worth ("city") recognizes
that the State of Texas has delegated to the city the fiduciary duty, as a
trustee, to manage the public right-of-way for the health, safety and welfare
of the public to Texas municipalities.
      (1)   Purpose.
         a.   Texas Local Government Code ( TLGC), Chapter 284, allows certain
wireless network providers to install in the public rights-of-way their
wireless facilities, described and defined in TLGC § 284.002, as "micro network
nodes," "network nodes" and "node support poles."
         b.   As expressly allowed by TLGC § 284.108, and pursuant to its
police power authority reserved in TLGC § 284.301, the city enacts this Design
Manual in order to meet its fiduciary duty to the citizens of the city, and to
give assistance and guidance to wireless telecommunications providers to assist
such providers in the timely, efficient, safe and aesthetically pleasing
installation of technologically competitive equipment.
      (2)   Applicability.
         a.   This Design Manual is for siting and criteria for the
installation and use of wireless facilities, including micro network nodes,
network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment being installed
pursuant to TLGC Chapter 284.
         b.   This Design Manual shall apply to any siting, installation,
construction, and collocation in, on, over or under the public right-of-way of
network nodes, node support poles, micro network nodes, distributed antenna
systems, microwave communications or other wireless facilities, by whatever
nomenclature, whether they are installed pursuant to TLGC Chapter 284, or
installed pursuant to an agreement as agreed to by the city, in its discretion,
or installed as may otherwise be allowed by state law.
   (b)   Prohibited and preferred locations of micro network node, network
node, node support pole and related ground equipment.
      (1)   The following are prohibited or restricted areas for certain
wireless facilities, except with separate city agreement or subject to
concealment conditions.
         a.   Municipal parks and residential areas. In accordance with TLGC §
284.104(a), a network provider shall not install a wireless facility in a
public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and
written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is
adjacent to a street that is:
            1.   Not more than 50 feet wide; and
            2.   Adjacent a residential area.
         b.   Each permit application shall disclose if the desired wireless
facilities are within a municipal park and residential areas as described
above.
         c.   Historic district and design districts. In accordance with TLGC §
284.105, a network provider must obtain advance written approval from the city
before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in a historic
district or design district with decorative poles.
            1.   As a condition for approval of wireless facilities in historic
district or design districts with decorative poles, the network provider shall
install the wireless facilities utilizing concealment measures (see
exhibit 1). Therefore, any request for installations in a historic district or
design district with decorative poles shall be accompanied with concealment
measures (see
exhibit 1), as applicable, in the permit applications.
            2.   A network provider shall comply with and observe all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, § 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act.
            3.   Each applicant shall disclose if the network node or new node
support pole are within a historic district or design district with decorative
poles or in an area of the city zoned or otherwise designated as a design
district or historic district.
         d.   Compliance with undergrounding requirements. In accordance with
TLGC § 284.107, a network provider shall comply with all applicable
nondiscriminatory undergrounding laws, regulations, and requirements that
prohibit installing above-ground structures in a public right-of-way without
first obtaining zoning or land use approval.
            1.   Areas may be designated from time to time by the city as
underground requirement areas in accordance with filed plats and/or conversions
of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law.
            2.   Each permit application shall disclose if it is within an
underground requirement area.
      (2)   Least preferable locations:
         a.   Municipal parks and residential areas.
         b.   Historic districts and design districts.
            1.   Installing wireless facilities on Main Street in the Downtown
Urban Design Districts is strongly discouraged.
         c.   Historic landmarks. A network provider is discouraged from
installing wireless facilities within 300 feet of a historic site or structure
or historic landmark recognized by the city, state or federal government (see,
for example, and not limited to § 442.001(3) of the Texas Government Code, and
16 U. S. C. § 470), as of the date of the submission of the application.
            1.   The city requests that a network provider explore the
feasibility of using concealment measures to improve the aesthetics and design
of the wireless facilities to minimize the adverse impact to the historic
landmark, site, or structure.
            2.   A network provider shall comply with and observe all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, § 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act.
            3.   Each applicant shall disclose if the wireless facilities are
within 300 feet of a historic landmark.
      (3)   Most preferable locations:
         a.   Industrial areas, if not adjacent to a municipal park,
residential area, historic district, or design district.
         b.   Highway areas, if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential
area, historic district, or design district.
         c.   Retail and commercial areas, if not adjacent to a municipal park,
residential area, historic district, or design district.
      (4)   Consult city staff for information regarding current historic
districts and design districts.
      (5)   While TLGC Chapter 284 does not require the city to designate
underground compliance areas to prohibit above-ground wireless facilities, the
city may, from time-to-time, designate a underground compliance areas.
   (c)   Order of preference regarding attachment and placement of wireless
facilities in the public right-of-way.
      (1)   Micro network nodes shall only be lashed on existing communication
lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with
notice to the pole owner as required by applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, Federal Pole Attachment Act, 47 U. S. C. § 224, and not placed on
utility poles, node support poles, or service poles.
      (2)   Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles) shall
be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground
equipment.
      (3)   Municipal service poles in the following order of preference:
         a.   Non-decorative streetlights with a height of more than 20 feet
(see
exhibit 2).
            1.   Be encased in a separate conduit than the pole electronics;
            2.   Have a separate electric power connection than the pole
structure; and
            3.   Have a separate access point than the pole structure.
         b.   Traffic signal structures (see
exhibit 3), when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the
facility and will not interfere with the safety of the public, and in
accordance with an agreement, as allowed by TLGC §§ 284.056 and 284.101(a)(3)
and (b). Installation of network node facilities on any traffic signal
structures shall:
            1.   Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light
electronics;
            2.   Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic
signal structure; and
            3.   Have a separate access point than the traffic signal
structure.
         c.   Street signage shall be a low-priority use for attachment of a
network node. Installations on all street signage structures shall not
interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the
safety of the public. Installation of network node facilities on any street
signage structures that has electronics shall:
            1.   Be encased in a separate conduit than city signage
electronics;
            2.   Have a separate electric power connection than the signage
structure; and
            3.   Have a separate access point than the signage structure.
         d.   Decorative street lights (see
exhibit 4) shall:
            1.   Be encased in a separate conduit than city streetlight
electronics;
            2.   Have a separate electric power connection than the streetlight
structure; and
            3.   Have a separate access point than the streetlight structure.
         e.   Other municipal service pole use is discouraged.
      (4)   New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed
facility for attachment of network nodes.
   (d)   Prior to applying for a permit.
      (1)   Prior to applying for a permit for installation of a network node
or node support pole, network providers shall obtain an address for each
network node or node support pole from the City of Fort Worth Fire Department
and receive notification that the address has been entered into the City of
Fort Worth's electronic permitting system.
      (2)   Network providers and their contractors shall register with the
planning and development department prior to submitting an application.
      (3)   Be an active member of the Digtest 811 requirements. Paint used to
mark underground utilities shall be water based.
      (4)   For non-city owned property within the public right- of-way network
providers are responsible for obtaining permission from the owners of such non-
city-owned property.
      (5)   It shall be the responsibility of the network provider to evaluate,
prior to submitting a permit application, the compatibility between the
existing city infrastructure and provider's proposed network node. A network
node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference with
existing city infrastructure. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's
public safety radio infrastructure.
   (e)   Permitting.
      (1)   Network providers shall provide evidence of such permission to
attach or use non-city-owned property and right-of-way. If the project lies
within a highway, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the
state or federal government, as applicable.
      (2)   Prior to installing a wireless facilities, network providers shall
complete and submit an application for a utility permit, using city's
electronic permitting system. The following are required documents for the
application:
         a.   Plans and drawings prepared and sealed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Texas that provide detailed drawings, with
calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in
TLGC Chapter 284, in accordance with, but not limited to § 284.002, Size of a
Micro Network Node, § 284.003, Size of Network Nodes, and § 284.103, Maximum
Pole Height, with each application and with each request for a permit for each
location.
         b.   Installations on all service poles shall have an industry-
standard pole load analysis completed and submitted with each permit
application indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be
attached will safely support the load, in accordance with TLGC § 284.108.
         c.   Plat and site plan which includes the following:
            1.   Indication of current right-of-way line and other easements
and encumbrances.
            2.   Indication of spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk,
trees, utilities, other poles and existing buildings.
            3.   Width of pedestrian clear zone.
            4.   Proposed underground conduit and equipment and its spacing
from other utilities.
            5.   A sectional profile of the right-of-way and identification of
all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts. All electrical lines
must be placed in ridged steel conduits. All conduit, shall be located a
minimum of 36 inches away from existing utilities, not less than five feet from
edge of pipe for water or sanitary sewer mains, and three feet above or below
water or sanitary sewer mains when crossing perpendicular. Written approval
from the water department director or designee is required if the conduit
crosses a water or sanitary sewer main.
         d.   Scaled drawings of the proposed attachments of a network node to
a service pole or node support pole of a scale of no less that 1"- 40'.
         e.   Photo simulations are required (see
exhibit 5).
         f.   Copy of the node ID sticker (see subsection (f)(9) for details).
         g.   Longitude and latitude for each network node and node support
pole.
         h.   An analysis demonstrating that the proposed wireless facilities
does not cause any interference with the city's public safety radio system,
traffic signal light system or other city safety communications components in
accordance with TLGC § 284.304.
      (3)   In the event that placement or maintenance of wireless facilities
conducted by the network provider requires streets or traffic lanes to be
closed or obstructed, the network provider shall submit a traffic control plan.
Storm water pollution prevention plan and trench safety plan may also be
required based on the proposed scope of work. Network providers shall avoid
placing any wireless facility over an existing storm water easement. Wireless
facilities shall be located no farther into the storm water easement than three
feet. The city retains the right to determine these conflicts and may require
the movement of wireless facilities during review.
      (4)   Network providers shall obtain an electrical permit and inspection
by city staff shall be required prior to the installation of an electrical
meter.
      (5)   Network provider shall schedule a site coordination meetings with
city staff are required for historic districts and design districts.
      (6)   Network provider shall pay all fees and rates adopted by city
council.
      (7)   Network providers shall identify end users of wireless facilities
and provide a guarantee agreement signed by end user(s).
   (f)   Standards and guidelines for wireless facilities.
      (1)   General.
         a.   In accordance with TLGC § 284.102, a network provider shall
construct and maintain wireless facilities in a manner that does not:
            1.   Obstruct, impede or hinder the usual travel or public safety
on a public right-of-way;
            2.   Obstruct the legal use of a public right- of-way by other
utility providers;
            3.   Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
            4.   Violate or conflict with any laws, including but not limited
to City Code Chapter 30-19 and the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.).
         b.   In historic districts and design districts with decorative poles
the following shall apply:
            1.   Concealment of wireless facilities shall be required by the
city in historic and design districts with decorative poles, pursuant to TLGC §
284.105. Network providers shall submit proposals for concealment with the
documents required for permitting (see
exhibit 1).
            2.   The wireless facilities shall be concealed or enclosed in an
equipment box, cabinet or other unit that may include ventilation openings.
            3.   There shall be no more than one network node on any one pole
(see
exhibit 6).
         c.   Network providers shall not install wireless facilities on public
art without written permission from the artist to prevent potential copyright
issues (see
exhibit 4).
         d.   Transport facilities shall be installed underground if the city
requires undergrounding in the location that the transport facilities are or
will be installed. Aerial fiber and power connections shall not be permitted if
the city prohibits aerial fiber and power connections in the location that the
transport facilities are or will be installed (see
exhibit 7).
         e.   All attachments on all service poles shall be at least 12 feet
above grade, in accordance with TLGC § 284.108(a)(1)-(2), and if a wireless
facilities' attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and
protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be
installed no less than 16 feet above the ground (see
exhibit 8).
         f.   Caution shall be exercised during the construction and
installation of new support poles and network nodes so they do not interfere or
conflict with exiting building overhangs and awnings.
      (2)   Location.
         a.   All wireless facilities shall be located to avoid any physical or
visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or in any manner create
safety hazards to pedestrians or motorists (see
exhibits 8,
9,
10, and
11).
         b.   Where available, all wireless facilities shall be located in the
furnishing zone or parkway strip in line with existing street trees and
decorative poles. In no instance when a furnishing zone or parkway strip is
available shall wireless facilities be located in the pedestrian clear zone.
Wireless facilities equipment in the furnishing zone shall generally be placed
in the center of the furnishing zone or parkway strip and shall meet minimum
Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) and City of Fort Worth Engineering
Standards Manual setback requirements from the back of curb, generally 18 to 24
inches (see
exhibit 12).
         c.   Where there is no furnishing zone or parkway strip, wireless
facilities shall maintain either a minimum five foot wide pedestrian clear zone
from back of curb to the inward edge of wireless facilities, or a minimum five
foot wide pedestrian clear zone between the outward edge of the wireless
facilities and the back of sidewalk. In the Downtown Urban Design District,
wireless facilities shall maintain either a minimum seven foot wide pedestrian
clear zone from back of curb to the inward edge of a wireless facility or a
minimum seven foot wide pedestrian clear zone between the outward edge of a
wireless facility and the back-of-sidewalk (see
exhibit 12).
      (3)   Height.
         a.   Standards:
            1.   In residential zoning districts, historic districts and design
districts with decorative poles height is a factor when determining sufficient
concealment.
            2.   In all other districts and in accordance with TLGC § 284.103,
a node support pole, modified utility pole or service pole may not exceed the
lesser of:
               i.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole
located within 500 linear feet; or
               ii.   Fifty-five feet above grade.
         b.   Guideline. The size and height of all wireless facilities in the
right-of-way should be no greater than the maximum size and height of any other
utility pole in the same block face.
      (4)   Separation.
         a.   The separation between wireless facilities shall be a minimum of
250 feet in historic districts and design districts with decorative poles and
200 feet for all other districts, per block face, to minimize the hazard of
multiple poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize effect on property values
and aesthetics in the area (see
exhibit 13).
         b.   In residential zoning districts, wireless facilities shall be
located where the shared property line between two residential parcels
intersects the public right-of-way (see
exhibit 14).
         c.   In nonresidential districts, wireless facilities shall be located
between tenant spaces, storefront bays or adjoining properties where their
shared property lines intersect the right-of-way.
         d.   In no instance shall a wireless facility be located in front of a
building entrance or exit.
      (5)   Network nodes.
         a.   Standards:
            1.   Network nodes shall be mounted in an inconspicuous location
and painted to match existing pole (see
exhibit 8,
9, and
15).
            2.   Network node placement shall not impair light, air, or views
from adjacent windows (see
exhibit 15).
         b.   Guidelines:
            1.   Use antenna models that include a GPS antenna ( if needed)
integrated into the same cylindrical shape on top of the main antenna.
            2.   Minimal profiles and shrouds are preferred.
            3.   Use antennas with electronic tilt mechanisms that reduce the
need for bulky mechanical tilt brackets.
            4.   A top-mount antenna with a very tall extension arm may look
out of character in a low lying residential neighborhood, but a top-mount
antenna that is relatively narrow and nearly flush with the top of the pole
offers a very minimal profile, which is preferred.
            5.   Use single element side-arms instead of dual parallel side-
arms. Evaluate opportunities to utilize cylindrical antennas in lieu of panel
antennas. If panel antennas are utilized, consider the use of mini shrouds
below each panel antenna to reduce the visibility of the cable loops. Avoid the
use of large bracket systems for panel antennas, which create a significant
offset from the pole.
            6.   For side-mounted antennas, consider using an arm that features
flanges/channels so that cabling and passive radio frequency gear can be better
hidden from view.
            7.   For top-mounted antennas, consider using a shroud around the
base of the antenna, especially for antenna models with four or more cabling
ports, as cable systems without a shroud at the base of the antenna can appear
cluttered. If a shroud cannot be used, utilize velcro ties (or similar) to
neatly arrange cabling (and note such on the site completion checklist on the
cover sheet of plans).
            8.   Pole top extension arms should not appear offset from the
pole. Utilize an arm that is as wide as the top of the pole and tapers toward
the antenna.
      (6)   New node support poles.
         a.   Node support poles shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a
traffic signal pole and set back a minimum of 15 feet from any pedestrian ramp.
The Transportation and Public Work (T/PW) Department may require greater
setbacks from these and other fixtures in the right-of-way to ensure proper
sight lines for public safety purposes.
         b.   Node support poles and accessory equipment shall be located at
least ten feet from a driveway and at least 12 feet from the center of existing
trees.
         c.   All new node support poles shall match existing poles found on
the block face in style and color.
      (7)   Equipment.
         a.   Equipment, as defined in TLGC § 284.002 shall be minimized and
consolidated as much as possible.
            1.   Ground equipment shall be minimal and the least intrusive.
               i.   In the historic districts and design districts with
decorative poles, equipment shall be designed to be inside a pole or utility
enclosure that is already present in the environment or in a pole that matches
the design used on the street already. Equipment shall be incorporated into the
design of the infrastructure when possible.
         b.   For the safety of municipal park patrons, and to allow full line
of sight near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install
ground equipment in a public right-of-way that is within a park, unless written
approval is given by the park and recreation director.
         c.   In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding
area and in accordance with TLGC § 284.102(1), to enhance the safety
requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, the city may deny a request for a
proposed location if the network provider proposes network node ground
equipment where existing ground equipment within 250 feet already occupies a
footprint of five square feet or more. Collocation of ground equipment is
encouraged.
         d.   In accordance with TLGC § 284.102(1), in order to maximize the
line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize any
obstruction, impediment or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a
public right-of-way ground equipment shall not be installed within 20 feet of a
street corner or a street intersection.
         e.   Equipment enclosures and equipment mounting base plates shall be
the same width as the pole or structure that they are attached to, even if they
need to be slightly longer as a result. Narrow equipment enclosures are less
likely to impede pedestrian traffic, impair views of buildings and scenic
resources or to detract from streetscapes (see
exhibit 16).
         f.   Equipment attached to a pole shall be installed at least 12 feet
above the ground in accordance with TLGC § 284.108, and if a network node
attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of
the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less
than 16 feet above the ground (see
exhibit 9).
         g.   In accordance with TLGC §§ 284.003(a)(1)(C), 284.003(a)(2)(C) and
284.003(a)(3)(B), no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing
structure or pole shall be more than two feet.
         h.   The color of all equipment shall match or complement its
location.
         i.   Equipment shall be stacked close together and on the same side of
the pole or shall be collocated with other ground equipment. If a long
rectangular disconnect switch is used, rotate the enclosure so the elements can
be stacked closer together on the pole. Avoid wide offsets (more than four
inches) of equipment enclosure brackets from the pole.
         j.    Equipment shall be orientated away from nearby residential
windows, doorways and entrances, and the primary pedestrian travel direction.
         k.   Equipment shall not be placed adjacent to the walkway in a manner
that diminishes the comfort of pedestrians or be located within the pedestrian
clear zone (see
exhibit 11).
      (8)   Electrical supply.
         a.   A network provider shall be responsible for obtaining any
required electrical power service to the wireless facility. The city shall not
be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical
power furnished to wireless facilities, including without limitation, stoppages
or shortages caused by any act, omission or requirement of the public utility
serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network
provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the
city.
         b.   A network provider shall not allow or install generators or back
up generators in the public right-of-way in accordance with TLGC § 284.002(12)
(B)(1).
         c.   Network providers shall utilize a line drop (no electric meter
enclosure) if allowed by the utility company, or use the narrowest electric
meter and disconnect available. Meter and other enclosures shall match the
infrastructure that it is attached to and shall be well maintained, including
regular painting and the use of a graffiti-resistant paint.
         d.   The disconnect switches shall be stacked above or below the
meter, instead of attached to the side of the meter.
         e.   Electric meters and disconnect switches shall be located as
required by the utility company. Electric meters and disconnect switches shall
not be located on the side of the pole that faces the sidewalk. Conduit leading
to the electric meter box and disconnect switch shall match the color of the
pole.
      (9)   Logo, decals, flashing lights, RF warning sticker and node IDs.
         a.   Network provider shall post its name, identifying information,
permit number and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the
wireless facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this
section shall not exceed two inches by four inches, unless otherwise required
by law ( e.g. RF ground notification signs).
            1.   Place the node ID sticker on the underside of the equipment
enclosure so it is only visible when standing next to the pole and looking up.
If the node ID sticker cannot be placed on the underside of the main equipment
area, place the sticker on the side of the enclosure facing in the direction of
travel ( e.g. north-facing for a pole on the right hand side of the street on a
north-south street). Alternatively, consider combining with disconnect
information.
            2.   Use sticker colors that are more muted ( e.g. tan),
complementary or the same color as the equipment but with white colored
lettering.
            3.   Utilize the smallest and lowest visibility (e.g. yellow
instead of blue) radio-frequency (RF) warning sticker required by government or
electric utility regulations. Place the RF sticker as close to the antenna as
possible, facing directly out toward the street, or directly away from street
if there is no window or doorway within 25 feet of the pole (preferred).
         b.   All equipment manufacturer decals shall be removed. Except as
required by law or by the utility pole owner, network provider shall not post
any other signage or advertising on the wireless facilities (see
exhibit 17).
         c.   Equipment shall not have flashing lights.
         d.   All visibly depressed manufacturer logos on equipment boxes shall
be filled in.
      (10)   Cabling.
         a.   Exposed wiring is prohibited. Above the electric meter and
disconnect switch, all conduit and wiring shall be located inside the pole (see
exhibits 9 and
11).
            1.   The use of shrouds, risers or conduit to reduce the appearance
of cluttered or tangled cabling is required (see
exhibit 17).
            2.   In some instances, installation practices such as using
equipment enclosures with specific port locations, or crossing wires below a
down-facing port on an equipment enclosure, can reduce the likelihood that
cabling will appear cluttered or bend outward from the pole and further away
from the enclosure.
            3.   Instructional notes for the installer shall be included on the
plan drawings in a checklist format in order to ensure proper field
installation.
      (11)   Paint.
         a.   Pole colors shall match the existing street pole color scheme.
         b.   The color of the equipment enclosure shall match the
infrastructure to which it is attached. The antennas, brackets mounting) and
cabling (ABC) shall match the color of the equipment (including the fiber
termination enclosure). Many installations feature wide variations in paint
colors, which is distracting. All equipment shall match pole, including PVC,
steel risers, strap and/or other material.
   (g)   Metered parking spaces. If the placement or maintenance to be
performed by the network providers requires the obstruction of any city owned
or operated metered parking spaces, the network provider shall obtain city
approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, and pay a fee, if required,
to the city as prescribed in any existing or subsequently enacted city
ordinance.
   (h)   Trees and vegetation.
      (1)   Except in cases where normal tree or vegetation trimming is
necessary to ensure the safe operation of the communications service or to
protect the network provider's wireless facilities, the removal, cutting,
marring, defacing or destruction of any trees or other vegetation (other than
grass) by network providers within the public rights-of-way is prohibited,
unless the network provider has obtained all applicable permits from the city
forester.
      (2)   All such normal tree or vegetation trimming by the network provider
must be performed in accordance with the requirements of existing or
subsequently enacted city ordinances and shall be at the network provider's own
expense.
      (3)   All other removal, cutting, marring, defacing or destruction of any
trees or other vegetation (other than grass) by the network provider shall be
subject to the supervision and direction of the city forester, department of
park and recreation or other appropriate governmental authority, including the
public improvement district. If the network provider either (i) fails to engage
in normal tree or vegetation trimming on public property and such failure
results in the network provider's wireless facilities causing damage or injury
to any property or person, or (ii) engages in normal tree or vegetation
trimming on public property and through such action causes damage or injury to
any property or person, then the network provider, by act of registering
hereunder, agrees to INDEMNIFY, HOLD HARMLESS AND DEFEND THE CITY FOR ANY
LIABILITY RESULTING FROM SUCH DAMAGE OR INJURY. The network provider may
contract for such services provided; any firm or individual so retained shall
receive city approval prior to commencing such activity.
   (i)   Installation.
      (1)   A network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install and
construct the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles
and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance
with the requirements promulgated by the City T/PW Director, as such may be
amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the
regulation, control and direction of the city through the T/PW Director. All
work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair,
modification and replacement of the micro network node, network node
facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be in
compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances,
codes, rules and regulations.
      (2)   In an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the public rights-
of-way and other municipal improvements, a network provider may be required to
coordinate the placement or maintenance of its wireless facilities with any
work, construction, installation in or repairs of the subject public rights-
of-way or other facilities therein that is occurring or is scheduled to occur
within a reasonable time from application for a permit. Every network providers
shall make space in its trench and conduit within the public rights-of-way
available to other providers, consistent with all applicable laws. Every
network provider shall utilize existing conduits, pathways and other facilities
whenever possible, and shall not place or maintain any new, different, or
additional poles, conduits, pathways or other facilities, whether in the public
rights-of-way or on privately owned property, until written approval is
obtained from the city or other appropriate governmental authority, and, where
applicable, from the private property owner.
      (3)   Potholing by hydro excavation method shall be required when conduit
crosses a water or sanitary sewer mains. Oversight by a city inspector is
required during construction.
      (4)   All work shall conclude ten calendar days from commencement of
installation each wireless facility.
   (j)   Restoration.
      (1)   Network providers shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or
any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third
party resulting from network provider's removal or relocation activities (or
any other of network provider's activities hereunder) within ten calendar days
following the date of such removal or relocation, at network provider's sole
cost and expense, including without limitation, restoration of the right-of-way
and such property to a similar or better condition as it was immediately before
the date network provider was granted a permit for the applicable location or
did the work at such location (even if network provider did not first obtain a
permit), including, without limitation, restoration or replacement of any
paving system, damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair,
restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval
of the T/PW Director.
      (2)   If the network provider fails to complete such restoration within
ten calendar days following the completion of such placement or maintenance,
the city may perform such restoration and charge the costs of the restoration
to the network provider. City will issue an invoice for such cost. Invoice must
be paid within 30 calendar days. The network provider shall, to the
satisfaction of the city's T/PW or Water Department Director, maintain and
correct any restorations made pursuant hereto for a period of 12 months
following the date of its completion, including restorations made by the city.
Failure to comply shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of any future
permits for the placement or maintenance of wireless facilities.
   (k)   Inspections. The T/PW Director or designee reserves the right to
perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node
support pole or related ground equipment located in the public right-of-way as
the T/PW Director deems appropriate. A network provider may have a
representative present during such inspection.
   (l)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   A wireless facility that has received city approval in the form of
a permit shall be considered an existing wireless facility as long as such
permit is current and not expired.
      (2)   Permits for the installation and construction for wireless
facilities shall be valid for a period of six months. Upon expiration of the
permit, the network provider must reapply.
      (3)   As builts. A network provider shall maintain accurate maps and
other appropriate records of its network node facilities, node support poles
and related ground equipment as they are actually constructed in the public
rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of Auto CAD/GIS digital format.
A network provider shall provide additional maps to the city upon request. All
maps shall conform to the City of Fort Worth standards.
   (m)   Waivers. By its discretionary consent and agreement, the city may
grant exceptions to the above restricted locations and sizes, but only in a
non-exclusive, and non-discriminatory manner, as allowed or required by TLGC §§
284.109 and 284.110.
   (n)   Appeals.
      (1)   All appeals related to this Design Manual will be heard and decided
by the city manager or city manager's designee and must be made in writing. An
appeal must be made within 30 calendar days of the network provider receiving a
decision from the city. In considering an appeal of a decision of the T/PW or
Development Services Director or designee, the following shall be considered:
         a.   Application requesting the installation of wireless facilities;
         b.   The T/PW and Development Services Director or designees'
decision;
         c.   The applicant's written statement of the grounds for appeal; and
         d.   The provisions of this Design Manual, in order to determine
whether the decision was consistent with the Design Manual.
      (2)   If a written decision on the appeal is not rendered within 90
calendar days from the date the written appeal is received, the requested
accommodation shall be deemed granted.
      (3)   The decision of the city manager or designee is final and shall
exhaust all administrative remedies.
   (o)   Improperly located wireless facilities and penalty.
      (1)   Wireless facilities shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in the public right-of-way. If any wireless facilities are installed in
a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the T/PW
Director and impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or do not comply or
otherwise render the public right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws,
including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall promptly
remove the wireless facilities at the sole cost and expense of the network
provider. If the network provider does not remove wireless facility within 15
calendar days of receiving notice from the city of such improper location, then
the city shall remove the wireless facility. The network provider shall
reimburse city for cost of removal.
      (2)   All fines and penalties as per City Code Chapter 30-19 shall apply
for all violations of the Design Manual.
   (p)   Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than ten
calendar days from the date network provider receives notice thereof, network
provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its micro network node, network
node, node support pole, and related ground equipment located in the right-of-
way. The foregoing shall not relieve the network provider from complying with
any city graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation.
   (q)   Insurance, indemnity, bonding and security deposits.
      (1)   Insurance, bonding and security deposits shall be in strict
accordance with city requirements for utility work In the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Indemnity shall be in accordance with TLGC § 284.302, as provided
for in TLGC § 283.057(a) and (b).
   (r)   Network provider's responsibility.
      (1)   The network provider shall provide written notice to the T/PW
Director or designee within ten calendar days prior to preforming any upgrades
or maintenance on a wireless facility.
      (2)   A network provider shall make citizen satisfaction a priority in
using the public right-of-way. Network provider should train its employees to
be customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with
citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its wireless facilities in the
public right-of-way. Network provider's employees shall be clean, courteous,
efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality
of interaction with the public. If, in the opinion of the T/PW Director, the
network provider is not interacting in a positive and polite manner with
citizens, they shall request network provider to take all remedial steps to
conform to these standards.
   (s)   Removal and relocation by the network provider.
      (1)   If the network provider removes or relocates a wireless facility at
its own discretion, it shall notify the T/PW Director or designee in writing
not less than ten calendar days prior to removal or relocation. Network
provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its
wireless facilities prior to relocation or removal.
      (2)   The city will not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by network
provider for wireless facilities that have been removed and relocated.
   (t)   Removal and relocation required for a city project.
      (1)   In accordance with TLGC § 284.107, except as provided in existing
laws, a network provider shall relocate or adjust wireless facilities in a
public right-of-way in three months and without cost to the city.
      (2)   All network provider understands and acknowledges that the city may
require any network provider to remove or relocate its wireless facilities, or
any portion thereof from the public right-of-way for city construction projects
as allowed by applicable laws.
      (3)   Network provider shall, at the T/PW Director's or designee' s
direction, remove or relocate its wireless facilities, or any portion thereof
from the public right-of-way at network provider's sole cost and expense,
except as otherwise provided by applicable laws, whenever the T/PW Director or
designee reasonably determines that the relocation or removal is needed for any
of the following purposes: water or sanitary sewer main breaks, and required
for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance
of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project of
a street or public right-of-way to enhance the public's use for travel and
transportation.
      (4)   If a network provider fails to remove or relocate the wireless
facility, or portion thereof as requested, in writing, by the T/PW Director or
designee within 90 calendar days of network provider's receipt of the request,
then the city shall be entitled to remove the wireless facility, or portion
thereof, at network provider' s sole cost and expense, without further notice
to network provider.
      (5)   A network provider shall, within 30 calendar days following
issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable
expenses incurred in the removal and relocation (including, without limitation,
overhead and storage expenses) of the wireless facility, or portion thereof.
   (u)   Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger reasons.
      (1)   A network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly
disconnect, remove or relocate the wireless facility within the time frame and
in the manner required by the T/PW Director if the TlPW Director or designee
reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal or relocation of any part
of a wireless facility (a) is necessary to protect the public health, safety,
welfare or city property, (b) the wireless facility, or portion thereof, is
adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or city property, or (c)
network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits and
certifications required by law for its wireless facilities, or use of any
location under applicable laws in strict accordance with the city's public
rights-of-way management ordinance, including, but limited to City Code Chapter
30-19, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent
with TLGC Chapter 284. If the T/PW Director reasonably determines that there is
imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove
or relocate the applicable wireless facilities equipment at the network
provider's sole cost and expense.
      (2)   The T/PW Director shall provide 30 calendar days written notice to
the network provider before removing a micro network node, network node, node
support pole and related ground equipment under this section, unless there is
imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare., in which case no
notice is necessary.
      (3)   A network provider shall, within 30 calendar days following
issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable
expenses incurred in the removal and relocation (including, without limitation,
overhead and storage expenses) of the wireless facility, or portion thereof.
   (v)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Network providers shall remove wireless facilities when such
wireless facilities have been abandoned, regardless of whether or not it
receives notice from the city. Unless the city sends notice that removal must
be completed immediately for failure to pay any fee, node attachment fee or to
ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within
the earlier of 90 calendar days of the wireless facility being abandoned or
within 90 calendar days of receipt of written notice from the city. Failure to
remove within the stated time will be considered abandonment. When network
provider removes or abandons permanent structures in the public right-of-way,
the network provider shall notify the T/PW Director or designee in writing of
such removal or abandonment and shall file with the T/PW Director the location
and description of each micro network node, network node, node support pole and
related ground equipment removed or abandoned. The T/PW may require the network
provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety
and the integrity of the public right-of-way. Should the network provider fail
to remove the abandoned wireless facility, the city may remove the abandoned
wireless facility at the network provider or end user's expense.
      (2)   A network provider shall, within 30 calendar days following
issuance of invoice for the same, reimburse the city for its reasonable
expenses incurred in the removal (including, without limitation, overhead and
storage expenses) of the wireless facility, or portion thereof.
   (w)   Pole ownership. City owns all non-utility poles in the public right-
of-way and shall continue to own any and all poles even if such poles are
replaced or relocated by a network provider. No part of a wireless facility
erected or placed on a pole or otherwise on the public right-of-way by network
provider will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a
part of, the public right-of-way. All portions of the wireless facility
constructed, modified, erected, or placed by network provider on the public
right-of-way will be and remain the property of network provider and. May be
removed by network provider at any time, provided the network provider shall
notify the city, in writing, prior to any work in the public right-of-way.
   (x)   Design Manual - updates. Placement or modification of wireless
facilities shall comply with this Design Manual at the time the application for
installation or modification is submitted.
   (y)   Definitions. The definitions as used in TLGC § 284.002, shall be used
in this Design Manual, unless otherwise noted below.
      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
      APPLICABLE CODES:
         a.   Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization; and
         b.   Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent
with TLGC Chapter 284.
      CHAPTER 284. Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284.
      CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas, or its lawful successor.
      CITY MANAGER. City manager or designee.
      COLLOCATE AND COLLOCATION. The installation, mounting, maintenance,
modification, operation or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-
way on or adjacent to a pole.
      CONCEALMENT OR CAMOUFLAGED. Any wireless facility or pole that is
covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or otherwise concealed such
that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is
visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for city advance approval under
TLGC § 284.105, in historic or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged
wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole
conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is
located and may include, but is not limited to, hidden beneath a facade,
blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area or
disguised with artificial tree branches.
      DECORATIVE POLE. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than
specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or
special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed
according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes.
      DESIGN DISTRICT. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by
municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and
aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
      DISASTER EMERGENCY OR DISASTER OR EMERGENCY. An imminent, impending or
actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not
limited to, any declaration of emergency by city, state or federal governmental
authorities.
      DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM OR DAS. Shall be included as a type of
"Network Node."
      EASEMENT. Means and shall include any public easement or other compatible
use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility
purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. EASEMENT shall include a private
easement used for the provision of utilities.
      FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC. The Federal Administrative
Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other
multichannel regulation on a national level.
      FURNISHING ZONE. The paved portion of the streetscape zone typically
located between the back of curb and the sidewalk. The furnishing zone
typically includes street light poles and lights, utility poles, regulatory
signage, traffic signal equipment and street trees. In some cases a streetscape
zone may not have a furnishing zone.
      HIGHWAY. Right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district under municipal, state or federal law.
      LAW. Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule,
regulation, order or ordinance.
      LOCAL. Within the geographical boundaries of the city.
      LOCATION. The city approved and lawfully permitted location for the
network node.
      MACRO TOWER. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the
height parameters prescribed by TLGC § 284.103, and that supports or is capable
of supporting antennas.
      MAYOR. The mayor for the city.
      MICRO NETWORK NODE. A network node that is not larger in dimension than
24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has
an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
      MUNICIPAL PARK. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by
municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity.
      MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by a
municipally owned utility, as defined by Utilities Code § 11.003, and located
in a public right-of-way.
      MUTCD. Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      NETWORK NODE. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term:
         a.   Includes:
            1.   Equipment associated with wireless communications;
            2.   A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power
supply and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
            3.   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to
and directly associated with a particular collocation; and
         b.   Does not include:
            1.   An electric generator;
            2.   A pole; or
            3.   A macro tower.
      NETWORK PROVIDER:
         a.   A wireless service provider; or
         b.   A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not
an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service
provider:
            1.   Network nodes; or
            2.   Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is
capable of supporting a network node.
      NODE SUPPORT POLE. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary
purpose of supporting a network node.
      PARKWAY STRIP. The unpaved portion of the right-of-way between the back
of curb and the sidewalk. The parkway strip typically includes street light
poles and lights, utility poles, regulatory signage, traffic signal equipment
and street trees. In some instances a streetscape zone may not have a parkway
strip.
      PEDESTRIAN CLEAR ZONE. The unencumbered paved or sidewalk portion of the
streetscape zone inside the right-of-way. The pedestrian clear zone may or may
not be separated from the travel lane by a furnishing zone or parkway strip.
      PERMIT. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or
collocation on a service pole required from a municipality before a network
provider may perform an action or initiate, continue or complete a project over
which the municipality has police power authority.
      POLE. A service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole,
or utility pole.
      PRIVATE EASEMENT. An easement or other real property right that is only
for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns.
      PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as "Network Provider."
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway or utility easement in which
the municipality has an interest. The term does not include:
         a.   A private easement; or
         b.   The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless
telecommunications.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. An ordinance that complies with
TLGC Chapter 284, Subchapter C.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. A single-family residential lot or other multifamily
residence or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning.
      SECTION 106 REVIEW. Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966 (NHPA) which requires federal agencies to take into account the effects
of their undertakings on historic properties, and affords the advisory council
on historic preservation a reasonable opportunity to comment.
      SERVICE POLE. A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned
or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including:
         a.   A pole that supports traffic control functions;
         b.   A structure for signage;
         c.   A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
         d.   A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality
and supporting only network nodes.
      SMALL CELL. Shall be included as a type of "Network Node."
      STREET. Only the portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel,
being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite
curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the roadway for vehicular
travel where there is no curb. A STREET is generally part of, but smaller in
width than the width of the entire right-of-way; while a right-of-way may
include sidewalks and utility easements, a STREET does not. A STREET does not
include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit
application or if added later.
      TAS. Texas Accessibility Standards.
      TRAFFIC SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
      TRANSPORT FACILITY. Each transmission path physically within a public
right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to
the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
      UNDERGROUND REQUIREMENT AREA. An area where poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or
have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances,
zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or
private restrictions that prohibit installing above ground structures in a
public right-of-way.
      USER. A person or organization that conducts a business over facilities
occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on
the context.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole that provides:
         a.   Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5
kilovolts; or
         b.   Services of a tele-communications provider, as defined by TLGC
Chapter 284, and Utilities Code § 51.002.
      WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided to the public using a network node.
      WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that provides wireless service to the
public.
      WIRELESS FACILITIES. Micro network nodes, network nodes, node support
poles, transport facilities, and any related equipment, including, but not
limited to, ground or underground equipment not marco facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8616.png]
Exhibit 1 - Unique and creative design solutions are encouraged and should be
contextual to the location of the wireless facility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8618.png]
Exhibit 2 - Non-decorative streetlights with a height of more than 20 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8620.png]
Exhibit 3 - Traffic signal structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8622.png]
Exhibit 4 - Decorative street light with public art. Network providers shall
not install wireless facilities on public art without written permission from
the artist to prevent potential copyright issues.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8624.png]
Exhibit 5 - Example of a photo simulation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8626.png]
Exhibit 6 - In historic districts and design districts with decorative poles
more than one network node is not allowed because it fails to meet the
concealment standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8628.png]
Exhibit 7 - Aerial power and fiber connections are not permitted. They create
additional visual clutter and may require extra tension and structural support.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8630.png]
Exhibit 8 - All attachments on all service poles shall be at least 12 feet
above grade, and if a wireless facilities’ attachment is projecting toward the
street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the
attachment shall be installed no less than 16 feet above the ground (see
exhibit 12).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8632.png]
Exhibit 9 - The pole on the wireless facility is mounted in an inconspicuous
location and painted to match. The pole on the left of the wireless facility is
a different color than the pole and there is exposed conduit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8634.png]
Exhibit 10 - Exposed wiring is prohibited. Above the electric meter and
disconnect switch, all conduit and wiring shall be located inside the pole. All
equipment is located inside the pole and avoids creating physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8636.png]
Exhibit 11 - Equipment shall not be placed adjacent to the walkway in a manner
that diminishes the comfort of pedestrians or be located within the pedestrian
clear zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8638.png]
Exhibit 12 - Where available, all wireless facilities shall be located in the
furnishing zone or parkway strip in line with existing street trees and
decorative poles. In no instance shall a wireless facility equipment be located
in the pedestrian clear zone. In the Downtown Urban Design District a seven
foot wide pedestrian clear zone shall be maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8640.png]
Exhibit 13 - The separation between wireless facilities shall be a minimum of
200 feet or 250 feet in historic districts and design districts with decorative
poles, per block face, to minimize the hazard of multiple poles adjacent to
road ways and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics in the area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8642.png]
Exhibit 14 - The wireless facility is located in front of the residential
building. Wireless facilities shall be located where the shared property line
intersects the public right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8644.png]
Exhibit 15 - Network nodes placement shall not impair light, air, or views from
adjacent windows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8646.png]
Exhibit 16 - Equipment enclosures and equipment mounting base plates shall be
the same width as the pole or structure that they are attached to, even if they
need to be slightly longer as a result. Narrow equipment enclosures are less
likely to impede pedestrian traffic, impair views of buildings and scenic
resources or to detract from streetscape (see
exhibit 14).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8648.png]
Exhibit 17 - The cabling that is cluttered and tangled. Excess loose cabling,
excess decals/stickers, and cluttered appearance of equipment cabinets is not
allowed. Repetitive, and highly visible RF-warning stickers, and equipment
manufacturer decals located near bottom of pole and visible to pedestrians are
not allowed. The presence of multiple stickers and manufacturer loops, which
should be removed or painted over.
(Ord. 22839-08-2017, § 1, passed 8-26-2017; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020)
§§ 30-21—30-30 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PARKWAY CONTRACTORS
§ 30-31 DEFINITION.
   As used in this article, a PARKWAY CONTRACTOR is defined as a person or firm
of persons which lays, constructs, builds, repairs or rebuilds any sidewalk,
curb, gutter or driveway on any street, alley or thoroughfare within the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-10) (Ord. 8806, § 1, passed 5-10-1983; Ord. 9161, § 1, passed
7-31-1984)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 30-32 LICENSE; BOND; PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to perform the work of a parkway
contractor, as defined in this article, without first having obtained from the
director of public works a license to do such work, having made and executed a
bond to the city in the sum of $10,000, without having obtained a parkway
contractor’s license, the fee for which shall be $562.50, and without having
obtained a permit from the director of public works to do such work. The
license provided for in this article shall be renewed annually, and the renewal
fee shall be $562.50.
(1964 Code, § 33-10) (Ord. 8806, § 1, passed 5-10-1983; Ord. 9161, § 1, passed
7-31-1984; Ord. 10633, § 1, passed 7-12-1990; Ord. 27191-09-2024, § 1, passed
9-24-2024, eff. 10-1-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 30-33 LICENSE APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION; CONDITIONS.
   (a)   The license required by the preceding section shall be issued and
approved by the director of transportation and public works. Before the
issuance of same, the applicant shall file in the office of the director of
transportation and public works a statement of his or her qualifications,
together with a surety company bond of $10,000 conditioned that the applicant
will indemnify and save harmless the city and any person, firm or corporation
with whom such applicant may contract to perform work from any and all damage
of every character arising from, or caused directly or indirectly by any
negligence in the performance of such work, and for any imperfect or inadequate
work done by the applicant, and that applicant will maintain such work in a
good and workmanlike state of repair for and during a period of two years from
and after its completion and acceptance by the city. Such statement of
qualifications approved by the director of transportation and public works,
together with bond, license number and date of issuance, shall be maintained by
the director of transportation and public works.
   (b)   The applicant shall also state in his or her application for a license
his or her place of business and the number under which the business is to be
transacted, and shall notify the director of transportation and public works
immediately of any and every change of address or style of his or her firm. All
such bonds shall be subject to the approval of the director of transportation
and public works and shall run for a period of one year from date, or until
revoked.
   (c)   The licensee shall not permit the use of such license by any person
not in his or her employ, for the purpose of doing any work covered by the
preceding section, nor shall he or she sublet any work for which a license is
issued to him or her to any other person.
   (d)   The licensee shall notify the director of transportation and public
works of the date on which he or she intends to start operations on any new
work or contract.
   (e)   The licensee shall stamp his or her name, together with the year in
which the work is completed, on each piece of work constructed by him or her
with a stamp having letters not less than one-half inch nor greater than one
inch in size, and making an impression approximately one-eighth inch in depth.
(1964 Code, § 33-11) (Ord. 9680, § 1, passed 7-22-1986; Ord. 19977-11-2011, §
2, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 30-34 WORK PERMIT; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   After the license required by this article is issued, the licensee shall
obtain a permit from the director of public works for doing any such work. All
such work shall be done according to plans and specifications, grades and lines
furnished by the director of public works, and shall at all times be subject to
the inspection and approval of the director of public works or other persons
designated for such work by him or her. Immediately upon the completion of each
and every such piece of work, the contractor shall apply for and obtain from
the director of public works a certificate, stating in substance that such work
has been completed according to the plans and specifications, grades and lines
given by him or her.
(1964 Code, § 33-12)
§§ 30-35—30-50 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: STREET AND STORM DRAIN CONTRACTORS
§ 30-51 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, a STREET AND STORM DRAIN CONTRACTOR is defined as a
person or firm of persons which lays, constructs, builds, repairs, rebuilds,
grades, gravels, paves, surfaces, resurfaces or does any work in or upon any
public street, alley or thoroughfare within the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-13) (Ord. 8806, § 2, passed 5-10-1983; Ord. 9161, § 2, passed
7-31-1984)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 30-52 LICENSE; BOND; PERMIT—REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to perform the work of a street
and storm drain contractor, as defined in this article, without first having
obtained a street and storm drain license, the fee for which shall be $500, and
without having made and executed a bond to the city in the sum of $25,000. The
license provided for in this article shall be renewed annually, and the renewal
fee shall be $500.
(1964 Code, § 33-13) (Ord. 8806, § 2, passed 5-10-1983; Ord. 9161, § 2, passed
7-31-1984; Ord. 15735, § 1, passed 11-4-2003)
§ 30-53 SAME—LICENSE APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION; CONDITIONS.
   (a)   The license required by this article shall be issued and approved by
the director of transportation and public works. Before the issuance of same,
the applicant shall file in the office of the director of transportation and
public works a detailed statement of the applicant’s qualifications, together
with a surety company bond in the amount of $25,000 conditioned that the
applicant will indemnify and save harmless the city and any person, firm or
corporation with whom such applicant may contract to perform work from any and
all damages of any character arising from or caused directly or indirectly by
any negligence in the performance of such work, and for any imperfect or
inadequate work done by the applicant and that applicant will maintain such
work in a good and workmanlike manner and state of repair for a period of two
years from and after its completion and acceptance by the city. Such statement
of qualifications approved by the director of transportation and public works,
together with bond, license number and date of issuance, shall be maintained by
the director of transportation and public works.
   (b)   The applicant shall also state in his or her application for a license
his or her place of business, the names of his or her associates in such
business and the name and address under which the business is to be transacted.
Each licensee shall notify the director of transportation and public works
immediately of any and every change of address or style of his or her firm. All
such licenses shall be in force from the date of issuance until revoked by the
director of transportation and public works as hereinafter provided. Such
license may be revoked by the director of transportation and public works for
violation by the licensee of any provision of this article, for failure of the
licensee to have approved bond in force at all times as aforesaid, or for
failure of the licensee to complete any specific work in conformity to the
plans and specifications for which any permit may be granted to licensee.
   (c)   The licensee shall not permit the use of such license for any person,
other than his or her employees, for the purpose of doing any work covered by
this article, nor shall he or she subcontract to any other person any work for
which a license is issued to him or her.
   (d)   In addition to the license or bond required in this article, it shall
be unlawful for any person to lay, construct, build, repair, rebuild, grade,
gravel, pave, surface, resurface or do any work in or upon any public street,
alley or thoroughfare within the city without having first secured from the
director of transportation and public works a permit to do the specific work
contemplated. The licensee shall notify the director of transportation and
public works of the date on which he or she intends to commence the work for
which the permit is sought.
(1964 Code, § 33-14) (Ord. 9680, § 2, passed 7-22-1986; Ord. 19977-11-2011, §
3, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 30-54 SAME—EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   This article shall not be construed to prevent any person from doing work in
a public street, alley or thoroughfare under authority of either a cement
contractor’s license and bond or a plumbing license.
(1964 Code, § 33-15)
§§ 30-55—30-65 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 30-66 PERMIT REQUIRED TO OPEN.
   Any person desiring to cut into or in any manner open any public street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, whether paved, graveled, graded or not, in
the city, for any purpose whatsoever, shall first obtain a permit from the
director of public works to cut into or open such street, alley, sidewalk or
public ground.
(1964 Code, § 33-21)
§ 30-67 DEPOSIT REQUIRED; REFUND PROCEDURE.
   Prior to the issuance of the permit for such work as mentioned in §
30-66, the director of public works shall require a cash or equivalent deposit
of a sum of money sufficient to refill any cut or opening contemplated and
about to be made, into any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds
and to replace any paving that may exist thereon. Such money shall be deposited
by the director of public works with the city treasurer, who shall hold the
same as a special fund until such time as the director of public works shall
make certificate that the work for which such deposit was made has been
properly done and the cuts and openings properly filled and the paving or other
surfacing properly replaced. As soon as such refilling has been done and
replacing of paving, etc., has been satisfactorily made and the director of
public works shall have so certified in writing, the city treasurer shall
refund the full amount of such deposit to the person depositing the same upon
warrant duly issued. In case the person cutting into or opening the surface of
such street shall fail to do properly things herein provided for and obtain the
certificate of the director of public works, the director of public works shall
do the same and charge the cost against the deposit and the person shall only
be allowed to receive the balance of his or her deposit after deducting the
amount charged against the same as aforesaid; provided, that in all cases of
cutting into or opening streets paved with brick, asphalt or similar material,
the cut or opening shall be filled with cement or other material as
satisfactory and substantial as cement, and all dirt taken from the excavation
shall be hauled away by the party opening the street and deposited as provided
in §
30-71.
(1964 Code, § 33-22)
§ 30-68 RESTORATION OF SURFACE; INSPECTION.
   When any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground has been cut into or
opened, as provided in § 30-66, for the purpose of laying gas, water or sewer
pipe or for any other purpose, the party doing the same shall puddle and ram
the backfilling so as to prevent the settling of the place cut and the street
shall be restored with similar material and workmanship to that existing in the
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground before the same was torn up. All work
shall be done to the satisfaction of the director of public works whose duty it
shall be to inspect the same after it has been done. The work shall be
completed or the opening refilled and replaced as herein provided and within
the time specified in the permit.
(1964 Code, § 33-23)
§ 30-69 LIGHTS AND BARRICADES.
   In all cases where the surface of the street, alley, sidewalk or public
ground is disturbed, the party so cutting into or opening the same shall place
lights at night and maintain suitable barricades to protect persons from
danger.
(1964 Code, § 33-24)
§ 30-70 ONLY NECESSARY MATERIAL TO BE REMOVED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit may be granted to
excavate the streets, alleys or public grounds, or any of them, in the city,
for the purpose of laying pipes, wires or any kindred purpose, to remove from
such streets, alleys or public grounds any of the earth, gravel, stone or other
material excavated from such excavations which is not needed for the purpose of
refilling the same, unless the same shall be done under the provisions of this
section and §§
30-71 and
30-72.
(1964 Code, § 33-25)
§ 30-71 DISPOSAL OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   All persons to whom permits may be granted to excavate the streets, alleys
or public grounds of the city, or any of them, for the purpose of laying pipes,
wires or for any kindred purpose, shall, at their own cost and expense, deliver
at such place as may be designated by the director of public works for such
purpose all such surplus earth, dirt, stone, gravel or other material coming
out of such excavation as shall not be necessary for the purpose of refilling
the same.
(1964 Code, § 33-26)
§ 30-72 CONDITION RE SURPLUS MATERIAL INCLUDED IN BOND.
   All bonds, cash deposits or obligations taken for the purpose requiring
persons to whom permits are given to excavate streets for the purpose aforesaid
shall be made to include a condition that the surplus material shall be
delivered in accordance with the provisions of §§
30-70 and 30-71.
(1964 Code, § 33-27)
§ 30-73 ERECTION OF WIRE-BEARING POLES, ETC.—PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No posts, poles or towers built or erected for the purpose of bearing wires
or upon which wires are placed or are to be placed, used in connection with any
telegraph, electric light, telephone, street railway, radio or like purpose,
shall be erected, placed, kept or maintained upon any street, alley,
thoroughfare or any other public place within the city, unless a written permit
shall have first been obtained from the chief electrical inspector to erect or
build such posts, poles or towers.
(1964 Code, § 33-28)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 30-74 SAME—SUBMITTAL OF PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS; FEE; PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Any person who desires to build or erect poles, posts or towers shall submit
to the chief electrical inspector plans and specifications showing the proposed
improvements. It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector when such
plans and specifications have been submitted to him or her, to make an
inspection of the proposed improvements and if, in his or her discretion, the
public good and welfare will be promoted, he or she shall issue a permit to the
person making the application. An inspection fee of $0.50 for each pole, post
or tower to be built or erected shall be paid by the applicant before such
permit is issued.
(1964 Code, § 33-29)
§ 30-75 TEMPORARY OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS WITH BUILDING MATERIALS OR
RUBBISH.
   (a)   Any person desiring to temporarily occupy any portion of any public
street, alley or sidewalk within the city for the purpose of placing thereon
material or rubbish for or from building operations, or for any excavation of
any area under such street, alley or sidewalk or for any purpose whatsoever
connected with the erection, removal, alteration or repair of any building or
other structure, shall apply to the director of public works for a permit for
such temporary occupation. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or
obstruct any street, alley or sidewalk as aforesaid without a written permit
therefor from the director of public works, which permit shall not be issued
until the person applying therefor shall have first presented a building permit
therefor issued by the director of public works, together with a bond, if
required by the director of public works, approved by the city council in such
sum as shall be fixed by the director of public works, conditioned that the
principal therein will discharge all claims of every character arising from or
occasioned by such occupancy of such street, sidewalk or alley or by reason of
damages or injuries sustained by persons or property because of such occupancy
of such street, alley or sidewalk or the construction or repair of such
building or the making of such excavation and discharge all judgments obtained,
together with all costs attached thereto against the city by reason of any such
claim, injury or damage sustained. Every person carrying on any such excavation
or building operation shall keep all streets, alleys and sidewalks adjacent to
such excavations or building operations carried on by him or her, in a clean
and orderly condition, and unobstructed, except as provided in this section,
during such operation, and at the expiration of the time stipulated in the
permit shall restore all such streets, alleys and sidewalks to as good
condition as they were before the beginning of such operations.
   (b)   A violation of any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section
shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights and privileges granted by the
permit hereinabove mentioned.
(1964 Code, §§ 33-30, 33-31)
§ 30-76 BUILDING EXTENSIONS OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building abutting on any street or
sidewalk in the city, or any tenant occupying such building, or any other
person, to construct, build, operate or maintain any building or part of
building or show window which extends over any part of any street or sidewalk
in the city.
(1964 Code, § 33-34)
§§ 30-76.1—30-76.10 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 30-76.11
through 30-88 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to
environmental use agreements and derived from § 1(c) of Ord. 11541, adopted
April 12, 1994, and § 1 of Ord. 11676, adopted September 20, 1994.
§§ 30-76.11—30-88 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: VALET PARKING
§ 30-89 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article:
   DIRECTOR. The director of the transportation and public works department or
the director's designated representative.
   LICENSEE. A person licensed under this article to operate a valet parking
service. The term includes any employee, agent or independent contractor of the
person in whose name the valet parking license is issued.
   SITE. The public space along the curb line of a block face within the right-
of-way or within the traffic  lane as identified by appropriate signage or
markings where a licensee may receive or return vehicles under a valet parking
license issued by the director.
   VALET PARKING LICENSE. A license issued by the director authorizing a valet
parking service to use the city's right-of-way.
   VALET PARKING SERVICE. A business, or any part of a business, which provides
a person to receive a vehicle from a patron of a commercial establishment or
commercial activity and operate it to and from a parking location so that the
patron and any passengers in the vehicle may unload and load at their immediate
destination without the necessity of locating a space and parking their own
vehicle.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-90 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate valet parking operations in order
to manage traffic flow in the public right-of-way in a manner that minimizes
congestion and makes parking more convenient to patrons visiting local
establishments. This article only applies to a valet parking service provided
in connection with a commercial establishment or commercial activity and does
not apply to occasional valet parking service provided at a private residence
or in connection with a social or fundraising activity. This article does not
apply to property that is used by a commercial establishment pursuant to a
written agreement with the city or to a valet parking service unloading and
loading patrons on private property.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-91 VALET PARKING LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; RENEWALS.
   (a)   A person who desires to operate a valet parking service on public
right-of-way shall apply in writing to the director, on a form prescribed by
the director, for a valet parking license. One application per site must be
submitted to the director. The application must be completed by the valet
parking service, or the owner or lessee of the premises benefitting from the
proposed valet parking service, and must contain the following information:
      (1)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of:
         a.   The applicant;
         b.   If the applicant is a lessee, the property owner; and
         c.   The independent contractor, if any, the applicant will use to
provide valet parking service;
      (2)   The proposed location of the valet parking service and a map
showing the placement of any valet parking service stands and off-site valet
parking. The map shall also include the placement of any traffic cones to be
used;
      (3)   The number of spaces requested to be reserved for the valet parking
service, each space being 25 feet long, if parallel to the curb, or nine feet
wide, if head in to the curb; a minimum number of two spaces must be reserved
unless the director determines that because of special traffic conditions, a
greater number of spaces is needed to efficiently operate the valet parking
service;
      (4)   The proposed hours and days of operation of the valet parking
service;
      (5)   The location of off-street parking and evidence of a signed
agreement or other documentation showing that the applicant has a legal right
to park vehicles at that off-street location;
      (6)    Proof of insurance as required by §
30-99;
      (7)   Copies of written notification to all property owners or their
representatives, located within 100 feet of, on the same side of the street as,
and within the same block as the site; and
      (8)   The applicable fee under §
30-93.
   (b)   Within 14 days after any completed application is submitted to the
director, the director shall forward a copy to any department that, in the
director's discretion, might be affected by the operation of the proposed valet
parking service. Each department representative, and any other notified
persons, shall review the application and return it with any comments, which
might affect the director's decision, to the director within 30 days of
receipt.
   (c)   After reviewing the application and properly submitted comments of the
departments, and upon receiving payment of all fees required by this division,
the director shall issue a valet parking license if the applicant meets the
requirements of this article, subject to §
30-94. If an application is denied by the director then the applicant may
appeal in accordance with §
30-95.
   (d)   A licensee desiring to change the location or hours of operation of a
valet parking service must submit a new application to the director in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   Application renewal.  The initial valet parking license will expire on
December 31 of the same year of issuance, unless terminated sooner by the
director. A licensee must apply to renew its annual valet parking license for
each site no later than December 1 of each year in order to maintain the valet
license without interruption, this must be done by completing a renewal
application on a form prescribed by the director in which the licensee must
disclose any changes related to the valet parking service and make payment of
all necessary fees. After reviewing the annual renewal application, the
director shall issue a renewal of the licensee's valet parking license if the
licensee continues to meet the requirements of this article. Unless terminated
sooner by the director, the renewed valet parking license will be effective
from January 1 through December 31 of each year the renewal is approved. If
renewal is denied by the director then the licensee may appeal in accordance
with §
30-95. Failure to apply for renewal of valet parking license shall necessitate
initiation of a new application.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-92 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be an offense to violate §§
30-96 through
30-99 of this article.
   (b)   With the exception of §
30-96(a)(5), an offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. In accordance Chapter 22, Article VI,
Division 1, §
22-158.3 of the city code, it is a civil offense to violate §
30-96(a)(5) of this article.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-93 FEES.
   (a)   The licensee must pay an annual fee of $500 for each of the first two
spaces for each approved application. Amounts will be prorated for applications
made prior to January 1 of each year.
   (b)   If the director determines that more than two spaces are necessary,
the fee shall be $150 per additional space per year. Amounts will be prorated
for applications made prior to January 1 of each year.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-94 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF VALET PARKING LICENSE; TEMPORARY SUSPENSION.
   (a)   The director shall deny a valet parking license if:
      (1)   The applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this article
or other applicable law;
      (2)   The applicant makes a false statement of material fact or omission
on an application for a valet parking license; or
      (3)   The director determines that the operation of the valet parking
service would:
         a.   Endanger the safety of persons or property or otherwise not be in
the public interest;
         b.   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         c.   Unreasonably interfere with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox or other object permitted at or near the
proposed location of the valet parking service; or
         d.   Unreasonably interfere with an existing use permitted at or near
the proposed location of the valet parking service.
   (b)   The director shall revoke a valet parking license if:
      (1)   The licensee fails to comply with the requirements of this article
regulating valet parking service, or other applicable law;
      (2)   The licensee made a false statement or omission of material fact on
an application for a valet parking license; or
      (3)   The director determines that the operation of the valet parking
service:
         a.   Endangers the safety of persons or property or is otherwise not
in the public interest;
         b.   Unreasonably interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         c.   Unreasonably interferes with the use of a pole, traffic sign,
traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox or other object permitted at or near the
location of the valet parking service; or
         d.   Unreasonably interferes with an existing use permitted at or near
the location of the valet parking service.
   (c)   After receipt of the notice of revocation, the valet parking license
holder shall immediately discontinue providing valet parking service using the
public right-of-way.
   (d)   The director may temporarily suspend the operations of a valet parking
service if the public right-of-way reserved by the valet parking service is
needed for construction, maintenance or repair of streets or utilities.
   (e)   The police or fire chief, or their designated representatives, may
temporarily suspend the operations of a valet parking service if the public
right-of-way reserved by the valet parking service is needed for an emergency
or temporary use.
   (f)   If the director revokes, denies or suspends a valet parking license,
the licensee shall receive written notice of his or her action, the reason for
the revocation, denial or suspension and that the licensee has the right to
appeal the director's decision. The decision of the director is final unless a
timely appeal is made.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-95 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A VALET PARKING LICENSE.
   (a)   A person may appeal a denial, suspension or revocation of a valet
parking license if he or she requests an appeal, in writing, received by the
city manager not more than ten days after notice of the action of the director
is issued to the applicant.
   (b)   The city manager or his or her designated representative shall act as
the appeals hearing officer in an appeal under this section. The appeals
hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present
evidence and make arguments on his or her behalf. The formal rules of evidence
shall not apply to an appeal hearing under this section, and the appeals
hearing officer shall make a ruling within ten days based on a preponderance of
the evidence presented at the hearing.
   (c)   The appeals hearing officer may affirm, modify or reverse all or part
of the action of the director being appealed. The decision of the appeals
hearing officer is final.
   (d)   All notices required under this article shall be in writing and sent
via certified or registered mail, return receipt requested through the United
Postal Service.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-96 STANDARDS FOR OPERATION OF A VALET PARKING SERVICE.
   (a)   A licensee shall:
      (1)   Allow only employees and independent contractors who hold a valid
state driver's license, and who are covered by the insurance required by § 30-
99 of this article, to operate any vehicle in connection with the valet parking
service;
      (2)   Operate the valet parking service in a manner that does not:
         a.   Use or occupy more of the public right-of-way than is allowed by
the valet parking license;
         b.   Obstruct a pedestrian's use of a sidewalk;
         c.   Obstruct a vehicle operator's ability to see any part of an
intersecting road;
         d.   Injure, damage or create a hazard to persons or property; or
         e.   Obstruct a vehicle's ability to use the adjacent travel lane;
      (3)   Place no more than two valet parking service stands on the public
right-of-way;
      (4)   Neither place nor allow the placement of a sign advertising the
valet parking service in the public right-of-way that exceeds a base dimension
of 18 inches, except as provided for under this section or §
30-101. The signs allowed under this section are intended to define the limits
of the valet operation only;
      (5)   Neither park nor allow the parking or standing of a vehicle in a
site for longer than 30 minutes for hotels operating a valet parking service
and five minutes for other non-hotel valet parking service operators. For
purposes of this subsection, parking or standing of a vehicle in a site will be
calculated based on the time that the vehicle is unattended. For purposes of
this section, "unattended" shall mean the time that a vehicle remains at the
site when it is not being loaded or unloaded. Licensee shall not use the site
for parking licensee's vehicles, including vehicles of any employee,
independent contractor, subcontractor, or vendor;
      (6)   Not park a vehicle on the public right-of-way and shall use only an
off-street parking location to park a vehicle accepted for valet parking
service;
      (7)   Notify director within ten days of a change in the location of off-
street parking and provide director with a signed agreement or other
documentation showing that the licensee has a legal right to park vehicles at
the new location;
      (8)   Keep a copy of the valet parking license readily available at the
site during hours of operation and shall produce the copy on the request of the
director, the director's authorized representatives, or a peace officer;
      (9)   Attach a sign to the valet parking service stand with the
licensee's name and contact phone number; and
      (10)   Provide appropriate reflective material to an employee who enters
the street while on duty, and an employee shall be required to wear the
reflective material while on duty.
   (b)   Except for the authorized hours of operation of a valet parking
service, spaces reserved by the valet parking service shall be available for
use by the general public on a first-come, first served basis in accordance
with posted signs and other traffic-control devices, except where parking is
restricted or prohibited.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-97 VALET PARKING SERVICE STANDS.
   (a)   A licensee may place two valet parking service stands on the public
right-of-way of the designated site consistent with the application approved by
the director. The valet parking service stand must be necessary to the general
conduct of the valet parking service and shall be used for such purposes,
including, but not limited to, the dispatch of valets and the storage of keys,
umbrellas and other necessary items.
   (b)   A valet parking service stand shall:
      (1)   Not occupy an area of the public right-of-way exceeding four feet
in width and four feet in depth;
      (2)   Not be affixed to the public right-of-way in any manner;
      (3)   Be removed from the public right-of-way when the valet parking
service is not being operated; and
      (4)   Not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (c)   A name and/or logo may be placed on a valet parking service stand for
the sole purpose of identifying the valet parking service. The identification
of the valet parking service shall not have dimensions greater than four feet
high and four feet wide.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-98 LOCATION OF A VALET PARKING SERVICE.
   (a)   Spaces and stands for a valet parking service may not:
      (1)   Be within ten feet of a crosswalk;
      (2)   Be within ten feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police or
other emergency facility;
      (3)   Be within five feet of a driveway;
      (4)   Be within three feet in front of or 15 feet behind a sign marking a
designated bus stop;
      (5)   Be within five feet of a bus bench; or
      (6)   Reduce the unobstructed space for the passage of pedestrians to
less than four feet.
   (b)   The director may require greater distances than those prescribed in
subsection (a) above when warranted by special vehicular or pedestrian traffic
conditions.
   (c)   The licensee must adhere to the map submitted under §
30-91(a)(2) as approved by the director.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-99 INSURANCE.
   (a)   A licensee shall procure, or cause to be procured, and keep in full
force and effect, and shall keep on file with the director, a policy of garage
liability and garage keepers liability insurance, as evidenced by a certificate
of insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business
in this state and accepted by the risk manager for the City of Fort Worth. The
insured provisions of the policy must include a waiver of subrogation in favor
of the City of Fort Worth as well as name the City of Fort Worth, and its
officers and employees, as additional insureds. The coverage provisions must
insure the public from loss or damage that may arise to any person or property
by reason of the operation of a valet parking service by the licensee.
   (b)   The garage liability insurance shall provide liability for bodily
injury and property damage resulting from the garage operations or operations
of any auto whether or not owned by the insured and shall be in the minimum
limit of $1,000,000; other than garage operations which shall be $1,000,000 per
occurrence and an aggregate of $2,000,000.
   (c)   In addition, the garage keepers insurance must provide a limit of
liability for property damage of not less than $1,000,000 for vehicles in the
care custody and control of the licensee. Maximum deductibles shall not exceed
$1,000 per unit, $5,000 per loss comprehensive and $1,000 for collision.
   (d)   The insurance policy required by subsection (a) of this section shall
contain an endorsement which provides for ten days' notice to the director in
the event of any material change or cancellation of the policy.
   (e)   Upon the director's approval, an exception to the following
requirements may be made if the exclusion of garage liability is waived and
endorsed by the commercial general liability insurance policy to include garage
operations.
   (f)   This section does not preclude additional or more stringent
requirements for valet parking services operated under a contract with the City
of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 15201, § 1, passed 8-27-2002; Ord.
18318-09-2008, § 4, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-
2016)
§ 30-100 INDEMNIFICATION AND HOLD HARMLESS.
   Licensee, and any independent contractor used by the licensee, must execute
a written agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Fort Worth and
its officers and employees against all claims or injury or damage to persons or
property arising out of the operation of the valet parking service by the
licensee.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
§ 30-101 SIGNS AND MARKINGS.
   (a)   The director is authorized to place city signs or curb markings at a
location licensed for a valet parking service pursuant to this article.
   (b)   The signs and markings shall:
      (1)   Indicate that the location is restricted for use by a valet parking
service;
      (2)   State the days and hours of operation of the valet parking service;
and
      (3)   Include a tow away sign.
(Ord. 15092, § 1, passed 5-7-2002; Ord. 22224-05-2016, § 1, passed 5-17-2016)
ARTICLE VII: NEWSRACKS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17529, § 1, adopted May 1, 2007, added a new Art. VII, to read as
herein set out. It should be noted that these provisions shall become effective
September 1, 2007. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis
of inclusion.
DIVISION 1: PURPOSE
§ 30-102 PURPOSE.
   The purpose this article is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens and visitors to the downtown area of Fort Worth through
the regulation of placement, type, appearance and maintenance of newsracks on
public rights-of-way so as to:
   (a)   Provide for pedestrian and driver safety and convenience;
   (b)   Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, ingress into and egress from
any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, or from
the sidewalk to the street by persons exiting or entering parked or standing
vehicles;
   (c)   Provide for the safety of the general public and property during
emergency conditions;
   (d)   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts,
traffic signs and/or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, sidewalks, planters, pavers
and access to locations used for public transportation;
   (e)   Allow for the placement and maintenance of newsracks in areas, as
determined by the city, which afford easy, convenient service to pedestrians,
but do not obstruct or interfere with access to abutting properties, and which
do not impede or endanger pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular traffic;
   (f)   Relocate, replace and/or remove newsracks which result in visual
blight and/or are not installed according to this ordinance on the public
rights-of-way or which block or interfere with the aesthetics of store window
displays, adjacent businesses, landscaping, street furniture, public or
private, and other improvements as well as to allow the removal of abandoned
newsracks;
   (g)   Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties, and ensure
that the aesthetics and historical attributes of the downtown area and
businesses are not compromised by the unregulated placement of newsracks in the
public right-of-way;
   (h)   Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal injury or
property damage;
   (i)   Maintain and preserve freedom of the press to distribute periodicals
and newspapers; and
   (j)   Reduce visual blight and improve the aesthetic appearance of the
city’s streets and sidewalks for the merchants, citizens and visitors to the
city by coordinating the placement and number of newsracks on public rights-of-
way.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 2: DEFINITIONS
§ 30-103 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ABANDONED NEWSRACK. Any newsrack which remains empty of the owners’
publication or unserviced for:
      (1)   Four consecutive days for a daily publication;
      (2)   Eight consecutive days for a weekly publication;
      (2)   Sixteen consecutive days for a biweekly publication; and
      (3)   Thirty-four consecutive days for a monthly publication.
   BUSINESS DAYS. Monday through Friday, excluding any legal holiday observed
by the city.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CITY MANAGER. The Fort Worth City Manager or his or her designated assistant
city manager.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway, whether marked or unmarked, which is
included with the extension of the sidewalk lines between opposite sides of the
roadway at an intersection.
   DEPARTMENT. The city’s department of planning and development for permitting
purposes and the city’s department of code compliance for enforcement purposes.
   DIRECTOR. The director the department of planning and development or the
director of code compliance, as applicable, or their designees.
   DISTRIBUTOR. The person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack
in a public-right-of-way, parkway or sidewalk.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
organization or legal entity of any kind.
   NEWSRACK. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale or
distribution, with or without charge, of newspapers, news periodicals, news
publications, printed news material, commercial literature or other
publications.
   OBSCENE. Material that depicts or describes sexual conduct that is
objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average
person, applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole,
appeals to prurient interests; or material which depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable state
law, and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entirety of any public street area, including the
public roadway and adjacent pedestrian ways and shall include, but not be
limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
   PARKWAY. The area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street and where
there is not sidewalk, the area between the edges of the roadway the property
line adjacent to the roadway. PARKWAY shall also include any area within a
roadway that is not open to vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK. All that area or surface provided for the exclusive use of
pedestrians.
   UNSERVICED. Any newsracks which does not contain the most current owners
publication.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 3: APPLICABILITY
§ 30-104 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all newsracks, whether
installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the
provisions of this ordinance. Any newsrack installed prior to the effective
date of this ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of
this article within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance. Any
newsrack not brought into compliance within 30 days of the effective date of
this ordinance shall be deemed to be in violation of this article.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 4: PERMITS
§ 30-105 PERMITS.
   (a)   No person shall install, maintain or operate any newsrack which in
whole or in part rests upon, on or over any public right-of-way, parkway or
sidewalk or in any other public way or place in the downtown area of the City
of Fort Worth as described in Exhibit “A” without first applying for and
receiving a permit from the director.
   (b)   A permit will not be issued unless the application is completed in
full, the requested installation meets all the appropriate placement criteria
as set forth in this article and the application is accompanied by the
appropriate permit fee for each individual newsrack installation requested. Any
permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall only be valid
as to the specific location specified in the permit application. Where
application is made for the installation of two or more single newsracks, a
separate permit shall be required for each individual newsrack.
   (c)   (1)   Upon this ordinance taking effect, any owner of a newsrack
currently existing on any city public right-of-way, parkway or sidewalk or in
any other public way within the downtown area as described in subsection (a)
above, must apply for a permit within 30 days of the effective date of the
ordinance or remove the newsrack from any public right-of-way, sidewalk or
public property. At the end of the 30-day period, the city shall use the
following method to determine which publisher newsracks shall be allows at a
particular permitted location at a block, corner or intersection:
         a.   Priority shall be give to publishers who continuously have
distributed newspapers or other publications in newsracks at that location for
more than 12 months before the effective date of this ordinance, as indicated
by the publisher’s affidavit and the city’s records;
         b.   Among publishers who have priority under this subsection (c),
newsrack locations shall be allocated first to newspapers and other
publications issued at least five days per week, second to newspapers and other
publications issued between two and four days per week, third to newspapers and
other publications issued once a week, and fourth to newspapers and other
publications issued less frequently;
         c.   If there are more allocated spots than publishers with priority
under this section, then the city shall allocated the remaining locations among
publishers who do not priority, first to newspapers and other publications
issued at least five days per week, second to newspapers and other publications
issued between two and four days per week, third to newspapers and other
publications issued once a week, and fourth to newspapers and other
publications issued less frequently;
         d.   Notwithstanding the requirements of this subsection (c), no
newspaper or other publication may receive a third space at an intersection
until all other interested publishers have had the opportunity to have their
newspaper or other publication allocated to that intersection;
         e.   Whenever a permitted location at a corner, block or intersection
becomes available, the location shall be allocated in the manner descried in
this subsection (c);
         f.   In the event two or more publishers have equal priority under
this subsection (c) then allocation shall be by a content neutral lottery or
other random method; and
         g.   Once the initial process as described above has been fully
implemented, all subsequent newsrack permits shall be issued on a first come
first served basis for any unfilled locations. Applications for any unfilled
locations will be accepted as submitted and received by the department.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the above process and the issuance of permits,
any newsrack which is not the subject of a valid permit application will be
deemed to be in violation of the article and subject to removal from the right-
of-way as set forth in this article.
   (d)   The application for a newsrack permit shall be in writing and on a
form approved by the director, signed by the applicant and shall include the
following information:
      (1)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or
organization requesting a permit and responsible for the newsrack;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom
the city may contact or notify at any time concerning the applicant’s newsrack;
      (3)   The specified number of newsracks and the detailed proposed
location for each one, shown on a drawing of the area described in subsection
(a) above or GIS/address based program provided by the applicant which is
compatible with the city’s GIS program and which indicated all existing
buildings, existing newsracks at the location(s) and general vicinity, and all
other possible obstructions within 20 feet of the proposed location(s) of the
newsrack, and the proposed specific locations of the newsracks;
      (4)   The name of the newspaper(s) or periodical(s) to be placed in the
each newsrack;
      (5)   Type or brand of newsrack, including an illustration and
description of the newsstand and mount and whether the newsrack will have a
coin-box attachment or equivalent;
      (6)   A sworn statement under penalty of perjury executed by an officer,
director or authorized agent of the applicant that the applicant shall not
sell, assign or transfer by any method, the permit for the newsrack location to
any other publisher, distributor, entity or individual person;
      (7)   Language whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the city, its officers, directors and employees against any loss or
liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal
injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as the result of the
installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack within the City of Fort Worth;
      (8)   An administrative fee; and
      (9)   Other information as requested by the director.
   (e)   Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack without
prior inspection of the location(s), but the director, or his or her designee,
shall have final approval of the location(s). The director shall review the
application and issue a permit within four business days to a person or
organization whose application meets the requirements of this section.
   (f)   The permit sticker, containing the distributor’s permit number, name,
address and working telephone number must be affixed and displayed on the front
of each newsrack in a conspicuous location. If such location is not
practicable, the permit sticker shall be located in a location approved by the
director.
   (g)   Initial permits shall be valid for a period of one year and shall be
renewable pursuant to the requirements of this article.
   (h)   Expiration; renewal. Unless earlier revoked, newsrack permits issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire on August 30 of the
second year after the permit is issued. Thereafter, the permits shall be
renewed every two years upon the payment of a new permit fee. Applications for
renewal shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration of any permit
issued and must be accompanied by a permit renewal fee. Application for permit
renewal and payment must be either presented in person to the department of
planning and development, via internet (if available), or mailed via certified
mail, postmarked no later than 30 days prior to the date of permit expiration.
Failure to renew an existing newsrack permit before its expiration will require
the payment of a late renewal penalty or the loss of placement of said rack at
the subject location.
   (i)   New development. If a new building or development occurs adjacent to
or near a permitted location that causes the permitted location or permitted
newsrack to no longer meet the requirements of this ordinance, the city shall,
after notification to the permittee, move the permitted newsrack to the nearest
permitted and available location that meets the requirements of the ordinance.
   (j)   Insurance. As a condition of the city granting an person or persons
one or more permits to maintain a newsrack or newsracks in the public right-of-
way, any such permittee shall be required to maintain a policy of general
liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the city, naming the City of
Fort Worth and its employees, agents etc. As “additional insureds” for the
specific purpose of indemnifying and holding harmless the City of Fort Worth,
its officers, boards, employees, etc. from and against any and all losses,
costs, damages, expenses or liability, whatsoever, which may result form or
arise out of the granting of a permit, and/or the installation and/or the
maintenance of an newsrack or newsracks for which the permittee shall be
responsible for paying any and all such losses or damages that may be sustained
by any person or persons as a result of, or which may be caused by or arise out
of the installation and/or maintenance of the permitted newsrack or newsracks.
The policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the
permittee at the permittee’s expense at all times during the period for which
the permittee holds a valid permit or permits.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “A,” as referenced in subsection (a), is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city.
DIVISION 5: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS
§ 30-106 NEWSRACKS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which projects onto,
into or over any part the roadway of any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk,
or which rests, in whole or in part, upon any portion of any street, or other
right-of-way on which motor vehicles are lawfully permitted.
   (b)   No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise secured to another
newsrack, fire hydrants, call boxes, sprinkler inlets, public signs, handrails,
planters, benches, trees, light poles or attached to any fixture located in any
public right-of-way, or sidewalk.
   (c)   Unlawful obstructions.
      (1)   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack:
         a.   Within five feet of any curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
         b.   Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
         c.   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
         d.   Within five feet of any designated handicapped parking or
handicapped access ramp;
         e.   Within five feet of any bus bench;
         f.   Within five feet ahead and 15 feet to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop. No newsrack will be installed within the marked
bus zone;
         g.   In front of an entrance to a business, including the curb area
directly across from such entrance where the distance between the entry door,
including any recessed area in front of the entry door, and the newsrack is
less than ten feet;
         h.   In any location used, marked or posted for public utility
purpose, public transportation purpose or government use;
         i.   Within or in any location where such newsracks leaves less than
five feet of clear space for pedestrian traffic or handicap accessibility;
         j.   Within two feet of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals,
mailboxes or other objects legally permitted;
         k.   Within five feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs,
trees, street tree wells, landscape planters or other landscaping. No newsrack
shall be located on any tree grate;
         l.   Within five feet of any driveway or driveway apron;
         m.   Within five feet of any outdoor dining areas or patio dining
areas;
         n.   Within four feet of any display window of any window abutting the
sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window for display purposes;
         o.   Where placement blocks access to historic markers, benches,
trashcans, bike racks, street furniture or other permanent improvements;
         p.   Where placement impedes the flow of pedestrian traffic by
reducing area free of obstructions (the clear space) to less than six feet or,
impeded access to or the use of abutting property, including but not limited
to, residences and places of business;
         q.   Within 20 feet for both sides of visual public art work or
architectural details of buildings, including, but not limited to, murals,
sculptures and fountains;
         r.   Within four feet to the front and ten feet to the rear of any
parking meter and where there are not parking meters on the curb, within 30
inches from any marked parallel parking space;
         s.   If the newsrack is placed near a curb, the newsrack shall be
situated near the curb with the back of the newsrack situated not less than 18
inches from the edge of the curb; and
         t.   In order to provide for the flow of pedestrian traffic, placement
of newsracks must provide for a ten-foot minimum passageway for a 20-foot or
greater sidewalk; eight feet minimum passageway for sidewalks measuring between
16 and 20 feet in width; and a five feet minimum passageway in width for
sidewalks that are less than 16 feet in width.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other subsection of this subdivision, no person
shall install, use or maintain any newsrack where placement endangers the
safety of persons or property.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 6: RESERVED
DIVISION 7: LOCATION, PLACEMENT AND NUMBER
§ 30-107 LOCATION, PLACEMENT AND NUMBER.
   (a)   If the newsrack is placed adjacent to the wall of the building, the
back of the newsrack shall be situated parallel to and not more than six inches
from such wall. This section shall not preclude newsracks from being located on
opposite corners of a street at an intersection.
   (b)   No more than four newsracks shall be placed immediately adjacent to
each other. No more than four newsracks shall be permitted on any street corner
or more than 16 newsracks on any four corners of an intersection or more than
eight newsracks on a blockface, including the newsracks located on the corner.
   (c)   No publication may have more than two newsracks at any intersection.
No more than two permits for installation of a newsrack shall be issued for
each publication at an intersection or more than one permit for each group of
four newsracks on a corner. No more than one permit shall be issued for each
publication on one side of a block or within 200 feet of the same block face,
whichever is less. A publication includes differing geographic editions of the
same publication and daily and Sunday editions of the same publication. In
cases where the block face is longer than 200 feet and there is space to
legally install additional newsracks, then a permit for one publication to
install a second newsrack on the same block face may be issued by the director.
   (d)   No newsrack shall be separated by a space of more than 12 inches from
any other individual newsrack. No group of newsrack shall extend for a distance
of more than eight feet and a space of not less than three feet shall separate
each group of newsracks.
   (e)   No more than one group of newsracks shall be allowed per 100 feet of
block face, which shall include locations at or near the corner of the block
face. No groups of newsracks shall be allowed less than 50 feet from another
group of newsracks.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 8: LETTERING, SIGNS AND LOGOS
§ 30-108 LETTERING, SIGNS AND LOGOS.
   (a)   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes.
External lettering is restricted to the external lettering and logos
replicating the publication style and color of the permitted publication in the
subject newsrack. Other than as permitted in this section, no other lettering
or advertising of any kind shall be permitted anywhere else on the newsrack,
including the mount.
   (b)   Display of obscene material. No person shall knowingly place or
maintain any publication or material in newsracks, which exposes to public view
from the street or sidewalk any statements, words, pictures or illustrations
that are obscene.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 9: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION
§ 30-109 STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION.
   (a)   Every newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
be in good repair at all times. Upon the removal of any newsrack, the applicant
shall be responsible for the repair of any resulting condition. Such work will
be done to the specification and prior approval of the department of code
compliance.
   (b)   Each newsrack which rests, pursuant to the standards set forth in this
division, in whole or in part on any public sidewalk, parkway or right-of-way
shall comply with the following standards.
      (1)   No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width,
or two feet in thickness.
      (2)   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
periodical sold.
      (3)   Unless offering free publications, each newsrack shall be equipped
with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event the person is unable to receive the paid for
publication. The coin-return shall be maintained in good working order.
      (4)   Each newsrack shall weigh a minimum of 75 pounds.
      (5)   Each newsrack shall be maintained by its distributor and/or the
permit holder, in good appearance, in working order with no broken or unduly
misshapen structural parts and shall be reasonably free of:
         a.   Dirt and grease;
         b.   Chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted
areas;
         c.   Rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas; or
         d.   Unbroken, cracked, dented, blemished or discolored plastic or
glass.
   (c)   The newsrack permittee shall maintain all newsracks and the sidewalk
surface immediately under and adjacent (within two feet) to the newsracks in a
safe, clean, attractive and sanitary condition and in good order and repair, as
determined by the department. The permittee shall make routine inspection and
maintenance calls on each newsrack and such inspections and maintenance calls
may be incorporated with delivery of newspapers or other publications. The
permittee shall clean, wash and remove all graffiti, stickers, posters, litter,
dust, dirt and weeds at each newsrack. The newsrack shall be maintained in a
continual good and working condition. Permittee shall respond to a request to
secure a site or to perform maintenance within 24 hours of notification.
   (d)   Repair and replacement. The permittee shall commence necessary repairs
within one week when any damage or vandalism is found by or reported to the
city. If the newsrack damage or vandalism is of an emergency or hazardous
nature, the permittee will repair, replace, remove or secure the site within 24
hours of notification. If the newsrack is totally destroyed because of an
accident, the permittee will remove the newsrack and appurtenant structures
within 24 hours, including repair of any damage to the public right-of-way,
returning the site to its former condition prior to the newsrack installation.
Permittee will upon notification by the city, or upon inspection, remove
graffiti within 24 hours from any newsrack.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
DIVISION 10: SEIZURE, REMOVAL OF NEWSRACKS IN VIOLATION, RIGHT TO HEARING
§ 30-110 SEIZURE, REMOVAL OF NEWSRACKS IN VIOLATION, RIGHT TO HEARING.
   (a)   Upon a determination by the director that a newsrack has been
installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article,
the director shall attached a notice tag to the newsrack specifying the date
and nature of the violation, and shall email or fax to the permittee a copy of
the violation describing the offense and the date the newsrack was tagged for
the violation. If no email or fax address is available, notice to the permittee
shall be in writing, sent by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the
address indicated on the permit application. Every notice shall indicate the
name and address of the city employee to contact to contest the violation and/
or seizure of the newsrack and language explaining the right of the permittee
to appeal. Permittee shall have ten business days from the date on which the
tag was attached, notice was emailed, faxed or mailing date to either correct
the violation or request a hearing pursuant to this section.
   (b)   A newsrack may be tagged for any violation of any requirement of this
article, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Where its installation, use or maintenance interferes with the use
of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects
legally permitted;
      (2)   When such newsrack does not have a name, address and telephone
number affixed in a place where such information may be easily seen and the
designee of such newsrack cannot be otherwise identified;
      (3)   When a newsrack is found in the public right-of-way which does not
have a visible city issued decal present indicating the correct permit number
of the newsrack or the newsrack has no valid permit at all; and
      (4)   When a newsrack is found in the public right-of-way which is not
maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair, in accordance with
this article.
   (c)   If a hearing is requested, city staff will not remove the non
compliant newsrack until a final determination by the city manager. However, if
a newsrack installed within the city right-of-way has no visible evidence that
it has been properly permitted (no city issued decal, no visible contact
information for the owner or no other evidence that would indicate that a valid
permit for the newsrack had been issued) city staff may confiscate the
offending newsrack and follow the procedures in this section below. There is
hereby created a presumption that any newsrack within the city’s right-of-way
that does not have a city decal, or visible identification and contact
information for the owner of the newsrack, has been installed without a valid
permit.
   (d)   The department may seize and remove a newsrack which remains in
violation of this section:
      (1)   Ten business days after the email, fax or mailing date of the
notice if the permittee fails to correct the violation or file an appeal; or
      (2)   Ten business days after the email, fax or mailing date of the
written decision on appeal upholding the director’s determination that the
newsrack is in violation of this section.
   (e)   Impoundment.
      (1)   General. Notwithstanding the director’s right to tag newsracks in
violation of this article, the director may impound any newsrack:
         a.   When the newsrack poses an immediate danger to persons or
vehicles;
         b.   Where its installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety
of persons or property;
         c.   When pursuant to subsections (a) and (d) above, a tag has been
attached to a newsrack and a written notice, such as fax, letter or email has
been sent to the owner, operator or responsible person for the newsrack;
         d.   When a hearing and appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final
determination that the violation(s) specified on the tag attached to such
newsrack has in fact occurred, and the designee has failed to correct such
violation(s) within ten business days from the date of said determination;
         e.   When a request for a hearing or appeal has been withdrawn. Such
request shall be deemed withdrawn, either by actual withdrawal or by the
failure of the designee to fully comply with this article;
         f.   When such newsrack has been abandoned; and
         g.   When such newsrack has been installed on the city’s right-of-way
without first applying for and receiving a permit as required by this code.
      (2)   Impoundment procedures.
         a.   Within 48 hours after removal of any newsrack, the city shall
notify the owner in writing, fax or email of the removal and the reason for
removal where ownership information is posted on the newsrack either through
the city decal or the required owner contact information. If ownership
information is not readily available because there is no city decal, or
ownership identification information posted on the newsrack, or no newspaper or
periodical in the newsrack with contact information, the city shall make every
reasonable effort to comply with the notification. When notification is
possible, the notice shall also inform the owner of the right to request,
either in writing or in person, within ten business days of the date of the
postmark of such written notice, a hearing by the city manager or his or her
designee to determine whether such removal was proper.
         b.   If a newsrack is installed or maintained in such a place or
manner as to impose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property, the
director will first make a reasonable attempt to contact the distributor of the
newsrack and request immediate relocation or removal. If the distributor or his
or her representative is unable to be contacted or does not respond to
appropriate notification, the director may seize the newsrack pursuant to this
subsection (e) only if it is impractical for the city to remedy the violation
by moving the newsrack to another location on the street, sidewalk or other
right-of-way without mechanical assistance. If the newsrack is seized pursuant
to this section, the director shall notify the distributor and the permittee of
the seizure in writing by first class mail to the address indicated on the
permit application.
         c.   Seized newsracks shall be retained by the city for a period of at
least 30 days following the seizure. An impound fee to cover the city’s cost
and expense of impounding shall be assessed against each publication vending
box seized and removed. The distributor or representative may recover the
newsrack at any time while in the city’s possession upon payment of the impound
fee.
         d.   Return of impounded newsracks. Any newsrack, together with its
contents, which has been impounded pursuant to this section, shall be returned
to the permittee:
            1.   Upon receipt of an impound fee as determined herein; or
            2.   Upon a determination after hearing by the city manager, or his
or her designee that the newsrack should not have been impounded and should be
returned to the permittee.
         e.   In the event a hearing has not been requested within the time
permitted following the impoundment of any newsrack, an impound fee shall be
imposed upon the permittee and shall be paid before the impounded newsrack is
returned.
         f.   The fees herein shall be determined and adopted by the city by
ordinance in order to collect sufficient money to defer the complete cost of
the city’s newsrack permitting and enforcement program as set forth in this
code. The fees shall be adjusted from time to time by the city to reflect any
change in the cost of permitting and enforcement. At no time shall the fees
adopted by the city recover more than the actual cost of the program.
      (3)   Sale or disposal after impoundment. The department may sell or
otherwise dispose of any newsrack, together with its contents, and retain the
proceeds, pursuant to Texas law, from any such sale or other disposition, and
any moneys contained in said newsrack at the time of its impoundment, provided
that either:
         a.   No hearing has been requested within the time permitted; or
         b.   A hearing and an appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final
determination that said newsrack was properly impounded, and fees assessed have
not been received within 30 days from the date of the final determination.
   (f)   Appeals.
      (1)   Request for hearing. Any newsrack permittee may file a written
request with the department for a hearing, in person or by certified mail, for
the purpose of demonstrating that a newsrack should not have been impounded, or
that a violation as specified on the tag attached to a newsrack has not in fact
occurred.
      (2)   Appeal. An appeal must be perfected within ten business days after
the mailing date of the notice by filing with the office of the city manager a
letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis of such appeal. Any action
by the city with respect to the alleged violation shall be stayed pending the
city manger’s decision, except pursuant to subsections (e)(1)a. and b. above.
      (3)   Notice of hearing. Within two working days from the date on which
the request for hearing is received, the Department shall set a hearing date
and shall notify the designee by certified mail of the date, time and place of
said hearing. Said hearing shall occur within ten working days of the date of
mailing the notice unless the person requesting the hearing wishes to have the
hearing at a later date, and both parties agree on the date. The city manager
may designate an assistant city manager to hear any appeal.
      (4)   Conduct of hearing. At the time set for such hearing, or at the
date to which such hearing is continued, the city manager or his or her
designee shall receive all evidence relevant to the occurrence or non-
occurrence of the specified violation(s), the compliance or noncompliance with
any of the provisions of this subsection (f), and any other relevant
information. The hearing shall be informal and need not be conducted according
to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses, but the city manager
shall give the parties a reasonable opportunity to be heard and oral and
written evidence may be presented by either the distributor and/or
representative or the city to show cause why the determination of the director
should be overturned or upheld.
      (5)   Decision after hearing. The city manager shall give oral notice of
the decision immediately after the hearing and written notice of the decision
within five business days after the hearing. The decision of the city manager
or his or her designee shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact,
a determination of the issues presented, and the amount of the fee, if any, to
be imposed. The determination of the city manager shall be final, but may be
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 17529, § 1, passed 5-1-2007, eff. 9-1-2007)
§§ 30-111—30-150 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30-151 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and cited as the Fort Worth Transportation
Impact Fee Regulations.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-1), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-152 PURPOSE.
   This article is intended to assure the provision of adequate transportation
facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development
to pay a share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and
attributable to such new development.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-2), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-153 AUTHORITY.
   This article is adopted pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 395
and the Fort Worth City Charter. The provisions of this article shall not be
construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized
under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set
forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this article.
Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution or otherwise to implement
and administer this article.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-3), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-154 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, whether
capitalized or not, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ANNEXATION (Full-Purpose). The legal process for annexing an area in order
to provide full municipal services. The city enforces all ordinances, provides
services as provided by law, and assesses property taxes and sales taxes.
(Limited-Purpose) The legal process for annexing an area in order to provide
only certain regulatory services for a specified period of time.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A transportation facility with a life expectancy of
three or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city.
   CHANGE OF USE. A change in the use or occupancy of an existing structure for
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued, that does not add square
footage to the existing structure.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CREDIT. A reduction in the amount of a transportation impact fee for a new
development, either by a decrease in the number of service units attributable
to such development or a decrease in the amount of transportation impact fees
otherwise due, that results from contributions of land, improvements or funds
to construct system improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision and
development regulations, policies or requirements.
   FINAL PLAT APPROVAL. The point at which the applicant has complied with all
conditions of approval and the executive secretary of the city plan commission
has signed the applicant's plat.
   IMPACT FEE. A fee for transportation facilities imposed on new development
by the city pursuant to this article in order to generate revenue to fund or
recoup all or part of the costs of capital improvements or facility expansion
necessitated by and attributable to such new development. IMPACT FEES do not
include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or
the construction of such improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or
subdivision regulations.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. The projections of population and employment growth
and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the
city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the transportation impact
fee Transportation Improvements Plan is based.
   LAND USE PER VEHICLE MILE EQUIVALENCY TABLE (LUVMET). A table converting the
demands for capital improvements generated by various land uses to numbers of
service units, as may be amended from time to time. The Land Use Per Vehicle
Mile Equivalency Table may be incorporated in a schedule of impact fee rates.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. A project involving the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of
any structure, or any use or extension of land, which has the effect of
increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions,
measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and
which requires either the approval and filing with the county in which the
property is located of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or
the issuance of a building permit, and which has not been exempted from these
regulations by provisions herein.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof
having a legal or equitable interest in the land for which an impact fee
becomes due. PROPERTY OWNER includes the developer for the new development.
   ROADWAY. Any thoroughfare designated in the city's adopted master
thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. ROADWAY also includes
any thoroughfare designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or
Texas highway system; to the extent that the city incurs capital improvement
costs for such facility.
   SERVICE AREA. Designated areas within the city, within which impact fees for
Transportation Facility Expansions may be collected from New Development
occurring within such area and within which area fees so collected will be
expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the
Transportation Improvements Plan.
   SERVICE UNIT. A vehicle mile which shall be defined as one vehicle traveling
a distance of one mile during the afternoon peak hour.
   SHELL BUILDING. A new, non-residential building that is built without a
final use determined. Finish-out permits for a building or areas within a
building that have not been issued a final certificate of occupancy do not
constitute a change of use and must pay impact fees based on their final use.
   SITE-RELATED FACILITY. An improvement or facility which is for the primary
use or benefit of one or more new developments and/or which is for the primary
purpose of safe and adequate provision of transportation facilities to serve
the new development, including access to the development, which is not included
in the transportation improvements plan, and for which the developer(s) or
property owner(s) is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable
development regulations.
   SYSTEM FACILITY. A transportation improvement or facility expansion which is
designated in the Transportation Improvements Plan. SYSTEM FACILITY may include
a transportation improvement which is located within or on the perimeter of a
new development site.
   TRANSPORTATION FACILITY. An improvement to a ROADWAY which includes, but is
not limited to: rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement, or
capacity expansion including additional lanes, intersection improvements, turn
lanes, drainage facilities associated with the Roadway, and water and
wastewater relocation if affected by the roadway. TRANSPORTATION FACILITY also
includes improvements, as described above, to a roadway officially enumerated
in the federal or Texas highway system to the extent that the city has incurred
capital costs for such facilities, including, without limitation, local
matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the
establishment of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage appurtenances and rights-
of-way.
   TRANSPORTATION FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of an
existing roadway in the city to serve new development, but does not include the
repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of roadways to better serve
existing development.
   TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended from
time to time, which identifies the transportation facilities or transportation
facility expansions and their costs for each transportation service area, which
are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period
not to exceed ten years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through
the imposition of transportation impact fees pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-4), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20086-03-2012, §
1, passed 3-6-2012; Ord. 20605-02-2013, § 4, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013;
Ord. 20852-08-2013, § 1, passed 8-6-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-
25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 27900-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 30-155 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this article apply to all new, non-exempt development
within the corporate boundaries of the city located within a transportation
service area.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-5), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-156 COMPUTATION OF MAXIMUM IMPACT FEES PER SERVICE UNIT.
   (a)   Maximum transportation impact fees per service unit shall be
established for each service area. The maximum impact fee per service unit for
each service area shall be computed in the following manner:
      (1)   Calculate the total projected costs of transportation improvements
necessitated by and attributable to new development in the service area
identified in the transportation improvements plan;
      (2)   From such amount, subtract a credit equal to the amount of that
portion of ad valorem tax revenues, if any, to be generated by new service
units during the period the transportation improvements plan is in effect,
including the payment of debt, associated with the transportation improvements
in the plan; and
      (3)   Divide the resultant amount by the total number of service units
anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use assumptions
forthat service area.
   (b)   The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new
development within a service area shall be that established by ordinance by the
city council, as such may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount
less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in
subsection (a) above.
   (c)   The city may vary the rates of collection or amount of transportation
impact fees per service unit among or within service areas in order to
reasonably further goals and policies affecting the adequacy of transportation
facilities serving new development, or other regulatory purposes affecting the
type, quality, intensity, economic development potential or development timing
of land uses within such service districts.
   (d)   The maximum impact fee per service unit for transportation facilities,
as may be amended from time to time, hereby is declared to be an approximate
and appropriate measure of the impacts generated by a new unit of development
on the city's transportation system. To the extent that the impact fee charged
against a new development, as may be amended from time to time, is less than
the maximum impact fee per service unit, such difference hereby is declared to
be founded on policies unrelated to measurement of the impacts of the new
development on the city's transportation system. The maximum impact fee may be
used in evaluating any claim by a property owner that the dedication or
construction of a capital improvement within a service area imposed as a
condition of development approval pursuant to the city's subdivision or
development regulations is disproportionate to the impacts created by the
development on the city's transportation system.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-7), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
4, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-157 USE OF PROCEEDS OF IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The transportation impact fees collected for each service area
pursuant to these regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of
any transportation improvements or facility expansions identified in the
transportation improvements plan for the service area necessitated by new
development, including but not limited to the construction contract price,
surveying and engineering fees, and land acquisition costs (including land
purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert witness fees).
Transportation impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and
interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by
or on behalf of the city to finance such transportation improvements or
facility expansions. Transportation impact fees also may be used to pay fees
actually contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or
financial consultant for preparation of or updating the transportation
improvements plan.
   (b)   Transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall
not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of transportation
improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable
transportation improvements plan;
      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new transportation
improvements or facility expansions;
      (3)   Upgrading, updating, expansion or replacement of existing
transportation improvements to serve existing development in order to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
      (4)   Upgrading, updating, expansion or replacement of existing
transportation improvements to provide better service to existing development;
or
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-7), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-158 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The city's financial management services department shall establish an
account to which interest is allocated for each service area for which a
transportation impact fee is imposed pursuant to this article. Each impact fee
collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account.
   (b)   Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are
deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for
the purposes authorized in § 30-157.
   (c)   The city's financial management services department shall establish
adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that transportation impact
fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized
in § 30-157. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such
times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this
article; provided, however, that any road impact fee paid shall be expended
within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date
the fee is deposited into the account.
   (d)   The city's financial management services department shall maintain and
keep financial records for transportation impact fees, which shall show the
source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each service
area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be
open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city
may establish a fee for copying services.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-8), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 18318-09-2008, §
4, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-
2022)
§ 30-159 ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   There is hereby created a capital improvements advisory committee
(“committee”) for transportation impact fees, which shall act in an advisory
capacity, in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 395.058.
   (b)   The committee shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate
members, each of whom shall be a resident of the city. The members of the
committee shall be appointed by the city council. At least four of the regular
members and one of the alternate members shall be representatives of the real
estate, development, or building industries who are not employees or officials
of a political subdivision or governmental entity. The alternate members shall
serve when regular committee members are unable to attend or participate.
   (c)   The regular members of the committee shall be identified by place
numbers one through seven. The odd-numbered places shall expire on October 1 of
each odd-numbered year and the even- numbered places shall expire of October 1
of each even-numbered year. The term of the alternate members shall expire on
October 1 in each odd numbered year. Members may be appointed to succeed
themselves. Vacancies shall be filled to unexpired terms but no members may be
appointed to a term in excess of two years.
   Four members of the committee constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business. The members of the committee shall regularly attend meetings and
shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized
expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (d)   The committee shall perform the following functions:
      (1)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
      (2)   Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments on
impact fees;
      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
plans;
      (4)   File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the capital
improvements plans and report to the city council any perceived inequities in
implementing the plans or imposing the impact fee; and
      (5)   Advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land
use assumptions, capital improvements plans, and impact fees.
   (e)   The city shall make available to the committee any professional
reports prepared in the development or implementation of the transportation
improvements plans.
   (c)   The city council will adopt procedural rules for the committee to
follow in carrying out its duties.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-9), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 27900-08-2025, § 2, passed 8-26-
2025)
§ 30-160 USE OF OTHER FINANCING MECHANISMS.
   (a)   The city may finance transportation improvements or facility
expansions designated in the transportation improvements plan through the
issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other
assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner
and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the
use of impact fees.
   (b)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of
a transportation impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully
imposed on and due against the property.
   (c)   The city council may decide that the city shall pay all or a part of
transportation impact fees due for a new development pursuant to duly adopted
criteria.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-10), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-161 IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION.
   (a)   Transportation impact fees established by these regulations are
additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of
building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be
consistent with and to further the policies of city's comprehensive land use
plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the
city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction
with the development of land.
   (b)   This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations and policies of the city, which shall be operative and remain in
full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-11), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§§ 30-162—30-170 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES
§ 30-171 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION SCHEDULES FOR IMPACT FEES.
   The amount of the impact fees to be assessed shall be as set forth in
Schedule 1, attached hereto and made a part of this article by reference (see
Chapter 30, Appendix B). The amount of the impact fees which are to be paid
shall be as set forth in Schedule 2 attached hereto and made a part of this
Article by reference (see Chapter 30, Appendix C). The amount of the impact
fees to be collected by vehicle-mile may be phased over a period of years, such
amount to be set forth by year in Schedule 2. Schedules 1 and 2 may be amended
from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in §
30-191.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-12), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
5, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 1, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022;
Ord. 25889-11-2022, § 1, passed 11-29-2022, eff. 12-1-2022)
§ 30-172 ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as
follows.
      (1)   For land first made subject to an impact fee upon adoption of the
original or a subsequent transportation impact fee ordinance, and which land
was finally platted before the effective date of such ordinance, assessment
shall occur on the effective date of the original or subsequent transportation
impact fee ordinance, as the case may be, and shall be the amount of the
maximum impact fee per service unit established by such original or subsequent
ordinance, as set forth in Schedule 1 thereof.
      (2)   For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a
building permit, and for which no plat is necessary pursuant to the city's
subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of transportation
impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building
permit, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit as
set forth in Schedule 1 then in effect.
      (3)   For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to
the city's subdivision regulations on or after the effective date of this
article, or for which replatting results in an increase in the number of
service units after such date, assessment of impact fees shall be at the time
of final plat approval, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit as set forth in Schedule 1 then in effect.
   (b)   Following assessment of the impact fee, the amount of the impact fee
assessment per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless
the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a
new application for final plat approval or other development application that
results in approval of additional service units, in which case a new assessment
shall occur at the Schedule 1 rate then in effect for such additional service
units.
   (c)   Following the submittal of any replat that results in an increase in
the number of service units, a new assessment must be made in accordance with §
30-172(a) and (b).
   (d)   Approval of an amending plat pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code
§212.016 and the city's subdivision regulations is not subject to reassessment
for an impact fee.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-13), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
5, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-173 COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   Transportation impact fees shall be collected at the time the city
issues a building permit for a new development, unless a different time is
provided for pursuant to subsections (b) or (c) below.
   (b)   The impact fees to be paid and collected per service unit for a new
development, less any applicable discounts in accordance with §
30-173(d), shall be the amount listed in Schedule 2 then in effect. The city
may enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of
payment of impact fees, in which case the agreement shall determine the time
and manner of payment.
   (c)   The Director of Development Services or his or her delegate shall
compute the transportation impact fees for a new development in the following
manner.
      (1)   The director shall first determine whether the new development
qualifies for any discount computed in accordance with subsection (d) below
that reduce impact fees otherwise due in whole or in part.
      (2)   To the extent that impact fees are owed for the new development
after application of available discounts, the director shall next determine
whether the new development is eligible for credits calculated in accordance
with Division 3 to reduce impact fees due.
      (3)   The total amount of the impact fees for the new development shall
be calculated based on the most current edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual land use definitions.
      (4)   Impact fees for Shell Buildings are based on a general land use
category to establish an impact fee amount to be collected at the time the
building permit for the Shell Building is issued. Impact fees will be
calculated based upon the ultimate land use corresponding with the subsequent
finish-out permits for the building reduced by the impact fees initially paid
on that portion of the Shell Building. Any difference in impact fees will be
due at the time the building permit is issued for the finish-out.
      (5)   An applicant may request an alternative service unit computation
for land uses not contained in the most current edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual by submitting a trip generation
study demonstrating the appropriateness of the trip generation rates for the
proposed development to the director for decision. An applicant may also
include an alternative service unit calculation in an appeal taken pursuant to
§
30-192.
   (d)   The following discounts shall apply to reduce Schedule 2
transportation impact fees otherwise due:
      (1)   Adequate public facilities discount.
         a.   The Schedule 2 transportation impact fees shall be reduced by 50%
for any development where:
            1.   One or more points of access serve at least 75% of the peak-
hour site-generated traffic volumes;
            2.   Such point(s) connect the development to the city's
thoroughfare system, as depicted in the city's master thoroughfare plan (MTP)
provided however, sites with multiple access points may include a TxDOT
facility as one of the access points to meet this criteria; and
            3.   The transportation facility so connected has been improved to
its ultimate capacity as classified under the current master thoroughfare plan.
         b.   Eligibility for this discount must be determined no later than
issuance of the first building permit for land subject to the final plat.
      (2)   Mixed-use/multi-modal development discount. The amount of
transportation impact fees due under Schedule 2 shall be reduced up to 25% for
any development where an accepted traffic impact study demonstrates that the
development will reduce the vehicle trips from those contained in the adopted
land use equivalency table, to one of the following:
 
5 to 9% trip capture:    10% impact fee reduction
10 to 14% trip capture:  15% impact fee reduction
15% to 20% trip capture: 20% impact fee reduction
21% or > trip capture:   25% impact fee reduction
 
      (3)   Extraordinary investment discount.
         a.   The amount of transportation impact fees due under Schedule 2
shall be reduced 25% for any development that results in all of the following
qualifications, as jointly determined by the Development Services Department
and the Department of Economic Development:
            1.   $25 million in capital investment, excluding land costs;
            2.   Creation of 75 new, permanent jobs; and
            3.   The projected salary of the new jobs is at least twice the
current federal minimum wage, plus benefits.
         b.   For each additional $10,000,000 in capital investment or
additional 75 qualified new, permanent jobs, the impact fee amount due under
Schedule 2 will be further reduced by an additional 5% up to a maximum
reduction of 50%. A development may receive this discount and have a period of
up to four years from the issuance of a building permit to qualify under the
terms of this discount. Impact fees otherwise paid shall be refunded to the
original payor at the time of issuance of the building permit. A development
shall refund a pro rata share of this discount should the development not
continue to maintain the number of new, permanent jobs for a period of at least
ten years from the date of building permit (or the date of qualification for
this discount), equal to 10% per annum for each year that the number of jobs is
not maintained. The terms related to this discount shall be incorporated within
an agreement for credits pursuant to §
30-182.
      (4)   Small business discount.
         a.   The amount of transportation impact fees due under Schedule 2 for
non-residential building permits, other than new construction building permits,
shall be reduced by 25% for a development that meets all of the following
qualifications, as jointly determined by the Development Services Department
and the Department of Economic Development:
            1.   An independently owned for-profit or non-profit entity with a
physical Fort Worth business address;
            2.   Business must not be a subsidiary of a larger company nor a
franchisee of a chain with more than five franchises;
            3.   Annual revenues of $2,500,000 or less for the most recent 12-
month period;
            4.   Twenty-five employees or less;
            5.   Business operations established at least one year prior to
making application for the discount; and
            6.   Proof of qualifications provided by notarized affidavit.
         b.   Sexually oriented businesses and game rooms are not eligible for
this discount.
         c.   The terms related to this discount shall be incorporated within
an agreement for credits
pursuant to §
30-182.
      (5)   Discounts cumulative. Discounts identified in subsections (d)(1) to
(d)(4) above are cumulative, so that a development that qualifies for the
maximum discount under each provision may reduce impact fees otherwise due up
to 100%.
      (6)   Burden of proof. The applicant for a discount provided for in this
section has the burden of proof to show that the development qualifies for the
discount.
      (7)   Application. An application for discounts shall be submitted with
the first building permit application submitted by the applicant. The
application for discounts shall be forwarded to the appropriate reviewing
department(s).
   (e)   The amount of each impact fee for a new development shall not exceed
an amount computed by multiplying the fee assessed per service unit pursuant to
§
30-172 by the number of service units generated by the development.
   (f)   If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has
expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees shall be
computed using Schedule 2 then in effect, with credits for previous payment of
fees being applied against the new fees due.
   (g)   Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service
units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new
service units shall be determined by using Schedule 2 then in effect, and such
additional fee shall be collected at the times prescribed by this section.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-14), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1- 2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
5, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 21188-04-2014, § 1, passed 4-1-2014;
Ord. 21650-02-2015, § 5, passed 2-17-2015; ; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed
10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 25889-11-2022, §§ 2, 3, passed 11-29-2022,
eff. 12-1-2022; Ord. 27900-08-2025, §§ 3—7, passed 8-26-2025)
§§ 30-174—30-180 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES
§ 30-181 CREDITS AGAINST TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   The city shall credit the contribution of land, improvements or
funding for construction of any system facility that is required or agreed to
by the city, pursuant to rules established in this section or pursuant to
administrative guidelines promulgated by the city. The credit shall be
associated with the plat or other detailed plan of development for the property
that is to be served by the transportation facility.
   Credit for right-of-way dedication will be determined by the highest of the
following three calculations per square foot:
      (1)   Twenty percent (20%) of the estimated construction cost in the
latest transportation improvement plan.
      (2)   Twenty percent (20%) of the total project cost as determined by the
City's acceptance of the roadway facility.
      (3)   The current Appraisal District Land Market Value per square foot
for the property as listed in the most recent Appraisal District Valuation for
the property.
   (b)   Master planned projects, including subdivisions containing multiple
phases, and whether approved before or after the effective date of these impact
fee regulations, may apply for credits against transportation impact fees for
the entire project based upon contributions of land, improvements or funds
toward construction of system facilities, or other transportation improvements
supplying excess capacity. Credits shall be determined by comparing costs of
transportation improvements supplied by the project with the costs of
transportation improvements to be utilized by development within the project,
utilizing a methodology approved by the city. The credit determination shall be
incorporated within an agreement for credits, in accordance with §
30-182.
   (c)   State and federal law and the city's ordinances, policies and
regulations, as amended, shall apply to determine a new development's
obligations to construct adjacent system facilities. The obligation to
construct, however, shall not exceed the maximum impact fees assessed against
the new development under Schedule 1. Construction required under such
ordinances, policies and regulations shall be credited against the amount of
transportation impact fees otherwise due. If the costs of constructing a system
facility in accordance with the community facilities agreement are greater than
the amount of impact fees due, the amount of the credit due shall be deemed to
be 100% of the impact fees and no impact fee shall be collected thereafter for
the development, unless the number of service units is subsequently increased.
   (d)   All credits against transportation impact fees shall be based upon
standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative
guidelines, including the following standards.
      (1)   No credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of
site-related facilities.
      (2)   No credit shall be given for a transportation facility which is not
identified within the transportation improvements plan, unless the facility is
on or qualifies for inclusion on the master thoroughfare plan and the city
agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new developments other than
the development paying the transportation impact fee and provisions for credits
are incorporated in an agreement for credits pursuant to §
30-182.
      (3)   In no event will the city grant a credit when no transportation
impact fees can be collected pursuant to this article or for any amount
exceeding the total transportation impact fees due for the development, unless
expressly agreed to by the city in writing.
      (4)   The city may participate in the costs of a system improvement to be
dedicated to the city, including costs that exceed the amount of the impact
fees due for the development, in accordance with policies and rules established
by the city. The amount of any credit for construction of a system facility
shall be reduced by the amount of any participation funds received from the
city.
      (5)   Where funds for transportation facilities have been escrowed
through a community facilities agreement or future improvements agreement for
transportation facilities that was executed with the city, the following rules
apply:
         a.   Funds expended under the agreement for transportation facilities
shall first be credited against the amount of transportation impact fees that
would have been due under Schedule 2 for those units of development for which
building permits already have been issued; and
         b.   Any remaining funds shall be credited against impact fees due for
the development under Schedule 2 at the time building permits are issued.
   (e)   Credits for right-of-way dedication shall be created when the right-
of-way dedication instrument has been executed. Credits for construction of
improvements shall be created when the improvements are completed and the city
has accepted the improvements. A development is eligible to receive 75% of the
estimated credits when a Community Facilities Agreement for constructing
transportation impact fee eligible improvements has been executed and an
acceptable financial guarantee in the form of a development bond, cash escrow,
escrow agreement, or letter of credit has been delivered to the city. The
remaining credits shall be created when the improvements are completed and the
city has accepted the improvements. Credits shall expire ten years from the
date the credit was created. Upon application by the property owner, the city
may agree to extend the expiration date for the credit on mutually agreeable
terms.
   (f)   Unless an agreement for credits under § 30-182 is executed providing
for a different manner of applying credits against transportation impact fees
due, a credit associated with a plat shall be applied at the time of
application for the first building permit and, at each building permit
application thereafter, to reduce impact fees due until the credit is
exhausted.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-15), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
6, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 26659-01-2024, § 1, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 30-182 AGREEMENT FOR CREDITS.
   An owner of a new development who has constructed or financed a
transportation improvement or facility expansion designated in the
transportation improvements plan, or other transportation improvement that
supplies excess capacity, as required or authorized by the city, shall enter
into an agreement with the city to provide for credits against transportation
impact fees due for the development in accordance with §
30-181. The agreement shall identify the basis for and the method for computing
and the amount of the credit due and any reduction in credits attributable to
consumption of road capacity by developed lots or tracts served by the
transportation improvements. For multi-phased projects, the city may require
that total credits be proportionally allocated among the phases. If authorized
by the city, the agreement also may provide for allocation of credits among new
developments within the project, and provisions for the timing and collection
of impact fees.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-16), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§§ 30-183—30-190 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: UPDATE AND RELIEF PROCEDURES
§ 30-191 UPDATES TO PLANS AND REVISION OF FEES.
   (a)   The city shall update its land use assumptions and transportation
improvements plans at least every five years, commencing from the date of
adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the transportation impact fees
based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in Tex. Local
Government Code Chapter 395, or in any successor statute.
   (b)   The city may review its land use assumptions, transportation impact
fees, transportation improvements plans and other factors such as market
conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) above to determine
whether the land use assumptions and transportation improvements plans should
be updated and the transportation impact fees recalculated accordingly,
utilizing statutory update procedures.
   (c)   Schedule 2 may be amended without revising land use assumptions and
transportation improvements plans at any time prior to the update provided for
in subsection (a) above, provided that the transportation impact fees to be
collected under Schedule 2 do not exceed the transportation impact fees
assessed under Schedule 1. Public notice and hearing is required to amend
Schedule 2 in accordance with the procedure for amending impact fees set forth
in Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 395, or in any successor statute.
   (d)   If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a)
above, the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions,
transportation improvements plan or transportation impact fees are needed, it
may dispense with such update by following the procedures in Tex. Local
Government Code § 395.0575 or successor statute.
   (e)   The city may amend any other provisions of this article in accordance
with procedures for ordinance amendments contained in the city's Charter.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-17), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-192 APPEALS.
   (a)   The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the
following administrative acts, as provided for in subsection (c), below:
      (1)   The applicability of a transportation impact fee to the
development;
      (2)   An error in the calculation of the transportation impact fee due;
      (3)   The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of a credit;
      (4)   The application of a credit against a transportation impact fee
due;
      (5)   The amount of the transportation impact fee in proportion to the
benefit received by the new development;
      (6)   The amount of a refund due, if any; or
      (7)   The availability of a discount against the collection of
transportation impact fees.
   (b)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that
relief should be granted by the city.
   (c)   The appellant must file a written notice specifying the specific
grounds of the appeal with the Director of Development Services within 30 days
following the decision appealed from. A statement that the impact fees owed are
too high, by itself, is insufficient grounds for an appeal. The Director or his
or her designee may resolve the appeal if the appellant agrees with the
Director's decision, or refer the matter to the City Manager for decision with
the Director's recommendation. If the appellant disagrees with the City
Manager's decision, the appellant may request city council review after
receiving the manager's written decision. City council review shall be
requested within 30 days from the date the appellant has received the manager's
decision. The city secretary shall schedule a public hearing to be held within
30 days of the date the request for city council review has been received,
unless otherwise mutually determined, at which the appellant may present
testimony and evidence before the city council. The city council may act at the
time of the public hearing and must act on the appeal no later than 30 days
after the public hearing.
   (d)   If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security
satisfactory to the Director, in an amount equal to the original determination
of the transportation impact fee due, the city shall process and may issue a
building permit if all other requirements are met while the appeal is pending.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-18), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022,
§ 2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 26659-01-2024, §§ 2, 3, passed 1-
23-2024)
§ 30-193 REFUNDS.
   (a)   Upon application, any transportation impact fee or portion thereof
collected pursuant to these regulations, which has not been expended within the
service area within ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to
the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the
impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental
entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the
date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Tex. Local Government Code
§ 395.025, or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to
this section shall be submitted within 60 days after the expiration of the ten-
year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered
expended on a first-in, first out basis.
   (b)   An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be
considered expended if the total expenditures for transportation improvements
or facility expansions authorized within the service area within ten years
following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected within the
service area for such improvements or expansions during such period.
   (c)   If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) above, the city
shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount
of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the
service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The
refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due
per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which
the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-19), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-194 REBATES.
   If the building permit for a new development for which a transportation
impact fee has been paid has expired, and a modified or new application has not
been filed within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written
application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the
property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate
pursuant to this section has been filed within this period, no rebate shall
become due.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-20), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-195 WAIVERS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 395.022, as amended, a school
district is not required to pay transportation impact fees imposed under this
article unless the board of trustees of the district consents to the payment of
the fees by entering a contract with the city imposing the fees.
   (b)   Impact fees will be waived for qualified neighborhood empowerment zone
(NEZ) projects or properties.
   (c)   A change of use, as defined in §
30-154, is exempt from the payment of impact fees.
   (d)   Open-enrollment charter schools and private schools as defined in the
Texas Education Code, serving students in kindergarten through the 12th grade,
are not required to pay impact fees imposed under this chapter unless the
governing board of the school consents to the payment of the fees entering into
a contract with the City of Fort Worth. The contract may contain terms the
governing board considers advisable to provide for the payment of the fees.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-21), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20086-03-2012, §
2, passed 3-6-2012; Ord. 20852-08-2013, § 2, passed 8-6-2013; ; Ord. 25810-10-
2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022; Ord. 25889-11-2022, § 4, passed
11-29-2022, eff. 12-1-2022)
§ 30-196 RELIEF PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Any person who has paid a transportation impact fee or an owner of
land upon which a transportation impact fee has been paid may petition the city
council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been
performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and
shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be
performed within 60 days of the request. If the city council determines that
the duty is required pursuant to the ordinance and is late in being performed,
it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request
and to continue until completion. This subsection (a) is not applicable to
matters which may be appealed pursuant to §
30-192.
   (b)   The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this
article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to
the ordinance, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict
application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in
confiscation of the property. The request for a variance shall be processed and
decided as an appeal under §
30-192.
   (c)   If the city council grants a variance to the amount of the
transportation impact fee due for a new development under this section, it may
cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in
the impact fee to the account for the service area in which the property is
located.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-22), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 25810-10-2022, §
2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-197 ANNEXATIONS.
   A formal annexation and incorporation of land into the City after the
effective date of this ordinance shall also place the land into a service area
(s) after an update of the land use assumptions, service area boundaries and
impact fees for the affected service area(s) has been adopted by the city
council. Developments on such annexed land will thereafter be subject to this
subchapter and the updated (if necessary), Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 rates.
Final plats for land and/or applications for building permits filed prior to
finalized annexation shall not be subject to assessment or collection of
transportation impact fees or be eligible for credits thereto unless a pre-
annexation or other agreement expressly stating the parties' intent has been
executed with the City.
(Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
§§ 30-198—30-200 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
§ 30-201 SERVICE AREAS.
   (a)   Service Areas as established, described and depicted in the original
Transportation Impact Fee Study, as updated and amended, are on file with the
city secretary's office.
   (b)   The boundaries of the transportation service areas may be amended from
time to time, or new transportation service areas may be delineated, pursuant
to the procedures in §
30-191.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-23), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
7, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022)
Editor’s note:
   The exhibit referenced in subsection (a) is not set out herein, but is on
file in the offices of the city.
§ 30-202 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (a)   The transportation improvements plan for the City of Fort Worth is as
presented in the most recent Transportation Impact Fee Study on file with the
city secretary's office.
   (b)   The transportation improvements plan may be amended from time to time,
pursuant to the procedures in §
30-191.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-24), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
7, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022)
§ 30-203 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   The maximum impact fees per service unit for transportation facilities
are as shown on Schedule 1 (see
Chapter 30, Appendix B), on file with the city secretary's office.
   (b)   The impact fees per service unit for transportation facilities, which
are to be paid by each new development, are as shown on Schedule 2 (see
Chapter 30, Appendix C), on file with the city secretary's office.
   (c)   The impact fees per service unit for transportation facilities may be
amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
30-191.
(Ord. 18083, § 1(1-25), passed 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 20605-02-2013, §
7, passed 2-5-2013, eff. 4-1-2013; Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 2, passed 10-25-2022,
eff. 11-1-2022)
APPENDIX B: SCHEDULE 1 - MAXIMUM ASSESSABLE TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES PER
VEHICLE-MILE
                                      Schedule 1
Service Areas                         Maximum Assessable Transportation Impact
                                      Fees Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Before 4/ On 4/1/    On 4/1/    On or
30-172(a))                            1/2013    2013 to 3/ 2018 to    After 10/
                                                31/2018    10/24/2022 25/2022
                                      Schedule 1
Service Areas                         Maximum Assessable Transportation Impact
                                      Fees Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Before 4/ On 4/1/    On 4/1/    On or
30-172(a))                            1/2013    2013 to 3/ 2018 to    After 10/
                                                31/2018    10/24/2022 25/2022
Service Area A                        $989      $2,158     $2,025     $1,642
Service Area AA                       $63       $228       $205       $355
Service Area B                        $2,014    $2,419     $3,316     $3,308
Service Area C                        $640      $1,323     $1,144     $1,781
Service Area D                        $987      $966       $463       $834
Service Area E                        $969      $2,708     $3,449     $2,927
Service Area F                        $387      $998       $675       $743
Service Area G                        $755      $2,091     $1,799     $2,055
Service Area L                        $619      $1,562     $441       -
Service Area M                        $1,450    $2,551     $3,164     $6,367
Service Area N                        $742      $1,283     $845       $2,742
Service Area O                        $1,632    $1,014     $3,560     $3,556
Service Area PI*                      $492      $492       $492       $2,756
Service Area S                        $1,028    $2,398     $2,984     $4,605
Service Area T                        $726      $2,322     $1,826     $3,727
Service Area U                        $567      $2,921     $3,457     $2,542
Service Area V*                       $3,269    $3,269     $3,269     $4,416
Service Area W                        $121      $860       $1,356     -
Service Area X                        $999      $2,312     $3,806     $3,294
Service Area Y                        $1,213    $2,370     $2,348     $2,588
Service Area Z                        $1,618    $2,962     $3,706     $6,101
 
*Assessments occurred on 3/1/2018
(Ord. 25810-10-2022, § 1, passed 10-25-2022, eff. 11-1-2022)
APPENDIX C: SCHEDULE 2 - TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES PER VEHICLE-MILE
 
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2023 to 5/31/2024
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2023 to 5/31/2024
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential 50% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
A                                     $494.50     $395.60     $1,079.00   $863.20     $1,012.50   $810.00     $821.00     $656.80
AA*                                   $63.00      $63.00      $228.00     $228.00     $205.00     $205.00     $355.00     $355.00
B                                     $1,007.00   $805.60     $1,209.50   $967.60     $1,658.00   $1,326.40   $1,564.00   $1,251.20
C                                     $320.00     $256.00     $661.50     $529.20     $572.00     $457.60     $890.50     $712.40
D*                                    $987.00     $987.00     $966.00     $966.00     $463.00     $463.00     $834.00     $834.00
E                                     $484.50     $387.60     $1,354.00   $1,083.20   $1,724.60   $1,379.60   $1,463.50   $1,170.80
F*                                    $387.00     $387.00     $998.00     $998.00     $675.00     $675.00     $743.00     $743.00
G                                     $377.50     $302.00     $1,045.50   $836.40     $899.50     $719.60     $1,027.50   $822.00
L**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
M                                     $725.00     $580.00     $1,275.50   $1,020.40   $1,582.00   $1,265.60   $3,183.50   $2,546.80
N                                     $371.00     $296.80     $641.50     $513.20     $422.50     $338.00     $1,371.00   $1,096.80
O                                     $816.00     $652.80     $507.00     $405.60     $1,780.00   $1,424.00   $1,778.00   $1,422.40
PI***                                 $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $2,756.00   $2,756.00
S                                     $514.00     $411.20     $1,199.00   $959.20     $1,492.00   $1,193.60   $2,302.50   $1,842.00
T                                     $363.00     $290.40     $1,161.00   $928.80     $913.00     $730.40     $1,863.50   $1,490.80
U                                     $283.50     $226.80     $1,460.50   $1,168.40   $1,728.50   $1,382.80   $1,271.00   $1,016.80
V                                     $1,634.50   $1,307.60   $1,634.50   $1,307.60   $1,634.50   $1,307.60   $2,208.00   $1,766.40
W**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
X                                     $499.50     $399.60     $1,156.00   $924.80     $1,903.00   $1,522.40   $1,647.00   $1,317.60
Y                                     $606.50     $485.20     $1,185.00   $948.00     $1,174.00   $939.20     $1,294.00   $1,035.20
Z                                     $809.00     $647.20     $1,481.00   $1,184.80   $1,853.00   $1,482.40   $3,050.50   $2,440.40
 
*Service Areas AA, D and F have the lowest Schedule 1 assessment rates.
Effective November 1, 2022, The collection rate in these service areas is 100%
of their respective Schedule 1 amounts.
**Effective November 1, 2022, Service Areas L and W no longer have collection
rates due to these areas being largely built out with minimal growth projected.
***Effective April 26, 2023, Service Area PI collection rate is 100% of its
Schedule I amount.
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2024 to 5/31/2025
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code § 30-172 Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
(a))                                        Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                            Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                               55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential
                                            1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                        1                       1                       1                       1
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2024 to 5/31/2025
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code § 30-172 Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
(a))                                        Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                            Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                               55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential 55% of Sch  Residential
                                            1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                        1                       1                       1                       1
A                                           $543.95     $395.60     $1,186.90   $863.20     $1,113.75   $810.00     $903.10     $656.80
AA*                                         $63.00      $63.00      $228.00     $228.00     $205.00     $205.00     $355.00     $355.00
B                                           $1,107.70   $805.60     $1,330.45   $967.60     $1,823.80   $1,326.40   $1,720.40   $1,251.20
C                                           $352.00     $256.00     $727.65     $529.20     $629.20     $457.60     $979.55     $712.40
D*                                          $987.00     $987.00     $966.00     $966.00     $463.00     $463.00     $834.00     $834.00
E                                           $532.95     $387.60     $1,489.40   $1,083.20   $1,896.95   $1,379.60   $1,609.85   $1,170.80
F*                                          $387.00     $387.00     $998.00     $998.00     $675.00     $675.00     $743.00     $743.00
G                                           $415.25     $302.00     $1,150.05   $836.40     $989.45     $719.60     $1,130.25   $822.00
L**                                         $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
M                                           $797.50     $580.00     $1,403.05   $1,020.40   $1,740.20   $1,265.60   $3,501.85   $2,546.80
N                                           $408.10     $296.80     $705.65     $513.20     $464.75     $338.00     $1,508.10   $1,096.80
O                                           $897.60     $652.80     $557.70     $405.60     $1,958.00   $1,424.00   $1,955.80   $1,422.40
PI***                                       $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $2,756.00   $2,756.00
S                                           $565.40     $411.20     $1,318.90   $959.20     $1,641.20   $1,193.60   $2,532.75   $1,842.00
T                                           $399.30     $290.40     $1,277.10   $928.80     $1,004.30   $730.40     $2,049.85   $1,490.80
U                                           $311.85     $226.80     $1,606.55   $1,168.40   $1,901.35   $1,382.80   $1,398.10   $1,016.80
V                                           $1,797.95   $1,307.60   $1,797.95   $1,307.60   $1,797.95   $1,307.60   $2,428.80   $1,766.40
W**                                         $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
X                                           $549.45     $399.60     $1,271.60   $924.80     $2,093.30   $1,522.40   $1,811.70   $1,317.60
Y                                           $667.15     $485.20     $1,303.50   $948.00     $1,291.40   $939.20     $1,423.40   $1,035.20
Z                                           $889.90     $647.20     $1,629.10   $1,184.80   $2,038.30   $1,482.40   $3,355.55   $2,440.40
 
*Service Areas AA, D and F have the lowest Schedule 1 assessment rates.
Effective November 1, 2022, The collection rate in these service areas is 100%
of their respective Schedule 1 amounts.
**Effective November 1, 2022, Service Areas L and W no longer have collection
rates due to these areas being largely built out with minimal growth projected.
***Effective April 26, 2023, Service Area PI collection rate is 100% of its
Schedule I amount.
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2025 to 5/31/2026
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2025 to 5/31/2026
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential 60% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
A                                     $593.40     $395.60     $1,294.80   $863.20     $1,215.00   $810.00     $985.20     $656.80
AA*                                   $63.00      $63.00      $228.00     $228.00     $205.00     $205.00     $355.00     $355.00
B                                     $1,208.40   $805.60     $1,451.40   $967.60     $1,989.60   $1,326.40   $1,876.80   $1,251.20
C                                     $384.00     $256.00     $793.80     $529.20     $686.40     $457.60     $1,068.60   $712.40
D*                                    $987.00     $987.00     $966.00     $966.00     $463.00     $463.00     $834.00     $834.00
E                                     $581.40     $387.60     $1,624.80   $1,083.20   $2,069.40   $1,379.60   $1,756.20   $1,170.80
F*                                    $387.00     $387.00     $998.00     $998.00     $675.00     $675.00     $743.00     $743.00
G                                     $453.00     $302.00     $1,254.60   $836.40     $1,079.40   $719.60     $1,233.00   $822.00
L**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
M                                     $870.00     $580.00     $1,530.60   $1,020.40   $1,898.40   $1,265.60   $3,820.20   $2,546.80
N                                     $445.20     $296.80     $769.80     $513.20     $507.00     $338.00     $1,645.20   $1,096.80
O                                     $979.20     $652.80     $608.40     $405.60     $2,136.00   $1,424.00   $2,133.60   $1,422.40
PI***                                 $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $2,756.00   $2,756.00
S                                     $616.80     $411.20     $1,438.80   $959.20     $1,790.40   $1,193.60   $2,763.00   $1,842.00
T                                     $435.60     $290.40     $1,393.20   $928.80     $1,095.60   $730.40     $2,236.20   $1,490.80
U                                     $340.20     $226.80     $1,752.60   $1,168.40   $2,074.20   $1,382.80   $1,525.20   $1,016.80
V                                     $1,961.40   $1,307.60   $1,961.40   $1,307.60   $1,961.40   $1,307.60   $2,649.60   $1,766.40
W**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
X                                     $599.40     $399.60     $1,387.20   $924.80     $2,283.60   $1,522.40   $1,976.40   $1,317.60
Y                                     $727.80     $485.20     $1,422.00   $948.00     $1,408.80   $939.20     $1,552.80   $1,035.20
Z                                     $970.80     $647.20     $1,777.20   $1,184.80   $2,223.60   $1,482.40   $3,660.60   $2,440.40
 
*Service Areas AA, D and F have the lowest Schedule 1 assessment rates.
Effective November 1, 2022, The collection rate in these service areas is 100%
of their respective Schedule 1 amounts.
**Effective November 1, 2022, Service Areas L and W no longer have collection
rates due to these areas being largely built out with minimal growth projected.
***Effective April 26, 2023, Service Area PI collection rate is 100% of its
Schedule I amount.
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2026
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
Schedule 2
Collection Rates effective 6/1/2026
Transportation Impact Fees
Per Vehicle-Mile
Assessment Date (as per City Code §  Final Plat Approved     Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved 4/  Final Plat Approved On
30-172(a))                            Before 4/1/2013         1/2013 to 3/31/2019     1/2019 to 10/31/2022    or After 11/1/2022
                                      Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-        Residential Non-
Service Areas                         65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential 65% of Sch  Residential
                                      1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch  1           40% of Sch
                                                  1                       1                       1                       1
A                                     $642.85     $395.60     $1,402.70   $863.20     $1,316.25   $810.00     $1,067.30   $656.80
AA*                                   $63.00      $63.00      $228.00     $228.00     $205.00     $205.00     $355.00     $355.00
B                                     $1,309.10   $805.60     $1,572.35   $967.60     $2,155.40   $1,326.40   $2,033.20   $1,251.20
C                                     $416.00     $256.00     $859.95     $529.20     $743.60     $457.60     $1,157.65   $712.40
D*                                    $987.00     $987.00     $966.00     $966.00     $463.00     $463.00     $834.00     $834.00
E                                     $629.85     $387.60     $1,760.20   $1,083.20   $2,241.85   $1,379.60   $1,902.55   $1,170.80
F*                                    $387.00     $387.00     $998.00     $998.00     $675.00     $675.00     $743.00     $743.00
G                                     $490.75     $302.00     $1,359.15   $836.40     $1,169.35   $719.60     $1,335.75   $822.00
L**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
M                                     $942.50     $580.00     $1,658.15   $1,020.40   $2,056.60   $1,265.60   $4,138.55   $2,546.80
N                                     $482.30     $296.80     $833.95     $513.20     $549.25     $338.00     $1,782.30   $1,096.80
O                                     $1,060.80   $652.80     $659.10     $405.60     $2,314.00   $1,424.00   $2,311.40   $1,422.40
PI***                                 $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $492.00     $2,756.00   $2,756.00
S                                     $668.20     $411.20     $1,558.70   $959.20     $1,939.60   $1,193.60   $2,993.25   $1,842.00
T                                     $471.90     $290.40     $1,509.30   $928.80     $1,186.90   $730.40     $2,422.55   $1,490.80
U                                     $368.55     $226.80     $1,898.65   $1,168.40   $2,247.05   $1,382.80   $1,652.30   $1,016.80
V                                     $2,124.85   $1,307.60   $2,124.85   $1,307.60   $2,124.85   $1,307.60   $2,870.40   $1,766.40
W**                                   $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00       $0.00
X                                     $649.35     $399.60     $1,502.80   $924.80     $2,473.90   $1,522.40   $2,141.10   $1,317.60
Y                                     $788.45     $485.20     $1,540.50   $948.00     $1,526.20   $939.20     $1,682.20   $1,035.20
Z                                     $1,051.70   $647.20     $1,925.30   $1,184.80   $2,408.90   $1,482.40   $3,965.65   $2,440.40
 
*Service Areas AA, D and F have the lowest Schedule 1 assessment rates.
Effective November 1, 2022, The collection rate in these service areas is 100%
of their respective Schedule 1 amounts.
**Effective November 1, 2022, Service Areas L and W no longer have collection
rates due to these areas being largely built out with minimal growth projected.
***Effective April 26, 2023, Service Area PI collection rate is 100% of its
Schedule I amount.
(Ord. 25889-11-2022, § 1, passed 11-29-2022, eff. 12-1-2022; Ord. 26099-04-
2023, § 1, passed 4-25-2023, eff. 4-26-2023)
CHAPTER 31: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
   Article
      
I.   PLAN COMMISSION
      
II.   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
      
III.   PLATTING
      
IV.   SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
      
V.   SUBDIVISION GENERAL STANDARDS
      
VI.   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
      
VII.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
      
VIII.   ENFORCEMENT
      
IX.   GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see
Ch. 2
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 6
   Building regulations, see
Ch. 7
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
   Human relations, see
Ch. 17
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17154, § 1, adopted September 12, 2006, amended the code by adding
provisions designated as a new App. C, Subdivision Ordinance. Amendments to
Ord. 17154 will be indicated by a history note cited in parentheses following
the amended section. Absence of such a note indicates the section derives
unchanged from said ordinance. Subsequently, Ord. 17851, § 1, adopted October
30, 2007, repealed Ch. 31 and replaced the contents with the contents of former
App. C. Section 2 of said ordinance amended the title of
Chapter 31 from “Subdivision Regulations” to “Subdivision Ordinance.” The
provisions of former App. C have been renumbered by the editor to match
existing style of the code. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed
analysis of inclusion.
Section
Article I: Plan Commission
   
31-1   Responsibility
   
31-2   Plan commission
   
31-3   Appointment
   
31-4   Organization
   
31-5   Decisions
   
31-6—31-20   Reserved
Article II: Development Review Committee
   
31-21   Establishment
   
31-22   Composition
   
31-23   Role and responsibility
   
31-24   Meetings and reports
   
31-25—31-40   Reserved
Article III: Platting
   
31-41   Plat requirements
   
31-42   Types of plans and plats
   
31-43—31-60   Reserved
Article IV: Submission and Review Process
   
31-61   Pre-submission; pre-development conference
   
31-62   Submission process
   
31-63   Review, approval and expiration
   
31-64—31-80   Reserved
Article V: Subdivision General Standards
   
31-81   Generally
   
31-82—31-100   Reserved
Article VI: Subdivision Design Standards
   
31-101   Access
   
31-102   Streets and blocks arrangements
   
31-103   Lot types and design
   
31-104   Easements
   
31-105   Stormwater management
   
31-106   Street design standards
   
31-107   Gated subdivisions and developments
   
31-108   Oil and gas pipelines
   
31-109   Oil and gas wells
   
31-110—31-130   Reserved
Article VII: Public Improvements
   
31-131   Construction plans preparation and approval
   
31-132   Construction design standards and specifications
   
31-133   Paving and drainage facilities
   
31-134   Street lighting
   
31-135   Site improvement data
   
31-136   Reserved
   
31-137—31-149   Reserved
Article VIII: Enforcement
   
31-150   Generally
   
31-151—31-170   Reserved
Article IX: Glossary of Terms
   
31-171   Glossary of terms
ARTICLE I: PLAN COMMISSION
§ 31-1 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city plan commission, referred to as “commission,” shall exercise all of
the powers of approval, disapproval and vacation of plats and plans, as
provided by state statutes and the City Charter and ordinances. The commission
may delegate to the director and director’s designee, the authority to
conditionally approve plats, and the authority to grant waivers of the
provisions of this chapter and continuances for construction plans. The
director may refer any matter delegated to the director to the commission for a
decision.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 1, Art. I), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 1, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019; Ord. 24457-09-2020, § 1, passed
9-22-2020; Ord. 25055-09-2021, § 1, passed 9-21-2021)
§ 31-2 PLAN COMMISSION.
   The plan commission shall have such members and purposes as defined in
Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the city code.
(Ord. 26353-08-2023, § 13, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 31-3 APPOINTMENT.
   (a)   The city plan commission shall be composed of residents of the city.
The city council shall consider for appointment to the commission only those
persons who have demonstrated their civic interest; general knowledge of the
community; independent judgment; understanding of zoning and planning;
availability to prepare for and attend meetings; and who, by reason of
diversity of their occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly
representative of the community.
   (b)   The city council shall appoint the city plan commission, which shall
consist of nine members, who shall serve in places numbered one through nine,
and five alternate members to serve in the absence of one or more regular
members. Preference will be given, where feasible, to prior plan commission
members as appointees to serve as alternate members to the commission. After
the expiration of the initial members' terms, members shall serve two-year
terms. No regular member shall serve more than three consecutive two-year terms
and the terms of current members of the commission shall be counted toward the
limit of terms to be served, for purposes of this section. At the expiration of
three consecutive two-year terms of service as a regular member, the member may
be appointed to serve as an alternate member at the discretion of the city
council.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 1, Art. III), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 1, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019)
§ 31-4 ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in November of
each year and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its
members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The commission
shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings.
The commission shall adopt a set of rules of procedure and keep a record of its
proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this article and the City
Charter. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular
meeting after their appointment.
   (b)   Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of business. The members of the commission shall regularly attend
meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without
compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized and approved expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (c)   There is hereby created the position of executive secretary to the
commission. The director of the planning and development department, or his or
her designated representative, shall serve as the executive secretary.
   (d)   The executive secretary shall have full care, custody and control of
the minutes and official records; shall attend to the correspondence of the
commission; and shall give such notices as are required and in the manner
prescribed by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 1, Art. IV),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23932-11-2019, § 1, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019)
§ 31-5 DECISIONS.
   (a)   Continuance. An applicant may request a continuance in accordance with
Tex. Local Government Code § 212.009(b-2) if received in writing prior to
publication of public notice, generally ten days prior to a public hearing. Any
request received after public notice is served shall be at the discretion of
the commission. An applicant may request a continuance on construction plans
delegated to the director or the director's designee in accordance with Tex.
Local Government Code § 212.009(b-2) if received in writing by the director or
the director's designee.
   (b)   Approval. The commission or director shall approve any plan or plat,
as applicable, that conforms to this chapter, the comprehensive plan as it
applies within the city limits (except where it conflicts with existing zoning)
and its appendices; master thoroughfare plan; parks and recreation policies,
applicable infrastructure policies and manuals; Meacham, Alliance and Spinks
Airport Controls; other city codes, ordinances, policies, rules or regulations;
and applicable state and federal laws.
   (c)   Conditional approval.
      (1)   The commission or director, as applicable, may conditionally
approve a plan or plat where there is a master thoroughfare plan amendment, a
rezoning or board of adjustment application is pending or when a plat or plan
does not fully conform with this chapter including all plans, design standards
and policy manuals incorporated by reference into the Subdivision Ordinance and
other applicable regulations in the City Code and state law. The commission or
director shall not deny or place conditions of approval based upon public
protest, private deed covenants and agreements, or allegations that the plan or
plat is not in keeping with the character of the neighborhood.
      (2)   Conditional approval shall constitute disapproval until all the
conditions are met. If the plat or plan is approved with conditions, the
commission or director, as applicable, shall provide a written statement to the
applicant in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.0091.
      (3)   The applicant may submit a response to the conditional approval to
the commission or director, as applicable, in accordance with Tex. Local
Government Code § 212.0093. If submitted in accordance with filing calendar,
the executive secretary shall file said response with the commission or
director, as applicable, for consideration within 15 days. The commission shall
approve or disapprove a response submitted in accordance with Tex. Local
Government Code § 212.0093. If the response is disapproved, the commission or
director, as applicable, shall provide a written statement to the applicant in
accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.0091.
   (d)   Approval with waivers.
      (1)   The applicant may request a waiver of the provisions of this
chapter by filing a written request with the executive secretary at the time of
plat or plan application submittal.
      (2)   a.   The commission may authorize a waiver when reasonable
difficulty will result from strict compliance. The commission shall consider
the general purpose and intent of this chapter, the applicable infrastructure
policies and state law requirements, the nature of the proposed use of the land
involved relative to the need for changes in infrastructure and municipal
services, existing zoning and uses of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable
effect of the variance upon traffic conditions.
         b.   The director may authorize a waiver to construction plans when
reasonable difficulty will result from strict compliance. The director shall
consider the general purpose and intent of this chapter, the applicable
infrastructure policies and state law requirements, the nature of the proposed
use of the land involved relative to the need for changes in infrastructure and
municipal services, existing zoning and uses of land in the vicinity, the
number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the
probable effect of the variance upon traffic conditions.
      (3)   a.   No waiver shall be granted unless the commission or director,
as applicable, finds:
            1.   That the effect of granting the waiver will be neither
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare nor injurious to other
property; and
            2.   That the effect of granting the wavier will not prevent the
use or orderly development of other tracts of land.
         b.   The findings, together with the specific facts upon which these
findings are based, shall be entered as part of the official minutes of the
commission meeting or the decision by the director.
   (e)   Denial. The commission or director, as applicable, may deny any plan
or plat or that does not conform to this chapter, the comprehensive plan as it
applies within the city limits (except where it conflicts with existing zoning)
and its appendices, master thoroughfare plan, parks and recreation policies,
applicable infrastructure policies and manuals, Meacham, Alliance and Spinks
Airport controls, other city codes, ordinances, policies, rules or regulations;
and other applicable state and federal laws. If the plat or plan is denied, the
commission or director, as applicable, shall provide a written statement to the
applicant in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.0091. The
applicant may submit a response to the denial to the commission or director, as
applicable, in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.0093. If
submitted in accordance with filing calendar, the executive secretary shall
file said response with the commission or director, as applicable, for
consideration within 15 days. The commission or director, as applicable, shall
approve or disapprove a response submitted in accordance with Tex. Local
Government Code § 212.0093. If the response is disapproved, the commission or
director, as applicable, shall provide a written statement to the applicant in
accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.0091.
   (f)   Recommendations to city council.
      (1)   The commission shall make a recommendation for street closures/
vacations to city council for final consideration and action.
      (2)   The commission will make a recommendation to city council for final
consideration and action for comprehensive plans, annexations and other tasks
as defined by city council.
   (g)   Changes following commission or director approval.
      (1)   a.   Plans or plats previously approved at the commission's public
hearing may not be changed or altered without a re-hearing, except to bring the
plan/plat in conformance with the conditions and requirements stipulated by the
commission.
         b.   Changes in land use, zoning, street classifications, the
configuration of street patterns, connections to perimeter streets, an increase
in development intensity or extensions to the perimeter boundary of the
subdivision to un-subdivided properties require a public hearing. Changes to
street classifications, connections to perimeter streets or extensions to the
perimeter boundary of the subdivision to un-subdivided properties shall also
require the written consent of the adjacent property owner.
      (2)   The executive secretary may administratively review and approve the
following without plan commission approval:
         a.   Minor alterations to internal streets and/or circulation system
and alignments; and
         b.   A net increase in the overall dwelling unit yield of the plan.
The net increase may not exceed 5% of the total residential lots rounded to the
nearest whole number.
      (3)   The director may approve alterations to previously approved
construction plans after the filing and rehearing of the altered construction
plans in accordance with the requirements for filing a new construction plan
for consideration.
   (h)   Other matters of business (OMB).
      (1)   Requests that are minor in nature may be placed on the commission
agenda for review and consideration by the commission under the heading "other
matters of business." All such requests shall be posted on the commission's
agenda prior to public hearing in the manner prescribed by state law.
      (2)   Requests eligible as "other matters of business" include the
following:
         a.   Change the subdivision name of a preliminary, short form or final
plat;
         b.   Increase in lot yield of an approved preliminary plat that does
not exceed 5% of the total residential lots, rounded to the nearest whole
number. In granting a request, the commission shall consider that the increase
is the result of a final adjustment in the plan design; adjustment in the size
or configuration of public park, other open space or community facility
parcels; or the elimination of oil/gas drill sites which would reasonably incur
an increase in lot yield;
         c.   A one-year extension of the expiration date of an approved
concept plan, preliminary plat, final or short form plat;
         d.   Vacation of a final recorded plat, where an agreed petition
signed by all affected property owners has been submitted; and
         e.   Revisions to the subdivision ordinance or commission's rules of
procedures.
(Ord. 17794, § 1, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 1, Art. V),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23195-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-1-2018; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 1, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019; Ord. 24457-09-2020, § 2, passed
9-22-2020)
§§ 31-6—31-20 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 31-21 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The development review committee (DRC) is established to assist the city
plan and zoning commissions in their review of plans and plats; rights-of-way
vacations and closures; master thoroughfare plan changes; and zoning changes
and site plans.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 2, Art. I), passed 10-30-2007)
§ 31-22 COMPOSITION.
   (a)   The DRC is composed of both “regular” and “associate” members of
various city departments and related agencies having an interest in the work
and activities of the respective commissions. “Regular” members shall represent
those directly involved in the review of the technical evaluation of the
commission cases. “Associate” members represent those departments and agencies
involved in limited aspects of commission cases.
   (b)   The executive secretary to the plan commission, or his or her
appointed representative, shall serve as the chairperson of the DRC. The
following shall constitute membership in the DRC:
Plan Commission Zoning Commission Department/Agency Member
Plan Commission Zoning Commission Department/Agency Member
R               R                 Planning and development department
R               R                 Transportation and public works department
R               A                 Park and recreation department
R               A                 Water department
A               A                 Environmental management department
R               R                 Fire department
R               A                 Police department
R               A                 Tarrant County Health Department
A               A                 Tarrant County Transportation and Engineering
                                  Department
A               A                 Housing department
(R = Regular Member; A = Associate Member)
 
(Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 2, Art. II),
passed 10-30-2007)
§ 31-23 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   The DRC shall advise the commissions on the following:
   (a)   The compliance and completion of applications for commission
consideration as to adopted rules, regulations and ordinances;
   (b)   The appropriate cases for plan commission “consent agenda” items;
   (c)   Waivers and reconsiderations;
   (d)   Appropriate zoning of land requested for voluntary or limited purpose
annexation;
   (e)   Street and alley vacations; and
   (f)   Amendments to the respective zoning and subdivision ordinances.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 2, Art. III), passed 10-30-2007)
§ 31-24 MEETINGS AND REPORTS.
   The DRC shall hold bi-monthly meetings to review cases with representatives
of cases and compile reports for the next scheduled meeting of the plan
commission.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 2, Art. IV), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 2, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019)
§§ 31-25—31-40 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PLATTING
§ 31-41 PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Platting required.
      (1)   Any owner of a tract of land within the city or its extra-
territorial jurisdiction (ETJ), which is to be divided into two or more parts
for the purposes of laying out a subdivision of the tract or parcel; laying out
lots for building or other land uses; or laying out streets, alleys, parks,
public squares or other parcels and lots intended to be dedicated to the public
use or for the use of the purchasers or owners of such lots fronting on or
adjacent to the public use must prepare a subdivision plat for the review,
approval and recording by the city.
      (2)   The entire original tract must be platted if any remainder or
proposed lot is less than five acres.
   (b)   Platting exempt.
      (1)   A division of land within the city or the ETJ shall be exempt from
the platting regulations where the division of land is into parts all greater
than five acres each, each part has access to a public street, and no public
improvement is being dedicated. Any parcel requiring a city permit must first
be platted and record in accordance with this chapter, provided however said
platting requirement may be waived in accordance with the procedures in
Article VIII of this chapter.
      (2)   No division of land, regardless of size, may be left in a
configuration that would prevent it from being platted in compliance with the
adopted subdivision ordinance.
   (c)   Multiple plat filing prohibited. Multiple preliminary plats may not be
filed on the same property for the purpose of simultaneous consideration by the
city plan commission.
(Ord. 17794, § 6, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 3, Art. I),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 19156-05-2010, § 1, passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 20382-09-
2012, § 1, passed 9-11-2012)
§ 31-42 TYPES OF PLANS AND PLATS.
   (a)   Concept plan (not recorded). A concept plan is required when:
      (1)   Preliminary plats are proposed to be presented in stages;
      (2)   The total land area of contiguous parcels under the same ownership
and control is greater than one square mile (640) acres; and
      (3)   The area is located wholly or partially within the City of Fort
Worth or proposed for annexation to the city.
   (b)   Preliminary plat (not recorded).
      (1)   A preliminary plat shall conform to the approved concept plan if a
concept plan was required.
      (2)   A preliminary plat is required to be processed by the planning and
development department and approved by the city plan commission prior to the
applicant submitting a final plat for city approval and recording with the
respective county clerk.
      (3)   A preliminary plat is not required if there is no dedication or
construction of public or private streets required for access and if four or
fewer lots are to be platted. See subsection (d), minor plat, below.
      (4)   A preliminary plat is required if there is:
         a.   Dedication or construction of public or private streets;
         b.   If five or more lots are to be platted (see subsection (d), minor
plat, below); or
         c.   If development of the property is to be platted in phases.
   (c)   Final plat.
      (1)   The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat,
approved construction plan and meet all of the requirements of the plan
commission.
      (2)   The final plat may include all or any portion of the area included
in the approved preliminary plat.
      (3)   A final plat that conforms to the approved preliminary plat,
approved construction plan and meets all of the requirements of the plan
commission does not require a public hearing and may be administratively
approved by the plan commission's executive secretary preceding the filing of
the plat for record.
      (4)   A public hearing is required if a final plat requires a waiver.
Notice of public hearing shall be in conformance with § 31-62(c).
   (d)   Final short plat.
      (1)   A final short plat is permitted for four or fewer lots that have
not been previously platted and recorded.
      (2)   All lots on the final short plat must have direct access to and
front or abut an existing public street.
      (3)   All lots must meet the lot size requirements of the zoning district
in which they are located.
      (4)   A final short plat that does not require a public hearing is
administratively approved by the plan commission's executive secretary
preceding the filing of the plat for record.
      (5)   A public hearing is required if a final short plat requires a
waiver. Notice of public hearing shall be in conformance with § 31-62(c).
   (e)   Replat.
      (1)   A replat does not vacate the previous plat of record governing the
remainder of the subdivision. A replat shall contain a note on the plat face
attesting that the replat does not amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions.
      (2)   A public hearing is required if a replat requires a waiver. Notice
of the public hearing shall be in conformance with Tex. Local Government Code §
212.015(b).
      (3)   A replat may be administratively approved if no waivers are
required or requested. The executive secretary shall provide written notice to
each lot owner of record within 200 feet of the lots replatted not later than
the 15th day after the date the replat is approved. The notice shall comply
with Tex. Local Government Code § 212.015(g).
   (f)   Amending plat.
      (1)   A plat of record may be amended without public notice, a public
hearing or approval of other lot owners and is controlling over the preceding
plat without vacation for one or more of the following purposes:
         a.   To correct errors in course or distance;
         b.   To add any course or distance that was omitted;
         c.   To correct an error in the description of the real property;
         d.   To indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibility for
setting monuments;
         e.   To show the location or character of any monument that has been
changed or was incorrectly shown;
         f.   To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or
omission including lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of
adjacent recorded plats;
         g.   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between
two adjacent lots if both lot owners join in the application for amending the
plat; neither lot is abolished; the amendment does not attempt to remove
recorded covenants or restrictions; and the amendment does not have a material
adverse affect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
         h.   To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment
of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
         i.   To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent
lots if the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the
plat; the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants and
restrictions; and the amendment does not increase the number of lots;
         j.   To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or
fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the
preceding plat if the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other
regulations of the city; the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any
covenants or restrictions; and the area covered by the changes is located in an
area that the city has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential
improvement area; and
         k.   To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if the
owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; the
amendment does not remove any covenants or restrictions; the amendment does not
increase the number of lots; and the amendment does not create or require the
creation of a new streets or make necessary the extension of municipal
facilities.
      (2)   An amending plat is filed for record in the county of jurisdiction
upon administrative approval by the plan commission’s executive secretary.
   (g)   Correction plat.
      (1)   A plat may be corrected without public notice, a public hearing or
approval of other lot owners and is controlling over the preceding plat without
vacation for one or more of the purposes listed in subsection (f)(1)a. through
(f)(1)g. above, Amending plat.
      (2)   A correction plat is filed for record in the county of jurisdiction
upon administrative approval by the plan commission’s executive secretary.
   (h)   Conveyance plat.
      (1)   A conveyance plat may be used to transfer ownership of a parcel or
portion of a parcel of land in order to record the transfer of ownership
without requiring construction or design of public improvements or collection
of development fees.
      (2)   The property must have access to private or public street.
      (3)   Utility easements may be recorded on the conveyance plat.
      (4)   a.   The conveyance plat shall contain a certification note on the
plat face, as follows:
            “This conveyance plat shall not convey any rights to development or
guarantee of public utilities, public or private access, or issuance of
addressing and permits, without compliance with all subdivision rules and
regulations and the approval and recording of a final plat.”
         b.   A conveyance plat is filed for record in the county of
jurisdiction upon administrative approval by the plan commission’s executive
secretary.
   (i)   Vacated plat. A recorded plat may only be vacated per the provisions
of Tex. Local Government Code § 212.013. A vacated plat must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   If any lot has been sold to an individual property owner, the
vacation application shall include the signatures of 100% of all property
owners within the recorded subdivision;
      (2)   No partial plat may be vacated without the consent of all property
owners encompassed by the prevailing recorded plat;
      (3)   No plat may be vacated unless access is provided to individual
platted lots and public street and alley rights of way, parks, public sites and
facilities, and utility and drainage easements and improvements are provided in
the accompanying replat; and
      (4)   No vacated plat may be recorded in the county of jurisdiction
without a public hearing and approval of the city plan commission.
(Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 3, Art. II),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 20382-09-2012, § 2, passed 9-11-2012; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 3, passed 11-12-2019)
§§ 31-43 —31-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
§ 31-61 PRE-SUBMISSION; PRE- DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE.
   (a)   A pre-development conference may be held between the applicant, his or
her consultant, and the DRC staff prior to submission of a preliminary plat,
concept plan, or construction plan application for the purpose of advising the
applicant as to the general restrictions, requirements and other planning and
engineering matters applicable to the plat. If an issue arises during the pre-
development meeting that directly concerns a city department not represented,
the appropriate staff will be contacted. This pre-development conference does
not constitute a filing under Tex. Local Government Code, Chapter 212.   
   (b)   A presubmittal conference may be held between the applicant, his or
her consultant, and the DRC staff prior to submission of a plat if the
applicant is willing to agree in writing that the conference does not
constitute the filing of an application. The purpose of the meeting is to
provide the applicant input on areas of the submittal that require additional
information to complete the application. This presubmittal conference does not
constitute a filing under Tex. Local Government Code, Chapter 212.
   (c)   A presubmittal conference may be held between the applicant, his or
her consultant, and the Infrastructure plan review center staff prior to
submission of a construction plan if the applicant is willing to agree in
writing that the conference does not constitute the filing of an application.
The purpose of the meeting is to provide the applicant with assistance in
designing construction plans that meet the city's requirements. This
presubmittal conference does not constitute a filing under Tex. Local
Government Code, Chapter 212.
   (d)   A post submittal conference may be held between the applicant, his or
her consultant, and the Infrastructure Plan Review Center staff after a
construction plan has been disapproved or conditionally approved. If the
applicant chooses to have a post submittal conference, the post submittal
conference must be held before the applicant files a response to the reasons
the construction plan was disapproved or conditionally approved. An applicant
must agree in writing that the conference does not constitute the filing of an
application or a response. The purpose of the meeting is to provide the
applicant with assistance in re-designing construction plans to meet the city's
requirements. This post submittal conference does not constitute a filing or
written response under Tex. Local Government Code, Chapter 212.
(Ord. 17794, § 2, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 4, Art. I),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23932-11-2019, § 5, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019;
Ord. 24457-09-2020, § 3, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 31-62 SUBMISSION PROCESS.
   (a)   Written request. Every proposal shall be submitted in writing in a
format and on application forms provided by the planning and development
department or transportation and public works department. All applications and
any required supplemental documents shall be submitted to the executive
secretary, or their designee. No plat or plan application will be accepted for
filing and processing by the executive secretary until all fees are paid, the
application meets the requirements of this chapter, including all necessary
studies, plans and supporting information; supporting documents are accepted
and approved by the reviewing department, and the property is properly zoned
for the anticipated use or an application has been submitted for rezoning.
   (b)   Filing date. The filing date for applications submitted for commission
or director action shall be established by the executive secretary. The filing
deadline shall be the official filing date for all applications. Any
application delivered to the city prior to the filing date shall be deemed
submitted on the official filing date.
   (c)   Public notices for certain applications. The following applications
shall require notice of a public hearing: application for waivers from
subdivision ordinance requirements for plats, right-of-way or easement
vacations and master thoroughfare plan amendments/waivers. Notice of the public
hearing shall be sent to the applicant or his or her agent; and to the owners
of all properties lying within 200 feet of the property (as ownership appears
on the last approved county tax roll). Notice may also be sent to the owners of
all abutting properties located outside the city limits and to other persons as
the executive secretary determines may be affected by the proposal. Notice
shall be given in writing, deposited in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, not less than ten days prior to the date of commission hearing. The
notice shall advise that a specific application as listed above has been
submitted for consideration and is available for review in the planning and
development department. The notice shall not be deemed a condition precedent to
the holding of any public hearing or to any official action concerning the
matter before the plan commission.
   (d)   Withdrawal of application. Any application may be withdrawn by
submitting a request to the executive secretary. The request shall be effective
upon the date of receipt by the executive secretary. A request to withdraw the
application after public notices have been mailed shall be heard by the plan
commission.
(Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 4, Art. II),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23679-06-2019, § 1, passed 6-4-2019; Ord. 23932-11-
2019, § 6, passed 11-12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019; Ord. 24457-09-2020, § 4, passed
9-22-2020)
§ 31-63 REVIEW, APPROVAL AND EXPIRATION.
   (a)   Concept plan.
      (1)   Applications. All concept plans shall include the following at the
time of filing:
         a.   Approved master water study;   
         b.   Approved master wastewater study; and
         c.   Approved master drainage study;
      (2)   Review. The DRC shall review the concept plan to determine the
relationship of proposed traffic-ways to existing neighborhood circulation
patterns; compliance with this chapter; the master thoroughfare plan; the
comprehensive plan; parks and recreation policies; Meacham, Alliance and Spinks
Airport controls; and other city codes, ordinances, policies, rules or
regulations; and the need for other public facilities.
      (3)   Approval.
         a.   The plan commission shall review all concept plans. The decision
of the plan commission is final.
         b.   Approval by the plan commission shall permit the submission of
preliminary plats in stages that are in conformity with the approved concept
plan and this chapter, City of Fort Worth development policies. Approval of a
concept plan shall not prevent the plan commission from approving concept plans
and plats on adjacent properties that are not consistent with the concept plan,
or from disapproving future preliminary plats that do not comply with the
approved concept plan. Before any inconsistent concept plan or plat is approved
on adjacent property, the plan commission shall give written notice to the
current property owner and to the applicant who filed the previously approved
concept plan.
      (4)   Conditional approval. Concept plans conditionally approved shall
follow the process provided in § 31-5(c).
      (5)   Withdrawal of approval by plan commission. Approval or conditional
approval of a concept plan is voidable or subject to amendment at any time,
after a public hearing by the plan commission, if the applicant causes a
material change in the approved concept plan.
      (6)   Expiration. A concept plan shall expire on the fifth anniversary of
the date the plan was approved by the plan commission if no progress has been
made towards the completion of the project. Progress towards the completion of
the project shall include any one of the following:
         a.   An application for a final plat or plan is submitted;
         b.   A good-faith attempt is made to file with the city or other
regulatory agency for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards
completion of the project;
         c.   Costs have been incurred for developing the project, including
costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities
designed to serve the project in the aggregate amount of 5% of the most recent
appraised market value of the real property of the project;
         d.   Fiscal security is posted; or
         e.   Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been
paid.
   (b)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Applications and engineering documents. All preliminary plat
applications shall include the following at the time of filing:
         a.   An approved drainage plan and study, including the 100-year
floodplain, and any existing or proposed drainage easements affecting the plan;
         b.   An approved comprehensive water study;
         c.   An approved comprehensive wastewater study;
         d.   Preliminary location of water wells serving the site, if not
served by a public domestic water supply and distribution system. Subdivisions
with three or more lots may show a typical location detail on the plat, with
dimensions to the nearest proposed sanitary waste disposal field or facility.
The county health department and city transportation and public works
department shall each receive a copy of planned locations. Documentation of
approved well sites and on-site waste disposal acres shall be provided from the
county health department; and
         e.   An approved Traffic Impact Assessment Study;
         f.   Proof that the property is properly zoned for the project or a
copy of the application for a zoning change or board of adjustment application;
         g.   Approved Master Thoroughfare Plan amendments or a copy of the
application for approval;
      (2)   Review. The DRC shall review the preliminary plat to determine the
relationship of proposed traffic-ways to existing neighborhood circulation
patterns; compliance with this chapter; the master thoroughfare plan; the
comprehensive plan; parks and recreation policies; Meacham, Alliance and Spinks
Airport controls; and other city codes, ordinances, policies, rules or
regulations; and the need for other public facilities.
      (3)   Approval.
         a.   The plan commission shall review preliminary plats requesting a
waiver. The decision of the plan commission is final.
         b.   The plan commission shall determine that the plat meets the
following city requirements prior to preliminary plat approval:
            1.   City's subdivision regulations;
            2.   Conformance with the zoning ordinance and district regulations
governing the plat, including proper zoning of the plat to be in place prior to
final plat approval;
            3.   Conformance with the latest adopted comprehensive plan of the
City of Fort Worth, with regards to current and future streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds and public utility facilities;
            4.   Conformance with the latest adopted master thoroughfare plan
and related street standards as determined by the city traffic engineer;
            5.   Conformance with city adopted park dedication policies;
            6.   Conformance with the city and/or county regulations (whichever
is applicable) for the safe and adequate provision of water supply and sanitary
waste collection and disposal;
            7.   Conformance with adopted federal, state, county and city
stormwater management regulations;
            8.   Conformance with the city's latest adopted airport controls
and master plans for Spinks, Alliance and Meacham Airports; and compliance with
related Federal Aviation Regulations (FAA) to mitigate potential adverse safety
impacts to other nearby surrounding regional satellite airports; and with the
U.S. Government Naval Air Station/Joint Reserve Base (aka Carswell AFB); and
            9.   Conformance with a previously approved concept plan.
      (4)   Conditional approval. Preliminary Plats conditionally approved
shall follow the process provided in § 31-5(c).
      (5)   Changes or alterations to approved plat.
         a.   No previously approved plat may be changed or altered, except to
bring the plat in conformance with the conditions and requirements stipulated
by the commission. Minor changes as outlined below shall be permitted at the
discretion of the executive secretary.
            1.   The proposed internal street and/or circulation system and
alignments may be altered if minor in nature. Changes to street
classifications, connections to perimeter streets, or extensions to the
subdivision's perimeter to un-subdivided property shall not be considered minor
alterations.
            2.   A net increase, not to exceed 5% of the total residential lots
(rounded to the nearest whole number) in the overall lot yield of the approved
preliminary plat may be made, except as elsewhere prohibited by these
regulations.
         b.   If the executive secretary determines that the proposed changes
are minor, a revised preliminary plat may be approved administratively. A
revised preliminary plat shall include all property within the boundary of the
original preliminary plat. A revision to a revised preliminary plat shall not
affect the expiration date of the plat and shall carry the same expirations as
outlined below.
      (6)   Expiration.
         a.   A preliminary plat shall expire two years from the date the plat
was approved by the city plan commission unless progress towards completion of
the project has been demonstrated prior to that expiration date, or a request
for an extension has been made in accordance with subsection (b)(7) below.
         b.   Progress must be demonstrated by the applicant in writing 30
calendar days prior to preliminary plat expiration. Progress towards the
completion of the project shall include any one of the following:
            1.   An application for a final plat or plan or a portion thereof
is submitted;
            2.   A good-faith attempt is made to file with the city or other
regulatory agency for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards
completion of the project;
            3.   Costs have been incurred for developing the project, including
costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities
designed to serve the project in the aggregate amount of 5% of the most recent
appraised market value of the real property of the project;
            4.   Fiscal security is posted; or
            5.   Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have
been paid.
         c.   A final plat that is not recorded in accordance with subsection
(c)(2) of this section will not constitute progress.
         d.   An acceptable demonstration of progress, as determined by the
executive secretary, will result in the project being extended five years from
the point of progress.
         e.   Subsequent progress made towards completion of the project, if
documented prior to plat expiration, will extend the life of the project for an
additional five years from the point of progress.
         f.   If a new preliminary plat is submitted, a new application and
fees will be required and a new maximum two-year period shall begin upon the
commission's approval of the newly submitted preliminary plat.
      (7)   Extension. The applicant may, within 30-calendar days prior to the
preliminary plat expiration date, request commission approval for an extension
up to a maximum one-year period, provided no plat changes have been made from
the original approved plat. Such written request shall be placed on the
commission's regular monthly agenda as an "other matters of business" item and
no additional application shall be required. If approved, the commission shall
set the expiration date of the requested extension for a period of time up to,
but not exceeding, one calendar year. Extensions shall not exceed five years
total from date of original approval.
   (c)   Plats (final plats, short form final plats, replats, vacated plats,
conveyance plats, and amended plats).
      (1)   Approval.
         a.   If the executive secretary determines that the final plat
complies with the requirements of this chapter or previously approved
preliminary plat, then the executive secretary shall certify the final plat and
it shall be recorded.
         b.   No final plat shall be certified as approved until:
            1.   All conditions required by this chapter including all plans,
design standards and policy manuals incorporated by reference into the
subdivision ordinance and other applicable regulations in the city code and the
commission have been met;
            2.   All approvals of outside governmental entities, state
agencies, or public utilities are provided to the city;
            3.   Construction of community facilities necessary to serve the
property; execution of a community facilities agreement or similar agreement
approved by the city and providing the city with an acceptable financial
guarantee, other than a completion agreement; providing the city with any
financial guarantee required by the county having jurisdiction in the ETJ per
an interlocal agreement under State Senate Bill No. 1445; or the execution of a
future improvements agreement and delivering to the city a check for the cost
of the public infrastructure covered by the future improvements agreement;
            4.   The dedication instrument is completed and signed;
            5.   Any related documents are reviewed and approved; and
            6.   The commission chairperson's and commission executive
secretary's attesting signatures have been placed on the face of the plat.
   (d)   Construction plans.
      (1)   Applications. All construction plans shall include the following at
the time of filing:
         a.   IPRC application form and payment of the application fee;
         b.   Construction plans that are signed and sealed by the engineer of
record;
         c.   Drainage study approved by the city or a copy of the city's
determination that the drainage study is not required;
         d.   Traffic impact assessment study approved by the city or a copy of
the city's determination that a traffic impact assessment study is not
required;
         e.   Water and sanitary sewer studies approved by the city, or a copy
of the city's determination that a water or sanitary study is not required;
         f.   Draft horizontal control plan;
         g.   Approved alignment walks for water, sanitary sewer and stormwater
infrastructure or a copy of the city's determination that an alignment walk is
not required;
         h.   Geotechnical report;
         i.   Proof that the property is properly zoned for the project or a
copy of the application for a zoning change;
         j.   Approved Master Thoroughfare Plan amendments or a copy of the
application for approval;
         k.   Approved street vacations or a copy of the application for
approval;
         l.   Approvals of outside governmental entities or a copy of all
applications for approval;
         m.   Construction plan waivers that have been granted or a copy of the
application for each waiver; and
         n.   A copy of the currently public city construction specifications
applicable to the construction plans.
      (2)   Review. The Infrastructure Plan Review Center shall review the
construction plan to determine compliance with: this chapter; other city codes,
ordinances, policies, rules or regulations; and county, state, and federal
laws.
      (3)   Approval.
         a.   The commission or director shall review construction plans
requesting a waiver. The decision of the commission or director is final.
         b.   The commission or director shall determine that construction
plans meet the following requirements prior to approval:
            1.   City's subdivision regulations;
            2.   Conformance with any approved preliminary plat or final plat;
            3.   Conformance with city codes, ordinances, policies, rules and
regulations;
            4.   Conformance with county, state, and federal laws.
            5.   Approval of proper zoning, street vacations, and Master
Thoroughfare Plan amendments; and
            6.   Approval of other governmental entities, when required, have
been obtained.
      (4)   Conditional approval. Construction plans conditionally approved
shall follow the process provided in §
31-5(c).
      (5)   Changes or alterations to approved construction plans. No
previously approved construction plan may be changed or altered, except to
bring the construction plan in conformance with the conditions and requirements
stipulated as part of the approval. Minor field changes shall be permitted at
the discretion of the infrastructure plan review center and the construction
inspector as long as the field changes do not conflict with the city codes,
ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations.
      (6)   Expiration.
         a.   A construction plan shall expire two years from the date the
construction plan was approved.
         b.   If a new construction plan is submitted, a new application and
application fee will be required and a new maximum two-year period shall begin
upon the approval of the newly submitted construction plan.
   (e)   Closure or vacation of public or private streets, alleys and access
easements. Plan commission review process - vacation or closure of streets and
alleys.
      (1)   Eligibility. All applications must conform to the requirements of
the city for vacating public or private streets and alley rights of way or
public access easements serving more than one property.
      (2)   Traffic study.
         a.   As a condition for vacation or closure approval and prior to the
commission's public hearing, the director of transportation and public works
may require the applicant to submit a traffic study prepared by a professional
civil engineer to determine whether or not the requested closure or vacation
would have an adverse impact on nearby or neighborhood through traffic and
circulation.
         b.   The study shall be performed and completed in a format as
required by the transportation and public works department. The study shall be
submitted not less than two calendar weeks prior to the commission's scheduled
public hearing. Copies of an executive summary of the traffic study shall also
be simultaneously transmitted to the planning and development department for
distribution to applicable city departments and the plan commission.
      (3)   Review. The DRC shall review and make a recommendation to the plan
commission on all applications for closure or vacation.
      (4)   Plan commission approval. After approval by the city plan
commission and upon receipt of the required purchase payment for the rights-of-
way or access easement established by the property management department, and
an acceptable replat has been submitted, the findings and actions shall be
certified by the executive secretary and transmitted to the city council for
final consideration and action.
      (5)   Plan commission denial and appeal. If the plan commission
recommends denial, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by
filing a written appeal with the executive secretary of the commission within
12 days after the commission's action. If no appeal is filed, the
recommendation of the plan commission shall be final.
      (6)   Expiration/extension.
         a.   If a replat application that incorporates the area to be vacated
is not submitted within 180 days of the city plan commission recommendation,
the commission's recommendation shall expire and be deemed withdrawn.
         b.   Any city plan commission's recommendation to city council to
vacate a public or private street, alley right-of-way or public access easement
made prior to June 1, 2010 must be incorporated into a replat recorded by
December 31, 2012 or the recommendation of the commission shall expire and be
deemed withdrawn.
         c.   For the expiration of the replat that incorporates the land area
to be vacated, see subsection (c), final plats, above.
   (f)   Vacation and abandonment of public utility, public open space and
drainage easements. An application to vacate a public utility, public open
space or drainage easement may be vacated by one of the following actions.
      (1)   Vacation by plat. Unless created by separate instrument, a
drainage, public open space or utility easement may be vacated by submitting a
plat.
      (2)   Vacation by separate instrument. Drainage, public open space and/or
utility easements may be vacated or abandoned by separate deed instrument
approved and executed by the city and recorded in the applicable deed records
of the county. The procedures shall be as follows.
         a.   Application. A completed application shall be submitted to the
property management department for review.
         b.   Accompanying exhibits. Proper exhibits as required by the
property management department shall be provided.
         c.   Abandonment concurrence. All adjacent contiguous property owners
that may be affected by the vacation or abandonment of the easement shall
provide evidence of concurrence with the vacation.
         d.   Processing and investigation. The property management department
shall notify and provide a copy of the application and exhibits to any affected
department, agency or franchised public utility company. After all affected
parties have been notified and endorsements received from reviewing city
departments and franchised utility companies, the division administrator shall
initiate approval by the city council.
         e.   Recording of instrument. Upon approval, the property management
department shall record the abandonment document in the county deed records.
(Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17794, §§ 3—5, passed 9-25-2007; Ord.
17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 4, Art. III), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 18319-09- 2008, §
9, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 19156-05-2010, §§ 7, 8, passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 20382-
09-2012, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-11-2012; Ord. 21650-02-2015, § 4, passed 2-17-2015;
Ord. 23679-06-2019, § 2, passed 6-4-2019; Ord. 23932-11-2019, § 7, passed 11-
12-2019, eff. 11-22-2019; Ord. 24457-09-2020, § 5, passed 9-22-2020)
§§ 31-64—31-80 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: SUBDIVISION GENERAL STANDARDS
§ 31-81 GENERALLY.
   (a)   Plats, plans and proposed public improvements shall conform to this
chapter, the comprehensive plan as it applies within the city limits (except
where it conflicts with existing zoning); master thoroughfare plan; parks and
recreation policies; Meacham, Alliance and Spinks Airport controls; and other
city codes, ordinances, policies, rules or regulations.
   (b)   These subdivision regulations shall be administered in accordance with
the following.
      (1)   Sites and access. Appropriately sized sites per the comprehensive
zoning ordinance and access to public schools, parks, playgrounds and other
community facilities shall be provided in conformance with rules and
regulations of the city. Subdivisions shall provide an adequate system of
streets with multiple routes and connections serving the same origins and
destinations.
      (2)   Adequate public facilities and infrastructure.
         a.   Each subdivision of land shall provide adequate public facilities
including water, wastewater collection and disposal, drainage facilities, parks
and recreation facilities, and transportation facilities necessary to properly
serve the proposed development, including related off-site facilities.
         b.   The adequacy of public facilities shall be determined by
evaluating their conformance with the minimum levels of service, as established
in this chapter or any other applicable city development standards.
            1.   Street access. All final platted lots shall have a paved
direct access to an all weather paved hard surfaced public or private street or
an access easement approved by the public safety departments and the city
engineer.
            2.   Water. All final platted lots must be connected to a domestic
public water system or served by a non-contaminated private water well, when
public water service is not available in accordance with adopted city water
department policy for water service. The public water system shall not cross
property lines, parallel side or rear property lot lines, nor encroach into
natural areas or wetlands, without written approval from the city water
department.
            3.   Wastewater. All final platted lots shall be connected to a
public wastewater collection and treatment system or served by a county health
department approved aerobic or septic sanitary waste disposal system, when a
public wastewater system is not available in accordance with City of Fort Worth
water department policy for wastewater service. The projected wastewater
discharge of a proposed development shall not exceed the capacity of the public
wastewater system. The public wastewater collection system shall not cross
property lines, or parallel side or rear property lot lines, without written
approval from the city water department.
            4.   Stormwater management. Stormwater management shall conform to
the adopted stormwater management policies and ordinances adopted by the city.
            5.   Parks and recreation. Park and recreation facilities and
features shall be deemed adequate when all required park fees have been paid
and/or all required agreements for land dedication or participation have been
approved and accepted by the department of park and recreation and the city
council.
            6.   Public utilities. All final platted lots must have access to
public and franchise public utilities.
      (3)   Drainage and natural land features. Subdivisions shall be designed
and platted in conformance with the tree preservation ordinance and the
stormwater management policy and ordinances. Floodplain and floodway
conservation, wetland protection and the preservation of historic and
archaeological sites and natural features including steep slopes and protected
wildlife habitats shall conform to federal and state laws.
      (4)   Urban forestry plan.
         a.   Subdivision plats are subject to the tree preservation and
planting requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of Fort Worth in
effect at the time of vesting. Prior to the submission of any plat for review
and approval by the city, the applicant shall apply for an urban forestry
permit or a waiver from such permit from the planning and development
department.
         b.   Should compliance with the urban forestry permit require a
provision for the planting of one or more trees per residential lot, a note
shall be placed on the final plat stating: “In accordance with City of Fort
Worth tree ordinance, construction shall require the provision of one tree per
5,000 square feet of lot area prior to final building inspection.”
      (5)   Incorporation of adopted design standards and policy manuals.
         a.   Design manuals. The city’s traffic engineering manual;
Installation Policy and Design Criteria for Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed
Water Infrastructure; and utility construction policies, as adopted and amended
by the city council and published by the city, are hereby incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth in these regulations.
         b.   Installation of community facilities. The city’s community
facilities agreement ordinance is incorporated by reference, as if fully set
forth in these regulations.
         c.   Chapter 212 of the State of Texas Local Government Code. Tex.
Local Government Code Chapter 212, governing: Municipal Regulation of
Subdivisions and Property Development is incorporated by reference as if fully
set forth in these regulations.
         d.   City Council adopted form based codes and/or design overlay
zoning districts containing a regulating plan, street cross sections, or
streetscape standards are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth in these regulations and shall apply to those areas zoned with the
appropriate zoning suffix.
         e.   Access Management Policy. The city’s Access Management Policy is
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in these regulations.
         f.   Active Transportation Plan. The Active Transportation Plan, as
may be amended, is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in these
regulations.
(Ord. 17794, § 8, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 5), passed 10-
30-2007; Ord. 17924, §§ 1, 3, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 20382-09-2012, § 5,
passed 9-11-2012; Ord. 22051-01-2016, § 1, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 22274-06-
2016, § 1, passed 6-14- 2016, eff. 6-23-2016; Ord. 23225-06-2018, § 1, passed
6-5-2018, eff. 8-1-2018; Ord. 23679-06-2019, § 3, passed 6-4-2019; Ord. 25824-
11-2022, § 1, passed 11-8-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17924, § 1, adopted December 18, 2007, deleted the provisions of §
31-136, incorporation of adopted design standards and policy manuals, and
renumbered said provisions as §
31-81(d). Said provisions have been designated as §
31-81(e) at the discretion of the editor, as there already exist provisions
designated (d). See also the Code Comparative Table.
§§ 31-82—31-100 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 31-101 ACCESS.
   (a)   Roadway network. Prior to plat approval the city shall determine
whether the roadway network serving the development to be platted has adequate
capacity to accommodate existing traffic, traffic reasonably anticipated from
the development, and traffic reasonably anticipated from other developments
approved or for which a formal application has been submitted. Adequate
connectivity will address internal connectivity as well as external
connectivity. This determination shall be based on information provided by the
developer in the plat application and supporting studies, unless the study is
waived.
   (b)   Vehicular paved access to subdivisions.
      (1)   Vehicular access to subdivisions within the city shall be by means
of a public street having an all weather reinforced concrete or HMAC asphalt
paved surface, constructed to city standards, and of appropriate design,
traffic capacity and service level rating to accommodate the present and
anticipated traffic volumes and wheel loads of passenger, sanitation, moving
vans, delivery services and emergency vehicles and equipment. Failure to meet,
or provide satisfactory proof of meeting these requirements, by the developer,
prior to the construction of on-site buildings, shall be basis for denial of
any required building or related permit.
      (2)   Vehicular access to subdivisions within the ETJ area of the city
shall be by an approved paved all weather hard-surfaced street, meeting the
design standards of the city or as depicted in an adopted city/county inter-
local agreement.
   (c)   Secondary ingress and egress to subdivisions.
      (1)   Subdivisions containing more than 30 one-family or two-family
dwelling units shall have a platted and constructed secondary ingress and
egress to a public street. Multi-family developments of 100 dwelling units or
more shall have a platted and constructed secondary ingress and egress to a
public street.
      (2)   Development phasing of any subdivision shall ensure that all such
residential units have a platted and constructed secondary entrance when more
than 30 residential units are proposed.
      (3)   Subdivisions with up to 40 one-family or two-family dwelling units
may be permitted with one access point if a platted and constructed secondary
entrance will connect to future development.
   (d)   Internal roadway network connectivity.
      (1)   All proposed developments shall have a connectivity index of 1.4 or
greater. The connectivity index shall be calculated by dividing the total
number of links (streets including stub-out streets) by the total number of
nodes (intersections, culs-de-sacs, no-outlets, dead-ends).
      (2)   Stub outs to adjacent property are worth one-half credit each
toward the number of links. Residential road connections to collector streets
and larger are worth one full credit each. Standard public access easements
count as links. Culs-de-sac count as links.
      (3)   Street elbows do not count as nodes. Standard alley intersections
do not count as nodes. Intersections on collector streets and larger do not
count as nodes. The termination of culs-de-sac count as nodes.
      (4)   Link-to-node connectivity index.
   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7811.png][https://export.amlegal.com/media/
5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/IMAGES/0-0-0-7813.png]
   Ratio = 7/8 = 0.88      Ratio = 13/9 = 1.44
      (5)   The city plan commission may grant waivers to these requirements
only upon finding that the development is constrained by topographic features,
existing development or other impassible features.
   (e)   External roadway network connectivity. Subdivisions shall be phased in
such a way to ensure effective traffic management. Applications for
subdivisions including five or more lots shall include a traffic management
plan, which shall include at a minimum: the estimated number of phases; the
necessary improvements to ensure adequate access; the trigger point(s) for
providing the improvements; and the number of lots that will be included in the
corresponding phases.
   (f)   Secondary ingress and egress shall be in conformance with §
31-101(c). Above the second access point, the accumulated estimated peak hour
traffic volumes for each public street connection shall not exceed the
following:
 
Street Classification Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
Local                 350 vehicles per hour per lane (vphpl) (each direction)
Collector             750 vphpl (each direction)
Industrial            750 vphpl (each direction)
 
   (g)   Collector network planning. All new preliminary plats shall show a
collector network consistent with these requirements. Final minor plats
contained within or adjacent to the planned or existing collector network shall
connect with the collector network.
      (1)   Collector design is a careful balance between providing direct
connectivity and attracting no more traffic than is appropriate. The primary
means of achieving this balance is through proper subdivision network layout
design, which considers each internal roadway's tributary area (the streets and
homes that feed it), the daily number of vehicle trips generated by a typical
home, and the resulting expected daily traffic on the key internal streets.
   Example Collector Street Network
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8682.png]
      (2)   Collector streets shall provide continuous access between
thoroughfares, but discourage long-distance through traffic. The definition of
long distance varies with context; Figure 4 indicates the target trip length
and upper-limit traffic volumes for each context.
      (3)   Collector streets serve both residential and non-residential land-
uses. However, they shall be planned and designed to discourage non-residential
(i.e. commercial, industrial) traffic intrusion into residential areas.
   Figure 4
 
                    Residential area
                    A. With fronting    B. No fronting      C. Non-residential/
                    single-family       single-family homes mixed-use areas
                    homes*
Typical trip length ½ mile             1 mile              up to 2 miles
Upper limit daily
traffic volume      2,000               5,000               10,000
(both directions)
Applicable design
features to promote Curvilinear design; Roundabouts;        Curvilinear design;
these               traffic-calming     discontinuities     roundabouts
characteristics     treatments
(see text)
On-street parking   Required            Allowed but not     Allowed but not
                                        required            required
*Collectors without fronting homes are preferred
 
      (4)   Collectors shall only terminate at an intersection with a
thoroughfare or another collector except when the collector is a stub, that
when ultimately finished will make this connection.
      (5)   Collector streets shall connect to thoroughfares at full median
opening locations in accordance with the requirements of the Access Management
Manual where feasible. The connection shall also be made at a location suitable
for a future traffic signal installation.
      (6)   Collectors shall align across thoroughfares rather than forming
offset intersections (to promote safe, efficient traffic flow on the
thoroughfare). The city plan commission may grant a waiver if analysis
determines that applying this approach will encourage cut-through traffic and/
or undesirably long trips on a specific collector. Figure 4 indicates the
typical trip lengths.
      (7)   At jurisdictional boundaries, collector planning and design must
coordinate with the adjacent jurisdiction to maximize the ability to meet Fort
Worth's policies and needs while supporting the adjacent jurisdiction's
policies and needs.
      (8)   Design features shall encourage speeds of 25 mph or less and
provide visual cues to drivers that the street is not intended for long-
distance trips.
      (9)   If a subdivision network layout alone is insufficient to achieve
the characteristics above, especially on collectors fronted by homes, special
design approaches shall be incorporated. Traffic engineering studies can
predict or estimate the effects of many of the design approaches described
below, especially the effects on traffic volumes. If these measures are not
sufficient to achieve the desired characteristics, then larger building
setbacks and/or landscaping along the street shall be considered to buffer
residences fronting on higher-volume collector streets. Design features to
discourage speeding and long-distance trips:
         a.   Curvilinear street design: Curvilinear design reduces speeds,
gives the road a meandering feel, and supplies a visual cue (if curvature is
visible from intersections) that speeds are lower and unsuitable for cut-
through traffic.
         b.   Neighborhood entry features: For residential collectors that have
fronting homes and that cross thoroughfares, neighborhood entry features -
including treed entry medians and entry signage - send visual cues that the
street is intended for neither through traffic nor desirable for that purpose.
         c.   Traffic calming measures: These measures are most appropriate on
residential collectors with fronting homes. They can include such items as on-
street parking, roundabouts, mini-roundabouts, chicanes, and raised crosswalks.
         d.   Discontinuities: The design approaches listed above are generally
sufficient to discourage cut-through traffic and promote desirable collector
function. For cases in which these measures are deemed through analysis to be
inadequate, discontinuities (Figure 5) may be considered. Discontinuities
generally make thoroughfare access unnecessarily difficult for local travelers.
Therefore, the discontinuity treatments described below shall only be
considered if the above design approaches are shown, via traffic engineering
analysis, to be unable to provide volume and trip-length limits appropriate to
their context as described in Figure 4.
            1.   L-shaped collectors. This approach discourages cut-through
traffic with a collector that connects intersecting thoroughfares rather than
parallel thoroughfares.
            2.   Offset thoroughfare crossing. This approach puts a jog in the
collector where it intersects the thoroughfare. This approach decreases
pedestrian access and comfort and increases the number of intersections on the
thoroughfare.
            3.   Internal offset. This approach puts a jog in between the
thoroughfares connected by the collector.
            4.   Internal gap. This approach creates deliberately circuitous
navigation through the neighborhood.
   Figure 5: Discontinuities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8684.png]
      (10)    Collector streets shall be spaced accordi ng to Figure 6, subject
to consistency with the Access Management Policy, unless natural or man-made
features pose constraints. When planning and designing a collector layout:
         a.   Avoid steep slopes and otherwise unsuitable topography.
         b.   Minimize impact to the built environment.
         c.   Minimize wetland and floodplain impacts (i.e., identify 90-degree
stream crossings at the narrowest point possible), critical watershed areas,
and stream crossings.
         d.   Avoid railroad crossings and bisecting parks.
         e.   Minimize impacts to utilities (e.g., gas wells).
      (11)   The city plan commission may grant waivers to these requirements
only upon finding that the development is constrained by topographic features,
existing development, or other impassible features. The city traffic engineer
or designee may administratively modify the spacing requirements within 10% or
100 feet (whichever is less) where it is impractical to meet the standards.
   Figure 6
 
                                                         Desired Maximum
                                                         Spacing between
Land Use             Dwelling Units/Acre Access Function Collector
                                                         Intersections along a
                                                         Thoroughfare (feet)
Rural                < 2                 N.A.            N.A.
Residential Suburban 2 - 4               High            1,500 - 3,000
   Urban          > 4                 High            750 - 1,500
Non-Residential and  n.a.                Medium          750 - 1,500
Mixed Use
 
(Ord. 17794, § 9, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. I),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 22051-01-2016, §§ 1 - 4, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 23225-
06-2018, § 2, passed 6-5-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
§ 31-102 STREETS AND BLOCKS ARRANGEMENTS.
   (a)   Streets and blocks shall be designed and configured in accordance with
the Table of Geometric Street Design Standards of
Article V and shall provide for the following.
   (b)   Arterial streets shall be intersected only by collector streets or
other arterial streets, unless the means of ingress and egress to a subdivision
is from such an arterial street. The city traffic engineer may approve
exceptions based on adopted traffic engineering standards.
      (1)   Roadway design. Roadway design should take advantage of natural
site features such as topography and drainage to reduce speeds through
neighborhoods and discourage through traffic intrusions.
      (2)   Interconnectivity of neighborhoods. Fragmented street systems
impede emergency access and increase the number and length of individual trips.
New residential subdivisions shall be designed to coordinate with existing,
proposed, and anticipated streets. Local and collector streets shall be
extended to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining un-
platted lands. In instances where the street stub-out would traverse an
adjacent 100-year floodplain, the spacing of the street crossings shall not
exceed one-half mile. Where the street crossing is in a public park, the design
of the crossing shall provide for pedestrian/bicycle access under the street,
unless the depth of the creek below the roadway makes such a grade separation
infeasible. Subdivisions shall be designed to connect to adjacent existing
stub-out streets as provided on an approved preliminary or final plat.
Subdivisions shall be designed to discourage the use of local streets by non-
local traffic while maintaining the connectivity with the surrounding system of
roadways. This can be accomplished using modified grid systems, T-
intersections, roadway jogs, or other appropriate traffic calming or roadway
design measures.
   Figure 7: Street Connectivity
 
Poor                                      Improved
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/ 5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8686.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8688.png]
   a. Walking, bicycling , transit use    a. Local trips shortened.
impeded.
   b. Local trips on major roads          b. Multimodal mobility improved.
increased.
   c. Properties cannot be developed      c. Local mobility enhanced.
properly.
                                            d. Internal site access opportunities
                                          increased.
 
      (3)   School location standards. For reasons of student and pedestrian
safety and vehicular access, circulation and control, development around
proposed school sites shall be guided by the following standards.
         a.   Elementary and middle schools. New elementary and middle school
sites shall have adjacent perimeter streets on at least two sides of the site.
These streets shall have at least 36 feet of roadway paving within a 60-foot
ROW, and one street shall function and be classified as a collector street.
Elementary and middle school sites shall not be located adjacent to, or at the
intersection of, one or more arterial streets.
         b.   Senior high schools. New senior high school sites shall have
direct access to an adjacent arterial street. Said schools shall have
“boundary” streets on at least three sides of the site. Two of which shall have
at least 60-foot ROW’s with paving widths of not less than 36 feet to 40 feet,
as determined by TPW, with one such street classified as a major collector
street. The third boundary street shall be an arterial street having ROW and
paving widths commensurate with the city’s master thoroughfare plan standards.
         c.   Colleges and universities. When new two- and four-year
institutions of higher learning are platted, they shall be sited and platted as
to the type and nature of perimeter street service necessary to ensure adequate
and safe circulation, mobility and access to the school facility, and to
minimize any adverse impact on the city’s street and transportation system.
Following recommendation from TPW department, and after review and approval of
a traffic impact study embracing the proposed school site and surrounding
environs, such plat shall be presented to the plan commission for approval.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. II), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23225-06-
2018, § 3, passed 6-5-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
§ 31-103 LOT TYPES AND DESIGN.
   (a)   Minimum residential lot widths.
      (1)   Within zoning districts. No residential lot shall be of less width,
at the building line, nor less total lot area than required by the zoning
district regulations governing the plat.
      (2)   Within ETJ areas. Where no zoning regulations apply, lots less than
10,000 square feet in area shall not be less than 50 feet in width; nor less
than 100 feet in width when greater than 10,000 square feet in area, unless a
waiver is granted for a panhandle or flag type lot. No waiver will be granted
for a lot less than 40 feet in width, measured at the lot access connection
with the adjacent street right-of- way.
         a.   Lots 150 feet in width or more, fronting onto an arterial street,
shall have a front building setback line of not less than 30 feet and shall be
provided with a circular drive if accessing such street.
         b.   Lots 100 feet in width or more, not fronting onto or accessing an
arterial street, shall have a front building set-back line of not less than 30
feet.
   (b)   Residential lot arrangements.
      (1)   Lot configuration. No residential lot shall be configured in such a
manner that it does not meet the minimum standards of zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Lot lines. Lot lines shall be perpendicular with street centerline
or street centerline radii.
      (3)   Lot platting arrangement. Residential subdivisions shall be platted
to provide two-tiers of residential lots between opposite parallel public or
private residential streets. All single-family and two-family residential lots
shall be platted with a front and a rear yard, with the front yard designed to
face a residential street. The rear yards of such lots may abut another
adjacent rear or side yard, open space, institutional lot or un-platted
property.
      (4)   Alternative lot platting arrangements: double frontage residential
lots (a.k.a. reverse frontage lots). Double frontage residential lots may only
be platted providing such lots have their primary frontage onto a residential
street or collector street and their opposite (secondary non-access) frontage
abutting an arterial street. Such lots shall be platted, screened and
landscaped in accordance with the following requirements.
         a.   Collector street (secondary) lot frontage. Lots that are less
than 100 feet in width at the front building line and face a residential street
with the opposite end of the lots backing onto a collector street, shall have
the collector street of the lot also considered as a “front yard” for zoning
purposes. The collector street frontage shall be subject to the provisions of
the front yard setback and fencing restrictions, designated in § 6.101 of the
zoning ordinance for the type of zoning district in which the lots are located,
except where the following conditions are present:
            1.   Where residential lots back onto both sides of the collector
street for a distance not to exceed 250 feet; or
            2.   The lot on the opposite side of the collector street forms the
rear or side yard of a nonresidential use or dedicated public or private open
space use.
         b.   Arterial street (secondary) lot frontage. Subdivisions with three
lots or more, having less than 100 feet in width at the front building line and
facing a residential street with the opposite end of the lots backing onto an
arterial street, shall have the arterial street frontage considered as the rear
of the lots. See § 6.101 of the zoning ordinance. Such lots shall have:
            1.   A minimum six-foot high solid masonry screen wall or solid
wood cedar fence with brick masonry columns at intervals not greater than ten
feet on center in accordance with § 5.305, Fences, of the comprehensive zoning
ordinance;
            2.   Street trees, not less than three-inch diameter caliper and of
a type and species acceptable to the city forester, shall be provided along or
within the arterial parkway at a minimum ratio of one tree per 50 lineal feet
of parallel parkway. Required trees may be clustered as necessary to avoid
obstructions to safe traffic visibility, pedestrian access and circulation,
drainage or utility service lines and facilities or to provide enhancement to
related aesthetic landscape features; and
            3.   Failure to comply with these requirements will cause
withholding of building permits on the lots affected.
         c.   Arterial street (primary) lot frontage. Direct residential
driveway access to individual one-family and two-family dwellings shall not be
allowed on any arterial. The city plan commission may grant a waiver if such
lots are a minimum of 150 feet in width or greater at the building setback line
and contain a circular access drive with approval by the city traffic engineer
and egress per TPW design requirements.
      (5)   Residential corner lots. Residential corner lots adjacent to
arterials shall obtain access from the collector or local street, and access
shall be placed as far from the arterial intersection as possible to achieve
the maximum available corner clearance.
   (c)   Flag lots (“panhandle lots”).
      (1)   Flag lots, known as “panhandle lots,” are defined as lot
configurations where the perimeter lot geometry reflects the shape of a “flag”
or “panhandle” where the narrow or elongated part of the lot abuts a public or
private street and widens at the building setback line to accommodate a
buildable development site.
      (2)   Flag lots are expressly prohibited, unless:
         a.   The proposed lot configuration is needed to abate an unusual
property accessibility constraint, not created by the applicant;
         b.   The property has acute topographical conditions and constraints;
or
         c.   The unusual adjacent property boundary configuration constrains
the arrangement of an otherwise standard lot configuration.
      (3)   Where any of the above items are present, the commission may grant
a waiver to allow such configuration, provided the following conditions are
met:
         a.   The waiver does not circumvent the normal platting of streets for
public and emergency access;
         b.   The waiver does not prevent the extensions of streets to adjacent
un-subdivided property;
         c.   The lot width is not less than 40 feet in width at its frontage
connection with the adjacent public or approved private street; and
         d.   The narrow or elongated part of the lot “panhandle” does not
exceed 100 feet in length, measured from the connecting street frontage to
where the lot widens into a “flag” shape to receive a suitable building area
where a building setback line shall be established; nor shall more than two
adjacent panhandle/neck lots be connected.
   (d)   Lots served by conventional septic or aerobic sanitary disposal
systems.
      (1)   Lots served by on-site wastewater septic disposal systems shall
have a contiguous land area not less than one acre (net) in size, exclusive of
100-year floodplain, drainage easements and features, access easements and
street right-of-way. Contiguous gross and net lot area calculations shall be
shown on and for each lot on the plat.
      (2)   Developments to be served by a public wastewater system but having
individual water wells shall have a “dry line” public water system, conforming
to city standards, to allow future connections to the public water supply
system for domestic use and fire protection purposes. See the Installation
Policy and Design Criteria for Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water
Infrastructure Manual for standards.
   (e)   Pedestrian access way lots or easements.
      (1)   When a school, park, or open space recreation site has only one
point of street access, a mid-block public pedestrian access easement or lot
shall be provided. Where adjacent to a single-family neighborhood, such access
ways shall not be less than 16 feet wide for pedestrian restricted walkways,
bicycle paths, and hiking/jogging paths.
      (2)   a.   All access ways shall be paved to city sidewalk standards,
shall contain city approved lighting illumination arranged so as not to shine
directly on adjacent residential properties, and shall be contained within a
designated lot or easement of common ownership. An all-weather paved hard
access way surface shall be provided therein, as follows:
            1.   Five-foot paved surface for eight-foot wide public use
easement or lot for access to lots less than 50 feet in width;
            2.   Eight-foot paved surface for ten-foot wide public use
easement, or 12-foot wide public pedestrian access easement or lot; and
            3.   Twelve-foot paved surface for 16-foot wide public pedestrian
access easement or lot.
         b.   Access ways may be platted as an easement, adjacent to a lot
line, or as a separate designated lot owned and maintained by a property
owner's association within the subdivision.
      (3)   Developments/subdivisions shall be designed to connect to adjacent
existing or platted sidewalk stub outs as provided on an approved preliminary
or final plat.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. III), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 18705-07-
2009, § 1, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 20382-09-2012, § 6, passed 9-11-2012; Ord.
22051-01-2016, § 6, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 23225-06-2018, § 4, passed 6-5-2018,
eff. 8-1-2018; Ord. 23679-06-2019, § 4, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-104 EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Utility easements. Utility easements shall be provided on subdivision
plats sufficient in width and location as defined by the city or approved
franchised utility provider. Where utility easements are required, the
following full statement of restriction shall be placed on the plat face of the
subdivision plat.
   Utility easements:
   Any public utility, including the City of Fort Worth, shall have the right
to move and keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs,
other growths or improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective system on any of the
easements shown on the plat; and any public utility, including the City of Fort
Worth, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress upon said
easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection,
patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective
systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of
anyone.
   (b)   Emergency access and fire lane easements. Emergency access and fire
lane easements shall be provided in locations required by the “Fort Worth Fire
Lane Ord. 6722.” The roadway surface shall be constructed to city design
standards and emergency access and fire lane easements must meet all
requirements of Ord 6722. No such easement shall be encroached upon by any
obstruction or parking.
   (c)   Intersections of streets and alleys with emergency access easement. At
the intersection of an emergency access easement driveway or turnout section
with a dedicated street or alley, a ten-foot by ten-foot triangular public open
space easement (P.O.S.E.) shall be provided on each side at the driveway or
turnout at the time the driveway and/or alley is constructed. In all such
cases, the following full statement of restriction shall be placed on the face
of the plat:
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE RESTRICTION:
   No structure, object or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height
of 24-inches to a height of 11-feet above the top of the curb, including, but
not limited to buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks,
etc., in the public open space easement as shown on this plat.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. IV), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 20382-09-
2012, § 7, passed 9-11-2012)
§ 31-105 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   (a)   General. All plats must conform to the stormwater management policy.
Any plat for property within or affected by a Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) designated floodplain must show the limits of the FEMA floodplain
effective on the date the plat is filed. The FEMA floodplain limits must be
geometrically and spatially correct, with a note indicated the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM) panel, community number and effective date of the map or the
most recent revision for the area.
   (b)   Storm drainage easements. Easements for storm drainage facilities
shall be provided at locations containing proposed or existing drainage ways.
The width of the easements shall be substantiated by a drainage study and
drainage calculations or other criteria submitted to and approved by the city
engineer.
      (1)   Storm drainage easements of 15 feet minimum width shall be provided
for existing and proposed enclosed drainage systems. When the underground
system exceeds 36 inches or when the dept of the system or the soil conditions
dictate additional width, additional easement width shall be provided.
      (2)   Storm drainage easements along proposed or existing open channels
shall provide sufficient width for the required channel and such additional
width as may be required to provide ingress and egress of maintenance
equipment; to provide clearance from fences and space for utility poles; to
allow maintenance of the channel bank; and to provide adequate slopes necessary
along the bank. Such width shall conform with those specifications in the city
storm drain policy and/or as determined and required by the city engineer.
      (3)   Storm drainage easements shall be provided for emergency overflow
drainage ways of sufficient width to contain within the easement stormwater
resulting from a 100-year frequency storm, less the amount of stormwater
carried in an enclosed system of a capacity required by the city storm drain
policy, and/or as determined and required by the city engineer.
   (c)   (1)   Floodplain easements. Except as provided for in subsection (d)
below, floodplain easements shall be provided along natural or improved
drainage ways and lakes or reservoirs. Floodplain easements shall encompass all
areas beneath the water surface elevation resulting from a storm whose design
frequency is 100 years, plus such additional width as may be required to
provide ingress and egress to allow for maintenance of the banks and for the
protection of adjacent property, as determined and required by the city
engineer. If a floodplain drainage way is proposed, the following full
statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument on the
subdivision plat unless the city council agrees to waive this requirement, or
the city engineer agrees to assume maintenance of the floodplain/drainage way.
      (2)   Floodplain restriction. No construction shall be allowed within the
floodplain easement without the written approval of the director of
transportation and public works. In order to secure approval, detailed
engineering plans and/or studies for the improvements, satisfactory to the
director, will be prepared and submitted by the party(ies) wishing to construct
within the floodplain. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor
elevations shall be a minimum of two feet above the floodplain base flood
elevation resulting from ultimate development of the watershed.
      (3)   Floodplain/drainageway maintenance. The existing creek, stream,
river or drainage channel traversing along or across portions of this addition,
will remain unobstructed at all times and will be maintained by the individual
lot owners whose lots are traversed by, or adjacent to, the drainage ways. The
City of Fort Worth will not be responsible for the maintenance, erosion control
and/or operation of said drainage ways. Property owners shall keep the adjacent
drainage ways traversing their property clean and free of debris, silt or other
substances, which would result in unsanitary conditions, and the city shall
have the right of entry for the purpose of inspecting the maintenance work by
the property owners. The drainage ways are occasionally subject to stormwater
overflow and/or bank erosion that cannot be defined. The City of Fort Worth
shall not be liable for any damages resulting from the occurrence of those
phenomena, nor the failure of any structure(s) within the drainage ways. The
drainage way crossing each lot is contained within the floodplain easement line
as shown on the plat.
   (d)   Federal floodway project. Floodplain easements shall not be required
from the Tarrant Regional Water District performing any activity in the federal
floodway project (however, a note shall be included on plat documents stating
that all requirements associated with development in the floodplain will apply
to any future owners of the property). The federal floodway project shall mean
the flood control levees and channel improvements constructed on the Clear Fork
and West Fork Trinity River by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) after
the severe flood of 1949, with subsequent additions through the 1980s. The
project shall extend along the West Fork Trinity River from Beach Street
westward to Meandering Road; and on the Clear Fork Trinity River southwesterly
from the confluence with the West Fork Trinity River at North Main Street to
State Highway 183; or as otherwise determined by the USACE.
   (e)   Stormwater storage easements.
      (1)   Stormwater storage easements shall be provided adjacent to a
levee’s drainage control structure to provide for the storage of the one
hundred-year frequency storm runoff while the drainage control structure is
closed due to high floodwater in the river.
      (2)   If a stormwater storage easement is proposed, the following full
statement of restriction shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the
subdivision plat:
 
Stormwater storage easement: Lot(s) ____________ of block(s) ____________ is
(are) within a designated sump (stormwater storage area) of the ____________
levee system, and may be subject to flooding whenever the sump’s drainage
control structure is closed.
 
      (3)   Stormwater storage area restriction. Construction will not be
allowed within a stormwater storage easement without the written approval of
the director of transportation and public works. Approval will only be given
when engineering studies show that the stormwater’s storage capacity is
maintained and the finished floor elevations, of all buildings, will be a
minimum of two feet above the floodplain base flood elevation resulting from
ultimate development of the watershed. The City of Fort Worth is not
responsible for the maintenance or operation of said stormwater storage area
and shall not be deemed liable for any flood damages occurring in said area.
   (f)   Dam and lake easements.
      (1)   A dam and lake easement shall be provided to encompass the proposed
dam and the area of the 100-year frequency impounded lake. No construction,
without the written approval of the director of transportation and public
works, shall be allowed within the dam and/or lake easement, and then only with
approved engineering plans and/or studies for the improvements.
      (2)   If a dam and lake easement is proposed, the following full
statement of restriction shall be placed on the face of the plat:
         Dam and lake easement: The owner of any dam or spillway shall comply
with all federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
relating to the construction, maintenance, use and location of dams, spillways
and the impounding of water caused by said dams. Owner shall be solely
responsible for all costs, liability, maintenance and repair of said dam, the
spillway, the bed and banks of the lake created thereby, and all appurtenances
related thereto, and same shall not be the responsibility or liability of the
City of Fort Worth, its officers, agents, employees, contractors or
subcontractors. In this connection, owner shall indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the City of Fort Worth, its officers, agents, servants and employees,
from and against any and all claims or suits for property damage or loss and/or
personal injury, including death, arising out of or in connection with the
design, construction, maintenance, use or location of said dam or dams, the
spillways, the impoundment of waters resulting there from, and the failure of
said dam or dams to retain said waters; and owner hereby assumes all liability
and responsibility for same.
      (3)   In addition to the above statement, a separate dam maintenance
agreement acceptable to the City of Fort Worth shall be provided by the owner.
   (g)   A levee easement.
      (1)   A levee easement shall be provided to encompass the proposed levee
with a minimum of 20 feet of additional width from the landside toe of the
levee to allow for the operation and maintenance of the levees. No
construction, alteration or modification may be made to the levee or its water
control structure without the written consent of the director of transportation
and public works. A stormwater storage easement may be needed adjacent to the
levee’s water control structure (see subsection (e) above).
      (2)   If a levee easement is proposed, the following full statement of
restriction shall be placed on the face of the plat:
         Levee easement: The owner of any levee shall comply with all federal,
state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to the
construction, maintenance, use and location of levees, and the impounding of
water caused by said levees. Owner shall be solely responsible for all costs,
liability, maintenance and repair of said levee, and all appurtenances related
thereto, and same shall not be the responsibility or liability of the City of
Fort Worth, its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. In
this connection, owner shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City of
Fort Worth, its officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any
and all claims or suits for property damage or loss and/or personal injury,
including death, arising out of or in connection with the design, construction,
maintenance, use or location of said levee, the impoundment of waters resulting
there from, and the failure of said levee to retain said waters; and owner
hereby assumes all liability and responsibility for same.
      (3)   In addition to the above statement, a separate levee maintenance
agreement acceptable to the City of Fort Worth shall be provided by the owner.
   (h)   Trinity River Vision Storm Drain Master Plan. The Trinity River Vision
Storm Drain Master Plan as adopted and amended by the city council is hereby
incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth in these regulations.
All development within Panther Island District, and all other areas that a part
of the Trinity River Vision Storm Drain Master Plan, shall conform to the
Trinity River Vision Storm Drain Master Plan.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. V), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 19156-05-
2010, §§ 3—6, passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 19336-09-2010, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-14-2010;
Ord. 26605-11-2023, § 1, passed 11-28-2023)
§ 31-106 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Street types. The primary categorization for thoroughfares is the
street type. Rather than categorizing thoroughfares solely on the basis of
traffic volumes and speeds, the master thoroughfare plan categorizations are
designed to reflect streets' respective land-use contexts, and a balanced
approach to the various transportation modes needing to use each street type.
The master thoroughfare plan includes five street types: activity street,
commercial mixed-use street, neighborhood connector, commercial connector, and
system link as follows:
      (1)   Activity street. Activity streets are "destination streets." They
are typically retail-oriented, with generous parkway widths and room for
sidewalk cafes and other such features. Automobile speeds are slow, and lanes
are slightly narrower than typical. Parking is typically on-street, and
building facades front the street. Buildings are typically one to three stories
high. Streets are typically in a grid pattern, diffusing traffic. Bicycles may
share the street depending on speeds, but bike lanes are also used.
      (2)   Commercial/mixed-use street. Commercial/mixed-use streets have a
business flavor and can often be found downtown. Buildings are typically multi-
storied and are often office/commercial-oriented, but may have residential uses
on the upper floors. Buildings front on the street and on-street parking is
common, but parking garages are also common - meaning automobiles are often
turning to and from the street. Wide sidewalks are prevalent and are especially
busy during rush hours and the lunch hour. Streets are typically in a grid
pattern, diffusing traffic. Commuter transit is prevalent, and traffic speeds
are fairly slow. Lanes are slightly narrower than typical. Bicycles are often
accommodated by bike lanes.
      (3)   Neighborhood connector. Neighborhood connectors provide access from
neighborhoods to services. They are often run at the peripheries of residential
areas, and landscaped medians are fairly common. Sidewalks or multi-use paths
are typically separated from the street by a landscape buffer. Buildings (or
residential fences) are generally set well back from the street. This street
type is especially suited for on-street bicycle travel due to relatively
infrequent driveways and cross-streets. Automobile speeds are moderate.
      (4)   Commercial connector. Commercial connectors typically serve retail
portions of the city. Many driveways may be present, and a mixture of medians
and center turn lanes help to regulate movements to and from sites. Retail
stores are generally separated from the street by surface parking lots.
Automobile speeds are moderate to high. Bicycle facilities must be carefully
designed due to the amount of driveways. Sidewalks are generally buffered from
the street by landscaping.
      (5)   System link. System links tend to emphasize longer-distance
automobile traffic, often providing connections to freeways. Automobile speeds
are moderate to high. Pedestrians and bicyclists are buffered from traffic as
much as possible; multi-use off-street paths are common. System links always
include raised medians to separate traffic directions and facilitate left
turns. Most left turns occur at signalized intersections; access to driveways
is typically via right turns.
      (6)   Industrial street.
         a.   Service. Industrial streets are established for industrial areas
to recognize different types of vehicles, i.e. with larger turning radii,
heavier industrial type traffic, and wheel loads. These streets are minor
arterials that route industrial traffic to and from the arterial system with
industrial districts.
         b.   Average daily traffic volumes. Traffic volumes vary from 5,000
vehicles per day to 20,000 vehicles per day or more.
         c.   Right-of-way and roadway design standards. ROW and paving widths
shall conform to those identified in the current Master Thoroughfare Plan.
      (7)   Collector street (C).
         a.   Service.
            1.   The collector street system differs from the arterial systems
in that facilities on the collector system may penetrate neighborhoods,
distributing trips from the arterials through the neighborhood area to the
ultimate destination such as a park, elementary, or middle school, which may be
on a residential street or a collector street. Conversely, the collector street
also collects traffic from residential streets in the neighborhood and channels
it into the arterial systems. In some cases, due to the design of the overall
street system, a minor amount of through traffic may be carried on some
collector streets.
            2.   The collector provides for both land access service and local
traffic movements within residential neighborhoods, commercial areas and
industrial areas.
            3.   Street layout shall provide for collector streets in areas
between arterial streets. See §
31-101(g).
         b.   Average daily traffic volumes. Average traffic volumes on
collector streets should not exceed 5,000 vehicles per day in residential
areas, and 10,000 vehicles per day in commercial or industrial areas.
         c.   Right-of-way and roadway design standards.
            1.   Residential collectors (C). 
            2.   Commercial collectors. 
      (8)   Urban local (residential street) (UL).
         a.   Service. Urban local residential streets are residential streets,
which carry traffic to and from collector and other residential streets. They
are likewise comprised of cul-de-sacs and loop streets, which serve low-density
residential areas and very limited public facilities, often in conjunction with
collector streets. Urban local residential streets are usually of limited
length and non-continuous in nature to discourage through traffic.
         b.   Average traffic volumes. Average traffic volumes on urban local
residential streets should not exceed 2,500 vehicles per day and are normally
in the range of 1,000 vehicles per day.
      (9)   Limited local (residential street) (LL).
         a.   Service. Limited local streets are residential streets, which
serve only cluster or zero lot line housing and have several limiting
restrictions and conditions which prohibit their use in other types of
developments, except in very specific instances. These restrictions and
conditions are detailed elsewhere in these regulations.
         b.   Average traffic volumes. Traffic volumes in these types of
developments approximate 1,000 or less vehicles per day.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   General street design standards.
      (1)   Conformance with MTP and development considerations. The
arrangement, classification, character, extent and location of streets shall
conform to the master thoroughfare plan and shall be considered in relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to drainage in and
through the proposed and adjacent subdivisions, to public convenience and
safety, and to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.
      (2)   Conformance with general design standards. All dedicated streets
shall conform to the subdivision design standards provided and the
characteristics of street classification and function, given in subsection (a)
of this section. All proposed streets shall be planned, designed and
constructed based on their anticipated function, traffic volumes, adjacent land
use, system continuity, etc., as elsewhere described. Where there is a question
as to the type of street classification required, the higher classification
shall prevail.
      (3)   Streets to conform with city design standards. All dedicated
streets shall conform to the city’s technical design standards and criteria and
in accordance with sound engineering practices. Internal ETJ area residential
streets that serve lots of one acre or more (net) in size shall be a minimum of
60 feet in ROW width and of concrete or stabilized HMAC.
      (4)   Variance to technical design criteria standards. Where in the
judgment of TPW the appropriate use of the neighboring property will not be
substantially injured, TPW may, in specific cases, recommend that the plan
commission authorize a variance to the technical design criteria provisions, in
order to permit reasonable development and improvement of property.
      (5)   Additional right-of-way (ROW) requirements at high volume
intersections. Additional right-of-way, other than the minimums shown in the
Master Thoroughfare Plan (MTP) may be required at high volume driveways for
turning lanes, etc., as determined by TPW during the design phase of the street
system and prior to submitting the final plat.
      (6)   Alignment with adjoining subdivisions. All streets shall be aligned
with existing streets in adjoining subdivisions.
      (7)   Street extension and continuation.
         a.   Urban local streets shall be extended to the subdivision boundary
to connect with adjoining streets or, where no adjacent streets are available
for such connection, to allow for the future connection with adjoining un-
platted property.
         b.   For regulations on the extension of private streets, see §
31-108, “Gated subdivisions and developments.”
      (8)   Street naming and addressing. Streets shall be named to provide
continuity with existing streets, and shall be named so as to avoid confusion
to postal or emergency response agencies. The city fire department shall
approve all street names and provide addressing of lots within the city. No
building permit shall be issued without a valid fire department approved
platted lot address.
      (9)   Street/alley intersection corner clips. A triangular right-of-way
dedication (corner clip) measuring ten feet by ten feet, measured at the
property line, is required on corner lots at the intersection of two streets or
intersection of a street and an alley. Exceptions to this requirement are noted
below in zoning districts “H” central business district, “MU-1” low intensity
mixed use district and “MU-2” high intensity district:
         a.   A triangular dedication measuring five feet by five feet is
required at the intersection of two streets or the intersection of a street and
an alley in which there are no traffic signals or all-way stop signs; and
         b.   No corner clip dedication is required at all-way stop signs and
signalized intersections where there is a required stop in at least two
directions.
      (10)   Street centerline offsets. Centerline offsets for all types of
local public and private streets shall be at least 135 feet. Collector street
off-set centerlines shall not be less than 250 feet. Greater centerline
offsets, as may be required by TPW, shall be provided when necessary for
traffic safety.
      (11)   Street and lot platting arrangement. Local, limited local, cul-de-
sac, loop and collector streets shall be platted to allow for two tiers of lots
between such streets.
      (12)   Lot arrangements abutting arterial streets. Where single-family or
duplex lots abut an existing or proposed arterial street, the lot platting
layout shall provide that:
         a.   Lots shall side to the arterial street and have a non-access
driveway restriction to the arterial street;
         b.   Reverse frontage lots shall contain a non-access driveway
restriction along the property line adjacent to and facing the arterial street;
         c.   Lots shall have screening along rear alleys; and
         d.   Other treatment as may be necessary or required for adequate
protection of adjoining properties, as approved by the commission, after
receiving recommendations from DRC taking into consideration the proposed
method of off-street parking and maneuvering which will prevent the necessity
of backing onto the adjacent arterial street.
      (13)   Residential driveway access limitation. Driveway access from an
adjacent urban local residential, limited local residential, cul-de-sac, loop
or collectorstreet to a residential lot less than 50 feet in width at the
building line shall be by rear access by one of the following means:
         a.   From an abutting side or rear alley or side or rear driveway
within an appropriate access easement; or
         b.   From a common shared driveway, centered over the common lot lines
between the adjacent dwelling units continuing through to the rear of the
dwelling units, shall be provided within an appropriate access easement.
      (14)   Reservation of land strips along and at the terminal ends of
streets. A land reservation in private or common property ownership association
along and/or at the ends of proposed or existing public streets, intended
solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to similarly zoned
property not included in the subdivision, shall be prohibited.
      (15)   Sidewalk requirement. Concrete sidewalks shall be required on both
sides of all public and private streets.
      (16)   Curved street intersection design limitation. In order to provide
an adequate and safe street intersection site distance, without the need for
the establishment of supplemental site protection easements, perpendicular
street intersecting with the interior (concaved) curved side of another street
shall be prohibited, unless the centerline curvature of the street being
intersected has a radius of not less than 1,000 feet, where intersected.
      (17)   Horizontal residential street alignment standards.
         a.   Ninety-degree directional alignment change. A 90-degree (+/- five
degrees) bend or elbow in a horizontal alignment change of an urban local
residential street shall have an interior acute angle right-of-way radius of
not less than 25 feet.
         b.   Sixty to 89-degree directional alignment change. A continuous
street with a horizontal alignment bend having an acute angle between 60 and 89
degrees, measured at the centerline intersection of the bend, shall have a
centerline radius of not less than 50 feet. For reasons of safe traffic flow
and safe site distances, horizontal alignment changes less than 60 degrees are
prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7181.jpg]
   Figure 8
      (18)   Limited local residential and urban local residential and
collector street intersection spacing intervals with higher order streets.
Public and private local streets and collector streets shall be designed
consistent with the City of Fort Worth Access Management Policy.
      (19)   Median spacing and location. Proposed median openings along
arterial streets may only be shown on preliminary plats consistent with the
City of Fort Worth Access Management Policy. The location and design of all
median openings shall be approved by TPW.
      (20)   Cut-through streets. Proposed cut-through street layouts, which
circumvent traffic-controlled intersections, are expressly prohibited.
   (d)   Street and block face design standards. Street and block face lengths
and the maximum number of residential units served shall conform to the
standards below.
      (1)   Cul-de-sac length and lot yield. The following standards apply to
both public and private streets:
         a.   Cul-de-sac streets.
 
                                          Maximum Street Maximum Number of
                                          Length (feet)  Lots of Dwelling
                                                         Units
2,500 sq. ft. to 4,999 sq. ft. lot size   650            30
5,000 sq. ft. to 7,999 sq. ft. lot size   850            30
8,000 sq. ft. to less than 1 acre lot     950            30
size
One acre or greater                       1,350          30
Adjacent roadway side slopes exceed 15%   2,000          30
“Eyebrow” or “Bulb” (ROW to Centern/aint)        5
 
         b.   Measurement technique. Cul-de-sac street lengths shall be
measured along the street centerline from the nearest intersecting street ROW
line to the radius point of the cul-de-sac turnaround. No residential street,
or series of interconnecting streets, forming a closed circle cul-de-sac(s) in
which only one outlet to a collector or higher order street is provided, shall
serve more lots than indicated in the street/block length design standards
section.
      (2)   Block face length.
         a.   Standard public and private local streets that serve large lots,
150 feet in width and greater, shall have a maximum of 1,950 foot block face.
Standard public and private local streets that serve urban lots, less than 150
feet in width, shall have a maximum block face of 1,320 feet. Limited local
streets shall not have a block face that exceeds 800 feet.
         b.   There is no minimum block face dimension.
            1.   [Reserved.]
            2.   Regulations for areas zoned UR, MU or H. Areas zoned for "UR"
urban residential district, "MU-1", "MU-2", and mixed-use districts or, "H"
central business district shall conform to the following block restrictions. To
ensure efficient circulation, the maximum distance between publicly accessible
streets shall be 1,000 feet. No block may have a perimeter greater than 1,600
feet, with a maximum block face of 500 feet. Private streets with adjacent
sidewalks that are accessible to the general public through a public pedestrian
access easement, or a private walkway, which is accessible to the general
public through a public pedestrian access easement, may serve as a block
boundary. When a public access easement or private street with an adjacent
sidewalk that is accessible to the general public through a public pedestrian
access easement is substituted for a block boundary, it shall connect to an
existing public sidewalk or shall be stubbed out to provide for the
continuation of a sidewalk accessible to the general public. Developments/
subdivisions shall be designed to connect to adjacent existing or platted
sidewalk stub outs as provided on an approved preliminary or final plat.
            3.   Regulations for areas zoned CR, C or D. Areas zoned for "CR"
low density multifamily, "C" medium density multifamily, and "D" high density
multifamily districts shall conform to the following block restrictions. To
ensure efficient circulation, the maximum block face shall be 1,000 feet.
Private streets with adjacent sidewalks that are accessible through a public
use easement, or a private walkway, which is accessible through such public use
easement, may serve as a block boundary. Walkways are required to connect to
public streets for improved connectivity and walkability. When a public access
easement or private street with an adjacent sidewalk that is accessible to the
general public through a public pedestrian access easement is substituted for a
block boundary, it shall connect to an existing public sidewalk or shall be
stubbed out to provide for the continuation of a sidewalk accessible to the
general public. Developments/subdivisions shall be designed to connect to
adjacent existing or platted sidewalk stub outs as provided on an approved
preliminary or final plat.
            4.   Measurement technique. The length of a block face shall be the
distance between intersecting street rights-of-way, regardless of directional
changes. Block width is the block end without lots facing onto it. The
perimeter of a block is the cumulative length of all block faces and block
ends. (See Figure 10.)
Figure 10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7185.jpg]
            5.   Private trails in public use easements may be substituted for
a private sidewalk in a public use easement where there is a connection that is
part of an adopted city plan for lake, river or creek trail systems.
            6.   Trails identified in the Fort Worth Active Transportation Plan
(Spine, rib, or local trail classifications) shall follow design guidance
established in the Trails Master Plan Executive Summary.
      (3)   Variance/waiver considerations to street and block face length
standards. Proposed streets and blocks that are longer than the allowed maximum
lengths described in these regulations shall require a re-design or a waiver
issued by the city plan commission. In reviewing a waiver request, the
commission shall consider any or all of the following issues relevant to the
subdivision.
         a.   Alternative design considerations that would mitigate the street
length issue and provide conformance with the subdivision regulation
requirements.
         b.   The effect of the over length street(s) on traffic and pedestrian
safety and circulation, land access, traffic congestion, construction and
municipal maintenance costs, and the efficient delivery of emergency and
support services, both to and within the neighborhood.
         c.   1.   Feasibility of potential mitigation measures, which might be
employed to lessen traffic impacts, such as the following:
               i.    Mid-block turnarounds;
               ii.    Limitation on the number of dwelling units or land
intensity to be served;
               iii.    Temporary access points;
               iv.    Identification of additional fire protection measures,
which might be employed, such as obstruction clearance easements, etc.;
               v.    Mid-block public pedestrian access easements that connect
to public sidewalks or trail systems that are part of an adopted city policy or
plan; and
               vi.    Context sensitive street designs.
            2.   Applicant proposals for the placement of traffic 'speed
reduction humps' in public or private roadway travel lanes as a speed reduction
method is not an acceptable or allowable mitigation solution.
   (e)   Cul-de-sac street design standards.
      (1)   Permanent street termination.
         a.   Streets designated to be permanently dead-ended shall be platted
and constructed with an approved standard paved cul-de-sac. Any dead-end street
of a permanent or a temporary nature, if longer than 150 feet, shall have a
surfaced cul-de-sac turnaround area of 80 feet in diameter. Said cul-de-sac
must be constructed prior to the expiration of the community facilities
contract, or earlier if required by TPW.
         b.   A street ending permanently in a cul-de-sac shall not be longer
than allowed in the street/block length design standards section and shall be
provided with a closed end turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at
least 80 feet, and a street property line (ROW) diameter of at least 100 feet.
         c.   In cases where physical constraints, property ownership,
different land use or other circumstances create conditions where it is
appropriate that the length of the cul-de-sac street be longer than allowed,
the plan commission may, following recommendation from the development review
committee, increase the cul-de-sac length standards referenced herein in order
to meet existing conditions of layout or topography, having due regard for
connecting streets, traffic circulation, convenience and public safety.
      (2)   Temporary dead-end streets. Street temporarily dead-ended shall
have provisions for future extension of the street and utilities and, if a
temporary cul-de-sac is required, for a “reversionary right” to the land
abutting the turn-around for excess right-of-way. Where adjacent property
contains an existing dead-end street over 200 feet in length without a cul-de-
sac which abuts the proposed development, the applicant shall extend the street
into the proposed development or construct a cul-de-sac as provided above.
   (f)   Limited local residential street design standards. Limited local
residential streets shall be designed according to the standards of this
article, and the following supplemental conditions/criteria:
      (1)   The street section shall not be less than 24 feet of paving width
(face-of-curb to face-of-curb) centered within a 40-foot public or private
right-of-way;
      (2)   Cul-de-sac turn around provisions and design shall be as stipulated
in subsection (e)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Where any limited local residential street is allowed to intersect
any arterial or collector street by a variance granted by the plan commission,
the street spacing, width and right-of-way requirements for a local street, as
defined elsewhere in this article, must be met for a depth of at least 50 feet
from the right-of-way line of the intersected arterial or collector street;
      (4)   Standard intersection corner clips, as specified elsewhere, are
required for street-to-street and street-to-alley intersections;
      (5)   Raised curbs and gutters shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of the Standard Specifications for Construction
Manual published by the transportation and public works department;
      (6)   The design and cross section of the paving of roadways shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Standard Specifications for Construction
Manual published by the transportation and public works department;
      (7)   A limited local loop-type street shall not exceed 800 feet in
length, serve a maximum of 30 dwelling units, and have at least one 90-degree
bend;
      (8)   A limited local street must intersect with a higher order street;
must have no other public or private streets dependent upon it for access; and
must serve no other traffic except that associated with the single-family or
cluster dwelling units having direct driveway access to it;
      (9)   Four off-street parking spaces, as required per § 6.201(b), of the
zoning ordinance, shall be provided for all front or rear entry lots;
      (10)   All of the land along both sides of a proposed limited local
street must be divided into lots for single-family or cluster dwelling units.
Final approval of street construction plans and final plats shall be contingent
upon obtaining single-family or two-family zoning;
      (11)   Where any lot adjoining a limited local street also adjoins a
higher order street, the frontage along the higher order street must comply
with the setback and driveway access characteristics required by the zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance and other related city policies;
      (12)   At least one length of curb not less than 20 feet in length
(excluding driveways) for every two dwelling units must be available along a
limited local street for over-flow parking. Lots, which only have frontage on
the turn-a-round portion of a cul-de-sac street, are excluded from this
protrusion; and
      (13)   A paving flare-out of 28 feet wide by 40 feet long, within the
prescribed ROW, shall be provided at the approximate mid-block location, not
exceeding 500 feet from the nearest intersecting cross street. (See Figure 11.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7187.jpg]
   Figure 11
   (g)   Alley design standards.
      (1)   Length. Alleys shall be of a similar length as their associated
opposite and parallel primary service streets, except for any additional length
required for turnout returns to the primary service street. Dead-end alleys are
prohibited. An alley with only one outlet shall be provided with an approved
turn-around.
      (2)   Width.
 
Minimum Width                   Single-Family and Two- Multifamily and Non-
                                Family Subdivisions    residential Subdivisions
a.   Right-of-way            16 ft.                 20 ft.
b.   Roadway paving (edge to 12 ft.                 20 ft.
edge)
c.   ROW radius @ street/alle25 ft.                 25 ft.
d.   ROW radius @ property li20 ft.                 25 ft.
 
      (3)   Paving. Alleys shall be paved with concrete in accordance with city
design standards and specifications. Alley paving shall have a minimum grade of
0.5% and a maximum grade of 10%.
      (4)   Intersection with streets. Alleys shall intersect streets at right
angles or radial to curved streets. The intersection of a street and an alley
shall be constructed as a standard driveway approach. Entrance widths to alleys
shall be constructed 12 feet wide for one-family and two-family residential
areas and 20 feet wide for other areas, with a uniform transition in alley
pavement width not to exceed one foot of transition per 20 feet in alley
length.
      (5)   Alleyway turnouts. Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property
line with turnouts to be not less than 20 feet wide. At alleyway turnouts, the
distance from the alley right-of-way to any gate, building or garage opening
shall be at least 25 feet. In cases where two alleys intersect or turn at a
sharp angle, lot corners shall be platted so that a triangular area of 25 feet
by 25 feet or greater is dedicated as part of the alley for the purpose of
providing a minimum required radius of 30 feet to the inside edge of the alley
paving.
   (h)   Fire lane design standards (emergency access easements).
      (1)   Easement width. Fire lanes shall not be less than 24 feet wide at
the outer easement lines and clear of all lateral obstructions.
      (2)   Vertical obstructions. There shall be no vertical obstruction of a
fire lane within the area between the top of the paving surface to a vertical
height of 14 feet.
      (3)   Roadway paving surface. An all weather hard paving surface, meeting
city standards and comprised of either reinforced concrete or HMAC asphalt
concrete over an approved base, shall comprise the fire lane roadway. The
roadway shall be centered within the fire lane easement at a width of not less
than 24 feet, face to face of curbs if constructed, and capable of supporting a
12,500 pound wheel load.
      (4)   Turnouts. Fire lane turnouts shall not be less than a 25-foot
inside turning radius, and a minimum outside turning radius of 50 feet,
measured at both the easement line and roadway paving surface edge.
      (5)   Dead-end turnarounds. All dead-end fire lanes in excess of 150 feet
in length shall be provided with a turnaround meeting the city’s geometric and
surfacing standards for a standard cul-de-sac design, or other such
configuration and design as approved by the fire department.
      (6)   Grade. Grade incline of fire lanes shall not exceed 10%.
      (7)   Markings. Fire lane markings and striping shall comply with fire
code requirements and fire department policy.
   (i)   Access easement design standards (public access easements, reciprocal
access easements, private drives or ways).
      (1)   Definition.
         a.   An ACCESS EASEMENT is an officially approved and privately
maintained “drive” or “way,” with the roadway constructed to city street
standards that is open to unrestricted and irrevocable public access and serves
two or more lots, each having a minimum of 100 feet of frontage each, as their
primary means of access.
         b.   ACCESS EASEMENTS are designed to provide access from adjoining
lots, such as within a “conventional” or “strip” shopping center, to an
adjacent arterial street, usually in conjunction with a median break. They may
also provide an alternate access to a collector or arterial street where
unusual topography may otherwise impede a safe entry connection to the lots
served.
      (2)   Easement width. The unobstructed easement width shall not be less
than 24 feet.
      (3)   Roadway width and paving surface. The easement paving width shall
not be less than 20 feet, and centered within the unobstructed access easement.
An all weather-paved surface capable of supporting a 12,500-pound wheel load
shall be provided as the roadway travel surface.
      (4)   Turnouts. Turnouts shall not have less than a 25 foot interior
radius measured at the vertex of the easement lines and an outside radius of 50
feet.
      (5)   Vertical obstructions. No vertical obstruction shall be allowed
within the area between the top of the pavement surface to a vertical height of
14 feet.
   (j)   Private street and alley design standards.
      (1)   Definition. PRIVATE STREETS AND ALLEYS are private vehicular access
ways shared by and serving three or more lots, which are not otherwise
dedicated to the public nor publicly maintained.
      (2)   Plat identification. Private streets and alleys shall be identified
by separate lot and block numbers on the plat and accompanied by a standard
plat note stating that the maintenance and upkeep shall be by a property owners
association or other such legal entity empowered by deed restrictions to own
and maintain such streets or alleys. No lot or block shall be platted to the
centerline of any private street or alley. The city shall have no ownership or
maintenance responsibilities associated with private streets or alleys. The
city shall, however, review the property owners association documents prior to
recording to ensure that adequate provisions of private perpetual ownership,
maintenance and upkeep are provided for in the association documents and to
ensure that there is no liability to the city.
      (3)   Standards. Private streets and alleys shall be designed, platted
and constructed in conformance with the standards for limited local residential
or urban local residential streets and alleys based on the type, density and
intensity of development to be served.
      (4)   Transfer of ownership. No private street or alley shall be
transferred to the city by a property owners association nor shall the city
accept a transfer, unless the city has first determined that such streets and/
or alleys meet or exceed the city’s requirements for right-of-way, roadway
paving and drainage standards in effect at time of transfer or dedication.
   (k)   Supplemental provisions; traffic studies. Traffic studies may be
required by the city in order to adequately assess the impacts of a development
plan or plat proposal on the existing and/or planned street system. The primary
responsibility for assessing traffic impacts associated with a proposed
development will rest with the developer, with the city serving in a report
review and evaluation capacity. All traffic studies submitted with respect to a
development plat proposal shall be approved by TPW prior to approval of the
plat by the plan commission.
      (1)   Preparation.
         a.   Traffic studies shall be prepared under the direction and
supervision of a licensed professional engineer of the State of Texas, with
reputable expertise and experience in professional traffic and transportation
engineering, with which to analyze and assess traffic impacts.
         b.   To this end, two types of traffic studies shall be considered.
Based upon the project size, development intensity, land use mix and estimated
traffic generation, TPW shall advise the applicant/developer as to the type and
detail level of traffic study required at the time a pre-plat conference is
held. In general, traffic studies shall be prepared using trip generation
calculations from the most recent version of the Institute of Traffic
Engineer’s (ITE) Trip Generation Manual.
      (2)   Submission. The accepted traffic study shall be submitted by the
applicant/developer to the transportation and public works department at the
time the plan or plat is submitted for review and approval.
      (3)   Types of studies. In general, the types and nature of traffic
studies which may be required are as follows.
         a.   Traffic assessment study (TAS). A TAS study is required when more
than 500 but less than 5,000 daily vehicle trips are anticipated to be
generated by the development or when only certain intersections may have a
capacity problem affecting turning movements, etc.
         b.   Traffic impact study (TIS). A TIS study is required when 5,000 or
more daily vehicle trips are anticipated to be generated by the development or
if the development is anticipated to cause severe impacts on either the roadway
system, nearby neighborhoods, evaluation for collector streets, internal
neighborhood circulation and connectivity assessment, or other such system
capacities and evaluations.
      (4)   Preparation. The traffic studies shall be prepared in concert with
the city’s traffic study procedures, traffic circulation analysis guidelines,
traffic impact analysis guidelines, current available traffic counts and zoning
and subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 17275, § 1, passed 11-7-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
17794, §§ 10, 11, 13, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art.
VII), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 17924, § 2, passed 12-18-2007; Ord. 18705-07-
2009, §§ 2, 3, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 20382-09-2012, § 8, passed 9-11-2012;
Ord. 22051-01-2016, § 7 - 10, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 22274-06-2016, §§ 2, 3,
passed 6-14-2016, eff. 6-23-2016; Ord. 23225-06-2018, §§ 5, 6, passed 6-5-2018,
eff. 8-1-2018; Ord. 23464-11-2018, § 1, passed 11-6-2018; Ord. 23679-06-2019, §
5, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-107 GATED SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   Definitions.
      GATED SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision or other approved
development served by private streets, drives or alleys in which restricted
access is controlled by a security gate.
      OTHER TERMS AND PHRASES. The definition of other terms and phrases,
including the design, construction and installation thereof, as used in these
regulations, shall be the same as for those described in the city’s zoning and
subdivision regulations.
      PRIVATE STREET. A private vehicular access way, shared by and serving
three or more lots or dwelling units, which is not dedicated to the public nor
publicly maintained. PRIVATE STREETS and private alleys, as established in
compliance with the subdivision and zoning regulations, may provide access to a
“gated” subdivision or other development, from a public street or way.
      SECURITY GATE. A single or paired gate which is designed, installed, and
electronically and/or manually operated to provide limited controlled vehicular
and/or pedestrian access restriction to a subdivision or development. The word
GATE shall mean the same as SECURITY GATE.
   (b)   Requirements. Gated subdivisions and related developments shall meet
the following requirements.
      (1)   Conformance with city regulations. The general provisions of all
city codes will apply to these regulations. All development plans concerning
private streets or gated subdivisions are subject to review and approval by the
fire marshal, and director of transportation and public works.
      (2)   Excluded streets. Streets shown on the city’s master thoroughfare
plan shall not be regarded as private streets. The private street may not
impact public traffic circulation or impair access to property either on-site
or off-site to the subdivision or development; or impair access to or from
public facilities, including schools, parks and libraries; or otherwise impair
the response time of emergency vehicles.
      (3)   Design and construction standards: private streets. Private streets
shall conform to the same standards as those regulating the design and
construction of public streets.
      (4)   Design and installation: security gate. Any security gate design
and installation shall conform to the following requirements:
         a.   Gate designs may incorporate one- or two-vehicular access gate
sections to meet the required minimum overall gate width of 24 feet. If the
entrance incorporates a median, guard house or similar structure that
necessitates a divided gate arrangement, each respective gate width may be
reduced to not less than 18 feet each, or as approved by the director of
transportation and public works. A pedestrian access gate shall also be
provided, having direct access to a public street or alley.
            1.   Each security gate designed and installed shall be approved by
and subject to a performance test by the director of transportation and public
works.
            2.   If a gate design incorporates an overhead feature or
obstruction, the vertical clearance shall be a minimum of 14 feet measured
above the crown of the finished road surface.
         b.   Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance
shall provide free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the
entrance area as required by TPW and public safety departments.
         c.   Secondary emergency access to a public street or alley shall be
provided for all gated one- or two-family subdivisions/developments containing
more than 30 lots or dwelling units. Said gate access and related mechanical or
manual security appurtenances shall be approved by the city’s development
services director and fire marshal.
      (5)   Maintenance and operations. All components of the gate system must
be maintained in a normal operating condition, and serviced on a regular basis,
as needed, to ensure proper gate operation. An appropriate power supply shall
be provided and maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all
times. Manual operated override provisions shall be incorporated therein, in
the event of power failure or during repair and maintenance operations.
         a.   Periodic inspection. The city shall have the right to enter the
subdivision or development, to periodically inspect the installed security gate
and related appurtenances and equipment, at any and all reasonable times, to
assess their proper maintenance and working condition. When in the city’s
opinion such gate or related appurtenance and/or equipment is faulty or unduly
impedes or adversely affects vehicular/pedestrian access, the city may cause
and/or order the appropriate and prompt repair or removal of the gate, or
device in question.
         b.   Responsibility for the cost of repairs/removal. The cost of such
repairs or removal shall be borne by, and may be assessed to, the appropriate
homeowner’s association or developer/owner of the property in question. Such
action taken by the city shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
entry features and related amenities such as gate, related devices,
guardhouses, mechanical/electrical equipment, landscaping and walls/fences/
hedges in association therewith.
         c.   Owner/developer responsibilities and liabilities. The appropriate
subdivision owner, developer or property owner’s association, including its
officers and assigns, shall be held mutually responsible and liable for any
violation of these regulations. Further, if the development is controlled and
operated by a homeowner’s association, provisions shall be contained in the
respective deed restrictions and association’s by-laws, referencing and
incorporating these regulations therein. No homeowner’s association thus
incorporating these regulations, shall amend, change or modify such without the
written consent of the city.
         d.   Hold harmless.
            1.   On the subdivision “final plat,” or planned development “site
plan,” shall be placed language whereby the owner, developer or property
owner’s association (as owner of the private streets, gates and appurtenance)
agrees to release, indemnify, and hold harmless the city. Or any other
governmental entity or public utility, for damages or injury (including death)
arising out of the use or operation by said entities, of any restricted
security gate/entrance or related feature.
            2.   The indemnification applies regardless of whether or not such
damages or injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission
of the city or governmental entity or public utility, including their officers,
employees, agents or assigns.
   (c)   Special variance/waiver considerations for street extensions in gated
subdivisions. Gated subdivisions with private streets or drives, that are
designed to provide internal circulation within the subdivision and that
provide adequate drainage and emergency access and egress connections to
existing adjacent perimeter public streets, may be granted a waiver from
extending private streets to the perimeter of the subdivision for purposes of
future connections with un-platted property.
(Ord. 17794, § 12, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. VII),
passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 23, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 31-108 OIL AND GAS PIPELINES.
   Oil and gas pipelines are regulated by the railroad commission of Texas,
safety division, pipeline safety section, by authority of the Office of
Pipeline Safety within the U.S. Department of Transportation. All known oil and
gas pipelines and pipeline easements must be indicated on a plat.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. VIII), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 18705-07-
2009, § 4, passed 7-14-2009)
§ 31-109 OIL AND GAS WELLS.
   (a)   Plat statement.
      (1)   When an existing oil or gas well is located on the subject property
to be platted, all plats must contain a statement that no building, not
necessary to the operation of an oil or gas well, shall be constructed within
the setbacks required by the current gas well ordinance and adopted fire code.
If, upon appeal to the city council, a variance for a lesser distance is
approved, the statement shall reflect the distance granted by the council.
      (2)   The plat statement note shall read as follows:
         BUILDING CONSTRUCTION DISTANCE LIMITATION TO AN OIL OR GAS WELL BORE
         Pursuant to the Fort Worth city code, no building(s) not necessary to
the operation of an oil or gas well shall be constructed within the setbacks
required by the current gas well ordinance and the adopted fire code from any
existing or permitted oil or gas well bore. The distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the well bore to the closest exterior point of the building,
without regards to intervening structures or objects.
   (b)   [Reserved.]
   (c)   [Reserved.]
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 6, Art. IX), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 18705-07-
2009, §§ 5, 6, passed 7-14-2009)
§§ 31-110—31-130 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 31-131 CONSTRUCTION PLANS PREPARATION AND APPROVAL.
   (a)   Construction plans for public improvements to be installed shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of Texas,
and submitted in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the
officials having jurisdiction as defined in the community facilities agreements
ordinance. No public improvements shall be installed until and unless said
plans shall have been received and accepted by the city. Construction plans
shall include, but are not limited to, those items specified by the city.
   (b)   The review process of engineering plans shall be in accordance with
the community facility agreements ordinance.
      (1)   Preliminary conference between consultant and municipal engineering
personnel responsible for the respective engineering project.
      (2)   One or more conferences should be held between consultant and
municipal engineering representative to discuss the preliminary engineering
plans and proposed specifications.
      (3)   Final plans and specifications prepared in accordance with good
engineering practice are submitted for detail check for errors, adequacy and
conformity with standard specifications for construction published by the
transportation and public works department. Review of plans and specifications
shall be conducted as soon as possible and not later than 20 working days from
date of submission.
      (4)   The information should be conveyed to the applicant, or his or her
engineer, by written comments on a copy of the plans and specifications, letter
or other acceptable written form, a copy of which may be retained by the
official until the completion of the project.
      (5)   The consulting engineer shall submit final plans and specifications
for approval when all comments, changes or corrections are made. The final
plans shall be signed and dated by the city engineer, water department director
and city traffic engineer, or their authorized representatives upon approval.
Final approved plans will be transmitted to the consultant by letter stating
approval subject to any additional minor changes or comments.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 7, Art. I), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23679-06-
2019, § 6, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-132 CONSTRUCTION DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All public improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the city code, and policies, design criteria, standards and specifications
promulgated by the city.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 7, Art. II), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23679-06-
2019, § 7, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-133 PAVING AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (a)   All streets and alleys shall be paved and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with city design standards and specifications.
   (b)   The right-of-way shall be graded to provide suitable finish grades for
pavement, sidewalks and planting strips with adequate surface drainage and
convenient access to the lots.
   (c)   All sidewalks or bicycle/pedestrian ways and driveways shall be
constructed in accordance with city design standards and specifications.
   (d)   All drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with city design standards and specifications.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 7, Art. III), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23679-06-
2019, § 8, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-134 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting shall be provided on all streets, shall conform to all
applicable city design and installation standards and shall be approved by the
city prior to construction. All necessary easements for street light
installation and maintenance shall be shown on both the preliminary and final
plats. Each owner (developer) is responsible for 100% of the cost of the
installation of streetlights. Owner and maintenance responsibility of
streetlights, if not otherwise provided for, shall transfer to the city upon
final acceptance by the city of the project.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 7, Art. IV), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 23679-06-
2019, § 9, passed 6-4-2019)
§ 31-135 SITE IMPROVEMENT DATA.
   The following site improvement data, including all plans and specifications
and engineering calculations, shall be submitted, bearing the seal and
signature of an engineer, proficient in civil engineering, and registered in
the State of Texas. The number of copies and a reproducible shall be furnished
as required by the using department.
   (a)   Roadways and sidewalks. Plans and profiles of all streets, alleys,
sidewalks, crosswalk ways and detailed cost estimates.
   (b)   Sanitary sewers. The location and dimensions of existing sanitary
sewer lines; plans and profiles of proposed sewer lines, indicating depths and
grades of lines; detailed design information; and cost estimates.
   (c)   Treatment plant system. When a separate sewer system or treatment
plant is proposed, proposed plans and specifications shall be submitted.
   (d)   Water lines and hydrants. The location and size of existing water
lines and fire hydrants; plans and proposed water lines and fire hydrants,
showing depths and grades of the lines; detailed design information; and cost
estimates.
   (e)   Streets and drainage. All street widths and grades shall be indicated;
runoff figures shall be indicated on the outlet and inlet side of all drainage
ditches and storm sewers, and at all points in the street at changes of grade
or where the water enters another street or storm sewer or drainage ditch.
Drainage easements shall be indicated.
   (f)   Drainage design. Calculations and map showing the anticipate
stormwater flow, including watershed area, percent runoff and time of
concentration. When a drainage ditch or storm sewer is proposed, calculations
shall be submitted showing the basis for design.
   (g)   Channels and storm drainage. When a drainage channel or storm sewer is
proposed, completed plans, profiles and specifications shall be submitted,
showing complete construction details and detailed cost estimate.
   (h)   Off-site drainage: upstream. When conditions upstream from a proposed
channel or storm drain outside the limits of the ownership of the developer do
not permit maximum design flow, the drainage facilities shall be designed based
on potential and fully developed conditions.
   (i)   Off-site drainage: downstream. When conditions downstream from a
proposed channel or storm drain outside the limits of the ownership of the
developer do not permit maximum design flow, water surface elevations for a one
hundred-year design frequency shall be indicated considering the downstream
condition in order to define the potential flood hazards. Solutions to protect
the property shall be developed.
   (j)   Drainage outfall. All drainage improvements shall be designed to an
acceptable outfall.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 7, Art. V), passed 10-30-2007)
§ 31-136 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17924, § 1, adopted December 18, 2007, deleted the provisions of §
31-136, incorporation of adopted design standards and policy manuals, and
renumbered said provisions as §
31-81(d). Said provisions have been designated as §
31-81(e) at the discretion of the editor, as there already exist provisions
designated (d). See also the Code Comparative Table.
§§ 31-137—31-149 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: ENFORCEMENT
§ 31-150 GENERALLY.
   (a)   Permits withheld.
      (1)   No building permits for any construction activity shall be issued
by the city until a final plat is approved and filed and recorded with the
county clerk of the county in which the tract is located; provided however the
development services director or designee may administratively waive the
platting requirement for building permits that meet the following criteria:
         a.   The permit is for a structure located off site on an adjoining
parcel of land that is temporary in nature and associated with an approved,
permitted construction project and will obtain a certificate of occupancy
issued for a maximum of 24 months with no extensions granted;
         b.   The permit is for a structure that is not occupiable including
but not limited to a retaining wall, fence over eight feet in height, sign,
sound barrier, equipment cabinet or weight scale; and
         c.   In addition to the above, the following conditions must be met:
            1.   The proposed structure does not negatively impact any
floodplain, floodway, utility easement, existing or proposed right-of-way, or
protected tree;
            2.   The proposed project is not within the boundary of an approved
preliminary plat; and
            3.   Any proposed utility service complies with Tex. Local
Government Code § 212.012.
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued nor public utility service
provided for land that has received approval and filed as a conveyance plat.
   (b)   Public services. The city shall be under no obligation to furnish, and
may withhold any or all public services, unless and until all rules,
regulations and requirements of this chapter have been met or duly waived by
the plan commission, or as otherwise waived by TPW, as authorized by these
regulations.
   (c)   Plat addressing. The city shall not cause the addressing of any lot or
parcel within a subdivision unless and until the final plat thereof has been
approved and filed for record in the county courthouse of jurisdiction.
(Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Ch. 8), passed 10-30-2007; Ord. 19156-05-2010, § 2,
passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§§ 31-151—31-170 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: GLOSSARY OF TERMS
§ 31-171 GLOSSARY OF TERMS.
   ACCESS. Adequate access is defined as having frontage on a paved road
meeting the right-of-way and pavement dimensions set forth in the master
thoroughfare plan.
   ACCESS CONTROLLER. The facility controlling vehicular access to private
street developments that may be a mechanism or a manned structure.
   ACREAGE, GROSS. The total acreage.
   ACREAGE, NET. The total acreage less those areas dedicated to public use
such as street alley rights-of-way and all easements.
   ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL. Approval by the executive secretary to the plan
commission.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of
access to abutting lots, which is primarily for vehicular service access to the
back or sides of lots or properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his or her
representative when written consent is obtained from the legal owner of the
premises. The terms APPLICANT, DEVELOPER and SUBDIVIDER are used
interchangeably in this chapter.
   ARTERIAL. See STREET, ARTERIAL.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. A person empowered by another to represent, act for and
transact business with the city.
   BENCHMARK, ELEVATION. A permanent benchmark that identifies the vertical
elevation above mean sea level or other approved level.
   BLOCK. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for
buildings; or if used as a term for measurement, it shall mean the distance
along both sides of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect
said street. When necessary, the city shall determine the outline of the BLOCK
in cases where platting is incomplete or disconnected.
   BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the city. All BONDS shall be approved by the city council wherever a bond is
required by the subdivision ordinance or adopted rules, regulations and
procedures.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter and/or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind. When subdivided in
a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided
may be deemed a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the
street right-of-way line at a specific distance therefrom marking the minimum
distance from the street right-of-way line that a building may be erected.
   BUILDING SITE. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory building, including such open spaces as are required under this
chapter and having direct access to a public street.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Facilities of a permanent nature, such as streets,
drainage, sanitary sewer, etc.
   CITY ENGINEER. The person designated by the city council to review
engineering aspects of projects located within the city.
   COLLECTOR STREET. See STREET, COLLECTOR.
   COMMON AREA. An area or facility that is owned jointly by the owners within
the subdivision and/or members of the property owners association. COMMON AREAS
include, but are not limited to private parks, community buildings and
screening walls.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENT (CFA). A contract between the city and
developer for the construction and cost sharing of public infrastructure
improvement.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. For purposes of this chapter, the comprehensive plan
shall include current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds and public
facilities as delineated by the master thoroughfare plan; parks and recreation
policies; Meacham, Alliance and Spinks Airport controls; and other city codes,
ordinances or regulations.
   COVENANT. An agreement to do or refrain from doing certain acts.
   CROSS STREET INTERSECTION. Situation in which two perpendicular streets
fully intersect, or cross one another from one side to the other at or near a
90-degree angle.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having but one outlet to another street and terminated
on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around.
   DRC. Abbreviation for DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   DEAD-END STREET. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
   DEDICATION. A gift or donation of property or interest in property by the
owner to the public.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per gross acre of subdivision,
excluding any areas that are nonresidential in use.
   DETENTION POND. A pond or impoundment designed to store stormwater runoff
for controlled release during or immediately following the storm event.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation or governmental entity
undertaking the subdivision or improvement of land and other activities covered
by this chapter including the preparation of a subdivision plat showing the
layout of the land and the public improvements involved. The term DEVELOPER is
intended to include the term SUBDIVIDER even though personnel in successive
stages of a project may vary.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than one street.
   DRAINAGE PLAN. An engineering study evaluating stormwater runoff and flows
that recommends drainage improvements necessary to comply with design standards
adopted by the city.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed for or used for
residential purposes.
   EASEMENT. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally,
a private individual and/or to a private or public utility corporation.
   EASEMENT, ACCESS. An easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular
or pedestrian access to a property.
   EASEMENT, DRAINAGE. An easement created for the purpose of conveying
stormwater across property either on the surface or in an underground system.
   EASEMENT, EMERGENCY ACCESS. An easement on private property created for the
purpose of providing access for emergency vehicles to a property.
   EMERGENCY. Response by the appropriate city department to an alarm or call
requiring immediate action in the interest of the public health and safety.
   ENGINEER. A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas
Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice
the profession of engineering.
   ENTRY TURNAROUND. An opening or other accommodation provided at the entrance
to a private street development in order to allow vehicles denied access to re-
enter the public street with a forward motion without unduly disturbing other
vehicles at the entrance.
   EROSION CONTROL. Structural and nonstructural techniques to prevent the
erosion and sedimentation of soil from rainfall and/or runoff.
   E.T.J.—EXTRA TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. That property which lies within the
jurisdiction of the City of Fort Worth for enforcing subdivision plat
regulations.
   EXECUTIVE SECRETARY. The director of the planning and development department
or his or her designated representative who serves as the executive secretary
to the plan commission.
   FPUC. Abbreviation for franchised public utility companies.
   FINAL PLAT. The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of
land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable
points by a surveyor with the subdivision location references to a survey
corner or other established reference and all boundaries, corners and curves of
the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without
additional references. Angular measurements and bearings shall be accurate to
the nearest tenth of a foot. The final plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be recorded in the plat records of the appropriate county.
   FLOODPLAIN. An area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
possibly being flood prone at or below the intermediate flood line (100-year
floodplain). The issuance of building permits for construction of any structure
within such floodplain is regulated by a separate specific ordinance governing
the safeguards, preventing actions against flooding, types of uses permitted in
flood prone areas, etc.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river of other water course and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood as defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HOA and POA. Abbreviations for HOME OWNERS ASSOCIATION and PROPERTY OWNERS
ASSOCIATION respectively, both mean the same and are used interchangeably.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Facilities needed to sustain manufacturing, residential,
commercial and all other land use activities. INFRASTRUCTURE includes water
lines, sewer lines and other utilities; streets and roads; communications; and
public facilities, such as fire stations, parks, schools and other similar type
uses.
   LAND USE PLAN. Part of comprehensive plan showing future land use.
   LOT. An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public
street, or upon an approved access easement having direct public street access,
and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer
or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which
is identified by a tract or lot number of symbol in a duly approved subdivision
plat properly approved by the city and filed on record with the county clerk.
      (1)   AREA, LOT. The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and
shall not include portions of streets and alleys.
      (2)   LOT DEPTH. The distance between midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot line in front and the rearmost
points of the side lot lines in the rear (the mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot line).
      (3)   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR THROUGH. A lot, other than a corner lot,
with frontage on more than one street.
      (4)   LOT, FRONTAGE. The length of street frontage between property
lines.
      (5)   LOT, IRREGULAR. Any lot not having equal front or rear lot lines,
or equal side lot lines (the opposite lot lines vary in dimension), or having
corners with an angle of either more or less than 90 degrees.
      (6)   LOT ORIENTATION. The compass reading for a line, drawn from a point
midway between the side lot lines at the required front yard setback to a point
midway between the side lot lines at the required rear yard setback.
      (7)   LOT WIDTH. The distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the
required front yard, provided, however, that the width between side lot lines
at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not
be less than 80% of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the
turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Within a subdivision, private open space is private
property under common ownership and for use by property owners within the
subdivision designated for recreational area, private park, play lot area,
plaza area, building setbacks (other than those normally required), and
ornamental areas open to the general view within the subdivision. PRIVATE OPEN
SPACE does not include streets, alleys, utility easements, public parks or
required setbacks.
   OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC. Within a subdivision, PUBLIC OPEN SPACE is property
which has been designated for park land, recreation or wildlife conservation
areas which have been dedicated to, and accepted by, the city or other federal,
state or municipal governmental entity.
   OWNER OF RECORD. Legal owner or owners of the property.
   PARK. Land dedicated to, or purchased by, the city or other federal, state
or municipal governmental entity for the purpose of providing public recreation
or open space areas.
   PARK, NEIGHBORHOOD. A public park intended to serve the recreation needs of
people living or working within a one-half mile radius of the park.
   PARK, PRIVATE. A tract of land presently owned or controlled and used by
private or semi-public persons, entities or groups for active or passive
recreational purposes.
   PAVEMENT WIDTH. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic;
where curbs are laid, it is the portion from the face of a standard six-inch
curb to the face of the opposite curb.
   PERMIT. A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit,
contract or other agreement for construction related to, or provision of,
service from a water or wastewater utility owned, operated or controlled by a
regulatory agency, or other form of authorization required by law, rule,
regulation, order or ordinance that a person must obtain to perform an action
or initiate, continue or complete a project for which the permit is sought.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, firm corporation, governmental agency
or political subdivision.
   PETITION. A written request.
   PHASED DEVELOPMENT. A plat presented by the developer proposing that only
part of the tract is to be developed with the remainder of the tract to be
developed at a later date.
   PID. Abbreviation for PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT which is created by the
city.
   PLAN COMMISSION. Same as COMMISSION.
   PLAT. A map of a specific land area such as a subdivision, showing the
location and boundaries of individual parcels of land subdivided into lots with
streets, alleys, easements, etc. drawn to scale.
   POLICY. A statement, or document, which has been enacted by the governing
body of the city that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making
decisions.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A formal document showing the detailed concept of the
subdivision, presented with the required accompanying material to the plan
commission for approval.
   PRIVATE STREETS. Private vehicular access ways shared by and serving three
or more lots, which are not otherwise dedicated to the public nor publicly
maintained.
   PRIVATE STREET LOT. A separate lot owned by the property owners association,
whereupon a private street is constructed.
   PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION. An organization established for the ownership,
care and maintenance of private streets and other private facilities.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Any facilities for the public welfare, usually including
public utilities, governmental buildings and public schools.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Facilities such as streets or drainage systems, which
are dedicated for public use.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE EASEMENT. An easement that restricts construction or
plantings so that open space and/or sight visibility is maintained.
   REAL PROPERTY. Land and anything attached to, or erected on it, excluding
anything that may be severed without injury to the land.
   REPLATTING. The resubdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a
previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract.
   RESERVE STRIP. A privately owned strip of land, normally one foot in depth,
adjacent to a public right-of-way which may be used by the city and franchised
utilities for locating facilities to serve the public.
   RESIDENTIAL STREET. Limited local, local or collector street (public or
private) built to city standards.
   RETENTION POND. A pond or other impoundment designed to store stormwater
runoff permanently.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Lands dedicated to the public for use as a street, alley or
crosswalk.
   SCREENING, WALL OR FENCE. An opaque wall or barrier or fence at least six
feet high made of masonry, cedar or similarly approved fence material per the
zoning ordinance.
   SHALL, MAY. The word SHALL is always mandatory. The word MAY is merely
permissive.
   SIDEWALK. A paved pedestrian way generally located within public street
right-of-way, but outside of the roadway, and built in accordance with city
specifications.
   SKETCH PLAN. A sketch drawing of initial development ideas superimposed on a
topographic map to indicate generally the plan of development and to serve as a
working base for noting and incorporating suggestions of the staff, city
engineer, utilities or others who are consulted prior to the preparation of the
preliminary plat.
   STACKING AREA. A setback measured from the public street right-of-way to the
access controller.
   STEEP SLOPE. Areas that contain slopes over 15% grade and are characterized
by increased run-off and erosion hazards.
   STREET. A public right-of-way, however designated on the city’s
comprehensive plan, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land.
      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. Designed to efficiently carry large volumes of
traffic through the city.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET.
         a.   Primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry
traffic from local streets to arterials, or to carry traffic through or
adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
         b.   A COLLECTOR STREET in a residential zoning district shall also be
identified as a residential street.
      (3)   LOCAL OR LIMITED LOCAL STREET. One used primarily for access to
abutting residential property.
      (4)   PRIVATE STREET. A vehicular access way under private ownership and
maintenance that has not been dedicated to the city or accepted by the city.
      (5)   STREET, INTERNAL. Generally any street whose entire width is
contained within a development.
      (6)   STREET, PERIMETER. Any street, which abuts a development or one
whose width lies partly within a development and partly without, unless,
otherwise defined by the city engineer.
      (7)   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines, which
delineate the rights-of-way of a street.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, STRUCTURES include buildings, mobile homes, billboards and poster
panels.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person or agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide
land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any
event, the term SUBDIVIDER shall be restricted to include only the owner or
equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of any tract of land situated within the corporate
limits, or extraterritorial limits, in two or more parts for the purpose of
laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any town or
city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots and
streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use
of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
SUBDIVISION includes re-subdivision.
   SURVEYOR. A Texas registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state
statues to practice the profession of surveying.
   T-STREET INTERSECTION. Situation where one street intersects with that of
another, in a perpendicular configuration at or near a 90-degree angle, and the
intersecting street does not penetrate through to the other side of the
intersected street, thereby forming a T-configuration.
   THOROUGHFARE. The public vehicular infrastructure composed of arterials,
collectors and local streets. See STREETS.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The officially adopted plan, a part of the comprehensive
plan, that identifies and classifies the existing and proposed thoroughfares in
the city.
   TPW. Abbreviation for DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC WORKS.
   TRAFFIC ASSESSMENT STUDY (TAS) and TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY (TIS). each has its
own definitions of standards of submission requirements, as administered by
TPW. A TAS study is of less complexity and detail than is a TIS study.
   TRAFFIC ENGINEER. The person designated by the city council to review
traffic aspects of projects located within the city.
   URBAN LOCAL STREET. Term meaning the same as RESIDENTIAL STREET, LOCAL
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC and LOOP STREET.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public
generally, and/or to a private utility corporation or public utility district,
for installing, maintaining, repairing or enlarging utilities across, over or
under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and
vehicles necessary for the installation, maintenance, replacement or
enlargement of said utilities at any time.
   VACATION (CLOSURE). To cancel, rescind or render an act that has the effect
of voiding a subdivision plat or a portion thereof as public easement, right-
of-way or other dedication.
(Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17851, § 1 (App. C, Glossary), passed
10-30-2007; Ord. 20382-09-2012, § 9, passed 9-11-2012)
CHAPTER 32: TAXATION
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
      
III.   RESERVED
      
IV.   TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN HISTORIC PROPERTY
      
V.   WILL ROGERS VENUE ADMISSIONS TAX
      
VI.   WILL ROGERS VENUE LIVESTOCK FACILITY USE TAX
      
VII.   WILL ROGERS VENUE PARKING TAX
Charter reference:
   Assessment and collection of taxes, see
Ch. XXIV
Cross-reference:
   Administration generally, see
Ch. 2
   Bingo tax, see §§
20-26 et seq.
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
   Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
   Payment of city taxes, see §
2-7
   Tax certificates, see §
2-8
Section
Article I: In General
   
32-1—32-15   Reserved
Article II: Hotel Occupancy Tax
   
32-16   Definitions
   
32-17   Levy; rate; disposition of revenues; exceptions
   
32-18   Collection; when due; remittance; delinquency; interest
   
32-19   Monthly reports
   
32-20   Rules and regulations; inspection of records
   
32-21   Criminal penalties
   
32-21.1   Civil collection procedures
   
32-21.2   Collection procedures on purchase of hotel
Article III: Venue Hotel Occupancy Tax
   
32-30   Definitions
   
32-31   Levy; rate; disposition of revenues; exceptions; duration
   
32-32   Collection; when due; remittance; delinquency; interest; notice
   
32-33   Monthly reports
   
32-34   Rules and regulations; inspection of records
   
32-35   Criminal penalties
   
32-36   Civil collection procedures
   
32-37   Collection procedures on purchase of hotel
Article IV: Reserved
Article V: Will Rogers Venue Admissions Tax
   
32-50   Definitions
   
32-51   Tax imposed
   
32-52   Tax collection
   
32-53   Use of tax proceeds
   
32-54   Enforcement and penalties
Article VI: Will Rogers Venue Livestock Facility Use Tax
   
32-60   Definitions
   
32-61   Tax imposed; exemption
   
32-62   Tax collection
   
32-63   Use of tax proceeds
   
32-64   Enforcement and penalties
Article VII: Will Rogers Venue Parking Tax
   
32-70   Definitions
   
32-71   Tax imposed
   
32-72   Tax collection
   
32-73   Use of tax proceeds
   
32-74   Enforcement and penalties
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§§ 32-1—32-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy, see Tex. Tax Code Ch. 351
§ 32-16 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms or phrases are, for the purpose of this article,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as
follows.
   BUSINESS DAY. A day on which City of Fort Worth main offices are open for
business and shall not include Saturdays, Sundays, City of Fort Worth holidays
or other days on which city offices have been declared closed for business.
   CONSIDERATION. The total price of, or total value received for, the right to
use a room, sleeping room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space, or other
facilities in such hotel and shall not include the price or value of any food
served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning
and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax
assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency.
   DUE DATE. The first business day following the end of the monthly
collection/reporting period.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings, trailer, railroad pullman not being
utilized for the transportation of travelers or any other facility in which the
public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall
include, hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns,
rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, railroad pullman cars parked on
a siding or other area and used for sleeping accommodations not involving the
transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is rented to
individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by permanent residents as that
term is hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping
facilities or open space is furnished for a consideration, but HOTEL shall not
be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or convalescent or nursing
homes.
   MONTHLY COLLECTION/REPORTING PERIOD. The regular calendar months of the
year. The last day of each month marks the end of the MONTHLY COLLECTION/
REPORTING PERIOD.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose.
   OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to
use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel
under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or
agreement.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to
occupancy of any room or rooms, sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at
least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
   PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
   TAX ASSESSOR-COLLECTOR. The tax assessor-collector of the city.
(1964 Code, § 19A-1) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 20486-11-2012, §
1, passed 11-6-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 32-17 LEVY; RATE; DISPOSITION OF REVENUES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any
sleeping room or space furnished by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is
at the rate of $2 or more per day, such tax to be equal to 9% of the
consideration paid by the occupant of such room or space to such hotel,
exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by any other governmental agencies.
   (b)   All revenues from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended as
provided by state law.
   (c)   No tax under this article shall be imposed upon a permanent resident.
   (d)   The amount of revenue from the tax that is derived from the
application of the tax at a rate of more than 7% of the cost of a room, and any
interest income therefrom, shall be used only for the construction of an
expansion of an existing convention center facility, for a qualified project to
which Section 351.1015, Texas Tax Code, applies, or for pledging payment of
revenue or revenue refunding bonds issued in accordance with state law for the
construction of the expansion of an existing convention center facility or for
a qualified project. The city shall attempt to include minority-owned
businesses in the issuance of at least 32% of the total dollar value of the
bonds issued, and in at least 32% of the total fees paid by the issuer, in
connection with the construction.
(1964 Code, § 19A-2) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 7969, § 2, passed
9-4-1979; Ord. 8900, § 1, passed 8-23-1983; Ord. 10120, § 1, passed 6-2-1988;
Ord. 10858, § 1, passed 6-11-1991; Ord. 13245, § 1, passed 11-18-1997; Ord.
21934-09-2015, § 1, passed 9-29-2015)
§ 32-18 COLLECTION; WHEN DUE; REMITTANCE; DELINQUENCY; INTEREST.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel
shall collect the tax imposed in §
32-17 of this article for the city and remit the same to the tax assessor-
collector on or before the due date, and at the same time file the report
required by §
32-19 herein.
   (b)   (1)   A delinquency occurs if, by the twenty- fifth day of the month
after the end of the monthly collection/reporting period:
         a.   The tax is not remitted or postmarked; or
         b.   The report is not filed or postmarked.
      (2)   If the twenty-fifth day of the month does not fall on a business
day, then the next business day shall be the date by which the tax must be
remitted or postmarked and the report must be filed or postmarked.
   (c)   A late penalty equal to 15% of the total tax owed shall be assessed if
the person fails to remit the tax or have it postmarked and/or file the report
or have it postmarked by the twenty-fifth day of the month following the end of
the monthly collection/reporting period. If the twenty-fifth day of the month
does not fall on a business day, then the next business day shall be the date
by which the tax must be remitted or postmarked and the report must be filed or
postmarked. A late penalty shall be in addition to any criminal penalties
imposed for a violation of this article.
   (d)   Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest in the amount of 10% per annum
each month the taxes are not remitted when due.
(1964 Code, § 19A-3) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 20486-11-2012, §
2, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 32-19 MONTHLY REPORTS.
   On the first day of the calendar month following each monthly collection/
reporting period, every person required in §
32-18 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall file a report with the
tax assessor-collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies
in the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies,
and any other information the tax assessor-collector may reasonably require.
Such person shall remit the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing
such report.
(1964 Code, § 19A-4) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 20486-11-2012, §
3, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 32-20 RULES AND REGULATIONS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and
regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this
article and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access, at a location within
the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth, to books and records necessary
to enable the tax assessor-collector to determine the correctness of any report
filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the
provisions of this article.
(1964 Code, § 19A-5) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 20486-11-2012, §
4, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 32-21 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article, or
shall fail to file a report as required in this article, or shall fail to remit
to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed in this article when such
report or remittance is due, or shall file a false report, then such person
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided in §
1-6 of this code.
(1964 Code, § 19A-6) (Ord. 6542, § 1, passed 8-30-1971; Ord. 13245, § 2, passed
11-18-1997; Ord. 20486-11-2012, § 5, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 32-21.1 CIVIL COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The assessor-collector shall refer any hotel occupancy tax account
that has a balance that is more than 90 days past due to the city attorney, or
other attorney acting for the city, to institute collection proceedings. The
city attorney, or other attorney acting for the city, shall be authorized by
this ordinance to file suit to enjoin the hotel owner, operator, manager and
other persons in control from operating any hotel in the City of Fort Worth
until the tax is remitted in full and/or the report is filed, as applicable, as
provided in the court’s order. In the event collection proceedings are
instituted under this provision, in addition to the amount of any tax and/or
penalty owed under this article, the person is liable to the city for:
      (1)   The city’s reasonable attorney’s fees;
      (2)   The costs of an audit conducted under §
32-20, as determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if:
         a.   The tax is at least two complete fiscal quarters past due at the
time the audit is conducted; and
         b.   The city has not received a disbursement from the comptroller as
provided by Tex. Tax Code § 156.2513 related to the person’s concurrent state
tax delinquency described by Tex. Tax Code § 351.008.
      (3)   A penalty equal to 15% of the total amount of the tax owed if the
tax has not been remitted for at least one complete municipal fiscal quarter
after its due date.
   (b)   The remedies provided by this section are in addition to other
available remedies.
(Ord. 13245, § 3, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. 20486-11-2012, § 6, passed 11-6-2012)
Editor’s note:
   This section was designated as § 32-22 when enacted by Ord. 13245. It was
redesignated by the editor in order to avoid conflicting with previously
existing material. The section was subsequently amended under its current
section number, as shown in the history note above.
§ 32-21.2 COLLECTION PROCEDURES ON PURCHASE OF HOTEL.
   (a)   If a person who is liable for the remittance of a tax under this
article is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the
seller or the seller’s assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price
sufficient to remit the amount due until the seller provides a receipt by an
individual designated by the city to provide the receipt showing that the
amount has been remitted or to issue a certificate showing that no tax is due.
   (b)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the
purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to
be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
   (c)   The purchaser of a hotel may request that the individual designated by
the city to provide a receipt under subsection (a) above issue a certificate
stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be
remitted before a certificate may be issued. The individual designated by the
municipality shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the
sixtieth day after the date that the individual receives the request.
   (d)   If the individual designated by the city to provide a receipt under
subsection (a) above fails to issue the certificate or statement within the
period provided by subsection (c) above, the purchaser is released from the
obligation to withhold the purchase price or remit the amount due.
(Ord. 13245, § 4, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. 20486-11-2012, § 7, passed 11-6-2012)
Editor’s note:
   This section was designated as § 32-23 when enacted by Ord. 13245. It was
redesignated by the editor in order to avoid conflicting with previously
existing material. The section was subsequently amended under its current
section number, as shown in the history note above.
ARTICLE III: VENUE HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 32-30 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The words, terms, and phrases used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in §
32-16 regarding the city's general hotel occupancy tax, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   (b)   In addition, the following words, terms, and phrases are, for the
purpose of this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, defined as follows:
   ACT. Chapter 334, Texas Local Government Code, as it may be amended or
recodified.
   VENUE HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX. The tax imposed under this Division 3 of Chapter
32.
   VENUE PROJECT or FWCC VENUE PROJECT. The Fort Worth Convention Center and
any related infrastructure, as approved by a majority of the voters of the city
voting in the special election held May 4, 2024.
   VENUE PROJECT FUND or FWCC VENUE PROJECT FUND. The fund established by the
City Council under Resolution No. 596506-2024 or any account within such fund.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-31 LEVY; RATE; DISPOSITION OF REVENUES; EXCEPTIONS; DURATION.
   (a)   In addition to the hotel tax levied under Article II of this chapter,
there is hereby levied a venue hotel occupancy tax upon the cost of occupancy
of any sleeping room or space furnished by any hotel, where the cost of
occupancy is at the rate of $2 or more per day, such tax to be equal to 2% of
the consideration paid by the occupant of such room or space to such hotel,
resulting in a combined hotel occupancy tax under Articles II and III of 11%,
exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by any other governmental agencies.
   (b)   All revenues from the venue hotel occupancy tax shall be deposited to
the FWCC Venue Project Fund and utilized in furtherance of the Venue Project as
provided by state law.
   (c)   No tax under this article shall be imposed upon a permanent resident.
   (d)   The tax imposed under this section must be collected on every
occupancy occurring on or after August 1, 2024. The tax shall continue to be
collected for so long as any bonds or other obligations issued by the city
under Section 334.043 of the Act for the purpose of financing a portion of the
costs of the Venue Project, and any bonds or obligations refunding or
refinancing those bonds or other obligations, remain outstanding and unpaid.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-32 COLLECTION; WHEN DUE; REMITTANCE; DELINQUENCY; INTEREST; NOTICE.
   (a)   The obligations to collect, remit, and report on the venue hotel
occupancy tax; the deadlines for same; and the penalties and interest for
delinquencies with respect thereto shall all be the same as those articulated
in §
32-18 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
   (b)   In addition to any other notice required or provided by law or
otherwise, each bill or other receipt for a hotel charge subject to the tax
imposed by this article must contain a statement in a conspicuous location
stating the following:
      The City of Fort Worth requires that an additional tax of two percent be
imposed on each hotel charge for the planning, acquisition, development,
establishment, construction, renovation and financing of the Fort Worth
Convention Center and any related infrastructure as a designated Venue Project,
as approved by the voters of the city on May 4, 2024.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-33 MONTHLY REPORTS.
   The obligations to submit reports on the venue hotel occupancy tax shall be
the same as those articulated in §
32-19 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-34 RULES AND REGULATIONS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The authority to adopt rules and regulations to make records available with
respect to the venue hotel occupancy tax shall be the same as those articulated
in §
32-20 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-35 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Criminal violations and penalties with respect to the collection,
remittance, and reporting of the venue hotel occupancy tax shall be the same as
those articulated in §
32-21 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-36 CIVIL COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   Civil collection procedures with respect to the venue hotel occupancy tax
shall be the same as those articulated in §
32-21.1 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
§ 32-37 COLLECTION PROCEDURES ON PURCHASE OF HOTEL.
   Procedures for collection of venue hotel occupancy tax in connection with
the purchase, sale, or transfer of the hotel shall be the same as those
articulated in §
32-21.2 with respect to other city hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 26960-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-11-2024, eff. 8-1-2024)
ARTICLE IV: RESERVED
Cross-reference:
   Historic preservation overlay districts, see
App. A, Ch. 4, §
4.401
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 23159-04-2018, § 1, adopted April 4, 2018, repealed Art. IV, § 32-41,
which pertained to ad valorem tax exemptions for certain historic property. See
also Code Comparative Table.
ARTICLE V: WILL ROGERS VENUE ADMISSIONS TAX
§ 32-50 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms or phrases are, for the purpose of this article,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as
follows.
   ACT. Chapter 334, Texas Local Government Code, as it may be amended or
recodified.
   ADMISSION TICKET. Any tangible or intangible ticket, pass, authorization,
permit, voucher, coupon, license, or other instrument granting the privilege of
admission to an event.
   BUSINESS DAY. A day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or day on
which commercial banks are not required or authorized to close in the City or
New York City.
   CATERING EVENT. A gathering the primary purpose of which is the serving of a
meal as determined in the discretion of the venue operator.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the city's Financial Management Services
Department or such other person designated by the city manager to enforce and
administer this article, and any person designated by the director as his or
her representative.
   DUE DATE. The first business day following the end of the monthly
collection/reporting period.
   EVENT. Any event or activity, other than a catering event, held at the venue
project, including, but not limited to, a livestock event, as that term is
defined in § 32-60; a concert; theater performance; family show; athletic
exhibition, meet, or game; or consumer or trade show.
   EVENT SPONSOR. The tenant of the venue project or any group or association
that organizes, presents, or sponsors an event, including a political
subdivision or nonprofit organization that is exempt from federal income tax
under § 501(a), Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, by being listed as
an exempt organization in § 501(c)(3) of that code.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, trust, company, corporation,
association, or other entity.
   VENUE OPERATOR. A person operating, managing, or controlling a portion of
the venue project by or for the city and includes both a third party engaged
under a lease or similar agreement as well as the director and his staff.
   VENUE PROJECT. A multipurpose arena at the intersection of Harley Avenue and
Gendy Street, other adjacent support facilities, and any related
infrastructure, as approved by a majority of the voters of the city voting in
the special election held November 4, 2014, which adjacent support facilities
include the facilities now existing or hereafter constructed on the campus of
the Will Rogers Memorial Center and a livestock support building and landscaped
event plaza in the immediate vicinity of the arena. The area designated as the
venue project is depicted in the shaded portion of Diagram VP1.
   Diagram VP1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8110.jpg]
 
   VENUE PROJECT FUND. The fund established by the city council under
Resolution No. 4387-12-2014 or any account within such fund.
(Ord. 22742-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-51 TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax at the rate of 10% of the
price paid for an admission ticket to or in connection with an event at the
venue project.
   (b)   The tax imposed under this article shall be calculated based on and be
added to the full cost, excluding the amount of any other tax that may apply,
of an admission ticket. The tax is a part of the price for the admission
ticket, is a debt owed to the person required to collect the tax by the person
receiving the admission ticket, and is recoverable at law in the same manner as
the charge for the admission ticket.
   (c)   The tax shall be collected for each event held, in whole or in part,
at the venue project, beginning on the date as of which the multipurpose arena
in the venue project is issued a certificate of occupancy and continuing so
long as bonds or other obligations, including revenue or refunding obligations,
for the planning, acquisition, establishment, development, construction, or
renovation of the venue project are outstanding and unpaid.
(Ord. 22742-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-52 TAX COLLECTION.
   (a)   (1)   The city manager shall have the authority to establish any rules
and regulations necessary to implement and collect the tax, including, but not
limited to, the establishment of procedures for the allocation of revenues and
imposition and collection of the tax; the development of record-keeping,
reports, and filing requirements related to the number of admission tickets
sold for events at the venue project during a given period of time; the
development of tax collection procedures and protocols, and auditing
requirements to ensure that the proper amount of tax has been collected and
deposited with the city.
      (2)   A venue operator or other person required to maintain records under
the rules shall be required to allow inspection of such records by the city and
its internal or external auditors on request.
      (3)   It is anticipated that items and services that are taxable and
nontaxable under this article may be bundled together and sold as a unit for a
single, undifferentiated payment. The rules for allocation of revenues and
imposition of the tax shall include, at a minimum, methods for unbundling such
items and services and imputing a reasonable portion of such a payment to each
individual item and service with tax to be imposed on the imputed portion of
the payment.
      (4)   Rules for record-keeping and reporting shall require, at a minimum,
the following information be made available:
         a.   The total revenue generated from sale of admission tickets in
connection with events during the reporting period, which shall be a period of
no less than one month;
         b.   The aggregate amount of all tax proceeds collected from events
during the reporting period, which shall be a period of no less than one month;
and
         c.   Any other information that the director reasonably requires.
   (b)   A venue operator shall be responsible for (i) ensuring the tax imposed
under this article is collected for and remitted to the city on or before the
due date in accordance with this article and any rules and regulations
established by the city manager pursuant to §
32-52(a) and (ii) filing reports and otherwise making available information
concerning collection and remittance of tax in accordance with rules adopted
under §
32-52(a). A venue operator may delegate the duty of collecting taxes and
reporting data for a specific event to an event sponsor. Neither the person
collecting the tax nor the event sponsor will be entitled to retain any
percentage of the tax as reimbursement for any costs associated with collection
of the tax.
   (c)   (1)   A venue operator is responsible for remitting tax revenues and
filing required reports for a monthly collection/reporting period as of the due
date.
      (2)   A delinquency occurs if, by the twenty-fifth day of the month after
the end of the monthly collection/reporting period:
         a.   The tax is not remitted or postmarked; or
         b.   The report is not filed or postmarked.
      (3)   If the twenty-fifth day of the month does not fall on a business
day, then the next business day shall be the date by which the tax must be
remitted or postmarked and the report must be filed or postmarked.
(Ord. 22742-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-53 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of the tax shall be deposited into the Venue Project Fund and
may be used only for purposes authorized by the act.
(Ord. 22742-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-54 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if that person:
      (1)   Has an obligation to collect the tax under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-52(a); and
      (2)   Fails to collect the tax imposed under this article on any
admission ticket sold in connection with an event.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to remit
collected tax proceeds under this article or under rules adopted by the city
manager in accordance with §
32-52(a) and fails to remit any tax proceeds as and when required.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to maintain
records under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-52(a) and fails to produce such records as and when required.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-52(a) and fails to submit a report as and when required.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-52(a) and submits a report containing false information.
   (f)   An offense under this section shall constitute a misdemeanor criminal
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (g)   The director shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
article.
   (h)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under this section, if a
person is obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under rules
adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-52(a) and is delinquent in doing so, that person shall pay a late fee equal
to the greater of (i) 5% of the outstanding amount then due or (ii) $25. The
person or owner will also be personally liable for the full amount of any taxes
not remitted to the city.
   (i)   A person obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-52(a) who is delinquent in remitting tax proceeds shall also be liable for
paying interest in the amount of 10% per annum, with imposition of interest
commencing on the day after the due date.
   (j)   In addition to any criminal penalties and late fees imposed under this
section, an attorney acting on behalf of the city may bring suit against any
person who fails to collect any tax or to remit to the city any tax as required
by this article in order to collect any amounts due.
(Ord. 22742-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
ARTICLE VI: WILL ROGERS VENUE LIVESTOCK FACILITY USE TAX
§ 32-60 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms or phrases are, for the purpose of this article,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as
follows.
   ACT. Chapter 334, Texas Local Government Code, as it may be amended or
recodified.
   BUSINESS DAY. A day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or day on
which commercial banks are not required or authorized to close in the City or
New York City.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the city's Financial Management Services
Department or such other person designated by the city manager to enforce and
administer this article, and any person designated by the director as his or
her representative.
   DUE DATE. The first business day following the end of the monthly
collection/reporting period.
   EVENT SPONSOR. Any group or association that organizes, presents, or
sponsors a livestock event, including a political subdivision or nonprofit
organization that is exempt from federal income tax under § 501(a), Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, by being listed as an exempt organization in
§ 501(c)(3) of that code.
   LIVESTOCK ANIMAL. Any of the following:
      (1)   An equine animal, including a horse, pony, mule, donkey, or hinny;
      (2)   A bovine animal, including a cow, heifer, bull, bullock, calf,
buffalo or bison;
      (3)   An ovine animal, including a sheep;
      (4)   An animal in the camelid family, including a llama or alpaca;
      (5)   A caprine animal, including a goat;
      (6)   A porcine animal, including a pig or hog;
      (7)   A ratite, including an ostrich, rhea, or emu; and
      (8)   Any other animal of similar size or characteristic as those listed
above and typically held in a stall or pen.
   LIVESTOCK EVENT. A rodeo or an agricultural, equestrian or livestock show,
fair, competition, exhibition or sale held for one or more consecutive days
that is conducted, in whole or in part, at the venue project, the duration of
which shall include any full or partial days before the livestock event that
are used for set-up or preparation of the event and any full or partial days
following the event that are used for disassembly and other post-event matters.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, trust, company, corporation,
association, or other entity.
   STALL or PEN. An enclosure or designated space and tie point that is located
within the venue project and that is designed for the housing or holding one or
more livestock animals.
   VENUE OPERATOR. A person operating, managing, or controlling a portion of
the venue project by or for the city and includes both a third party engaged
under a lease or similar agreement as well as the director and his staff.
   VENUE PROJECT. A multipurpose arena at the intersection of Harley Avenue and
Gendy Street, other adjacent support facilities, and any related
infrastructure, as approved by a majority of the voters of the city voting in
the special election held November 4, 2014, which adjacent support facilities
include the facilities now existing or hereafter constructed on the campus of
the Will Rogers Memorial Center and a livestock support building and landscaped
event plaza in the immediate vicinity of the arena. The area designated as the
venue project is depicted in the shaded portion of Diagram VP1.
   Diagram VP1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8124.jpg]
 
   VENUE PROJECT FUND. The fund established by the city council under
Resolution No. 4387-12-2014 or any account within such fund.
(Ord. 22744-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-61 TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTION.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax on each stall or pen that a
person has a right to use or occupy for any reason in connection with a
livestock event, with the rate of such tax being $1 per stall or pen per day,
provided that the aggregate tax collected shall not exceed $20 per stall or pen
for any livestock event.
   (b)   The tax imposed by this article is a debt owed by the person having
the right to use a stall or pen and is recoverable at law.
   (c)   The tax shall be collected for each livestock event held, in whole or
in part, at the venue project, beginning on the date as of which the
multipurpose arena in the venue project is issued a certificate of occupancy
and continuing so long as bonds or other obligations, including revenue or
refunding obligations, for the planning, acquisition, establishment,
development, construction, or renovation of the venue project are outstanding
and unpaid.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no tax shall be levied or imposed under
this section for the use or occupancy of stalls or pens by livestock at the
Tarrant County Junior Livestock Show.
(Ord. 22744-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-62 TAX COLLECTION.
   (a)   (1)   The city manager shall have the authority to establish any rules
and regulations necessary to implement and collect the tax, including, but not
limited to, the establishment of procedures for allocation of revenues and
imposition and collection of the tax; the development of record-keeping,
reports, and filing requirements related to the number of stalls or pens a
person has a right to use or occupy with one or more livestock animals during a
livestock event; the development of tax collection procedures and protocols,
and auditing requirements to ensure that the proper amount of tax has been
collected and deposited with the city.
      (2)   A venue operator or other person required to maintain records under
the rules shall be required to allow inspection of such records by the city and
its internal or external auditors on request.
      (3)   It is anticipated that items and services that are taxable and
nontaxable under this article may be bundled together and sold as a unit for a
single, undifferentiated payment. The rules for allocation of revenues and
imposition of the tax shall include, at a minimum, methods for unbundling such
items and services and imputing a reasonable portion of such a payment to each
individual item and service with tax to be imposed on the imputed portion of
the payment.
      (4)   Rules for record-keeping and reporting shall require, at a minimum,
the following information be made available:
         a.   The total number of stalls or pens used in connection with the
livestock event;
         b.   The total number of livestock animals housed at the livestock
event;
         c.   The aggregate amount of all tax proceeds collected during the
livestock event; and
         d.   Any other information that the director reasonably requires.
   (b)   A venue operator shall be responsible for (i) ensuring the tax imposed
under this article is collected for and remitted to the city on or before the
due date in accordance with this article and any rules and regulations
established by the city manager pursuant to §
32-62(a) and (ii) filing reports and otherwise making available information
concerning collection and remittance of tax in accordance with rules adopted
under §
32-62(a). A venue operator may delegate the duty of collecting taxes and
reporting data for a specific livestock event to an event sponsor. Neither the
person collecting the tax nor the event sponsor will be entitled to retain any
percentage of the tax as reimbursement for any costs associated with collection
of the tax.
   (c)   (1)   A venue operator is responsible for remitting tax revenues and
filing required reports for a monthly collection/reporting period as of the due
date.
      (2)   A delinquency occurs if, by the twenty-fifth day of the month after
the end of the monthly collection/reporting period:
         a.   The tax is not remitted or postmarked; or
         b.   The report is not filed or postmarked.
      (3)   If the twenty-fifth day of the month does not fall on a business
day, then the next business day shall be the date by which the tax must be
remitted or postmarked and the report must be filed or postmarked.
(Ord. 22744-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-63 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of the tax shall be deposited into the Venue Project Fund and
may be used only for purposes authorized by the act.
(Ord. 22744-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-64 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if that person:
      (1)   Has an obligation to collect the tax under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-62(a); and
      (2)   Fails to collect the tax imposed under this article on any stall or
pen used or occupied by a livestock animal in connection with a livestock
event.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to remit
collected tax proceeds under this article or under rules adopted by the city
manager in accordance with §
32-62(a) and fails to remit any tax proceeds as and when required.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to maintain
records under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-62(a) and fails to produce such records as and when required.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-62(a) and fails to submit a report as and when required.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-62(a) and submits a report containing false information.
   (f)   An offense under this section shall constitute a misdemeanor criminal
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (g)   The director shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
article.
   (h)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under this section, if a
person is obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under rules
adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-52(a) and is delinquent in doing so, that person shall pay a late fee equal
to the greater of (i) 5% of the outstanding amount then due or (ii) $25. The
person or owner will also be personally liable for the full amount of any taxes
not remitted to the city.
   (i)   A person obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-62(a) who is delinquent in remitting tax proceeds shall also be liable for
paying interest in the amount of 10% per annum, with imposition of interest
commencing on the day after the due date.
   (j)   In addition to any criminal penalties and late fees imposed under this
section, an attorney acting on behalf of the city may bring suit against any
person who fails to collect any tax or to remit to the city any tax as required
by this article in order to collect any amounts due.
(Ord. 22744-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
ARTICLE VII: WILL ROGERS VENUE PARKING TAX
§ 32-70 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms or phrases are, for the purpose of this article,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as
follows.
   ACT. Chapter 334, Texas Local Government Code, as it may be amended or
recodified.
   BUSINESS DAY. A day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or day on
which commercial banks are not required or authorized to close in the City or
New York City.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the city's Financial Management Services
Department or such other person designated by the city manager to enforce and
administer this article, and any person designated by the director as his or
her representative.
   DUE DATE. The first business day following the end of the monthly
collection/reporting period.
   PARKING FACILITY OPERATOR. A person operating, managing, or controlling a
venue parking facility and, with respect to a city-owned venue parking
facility, includes both a third party engaged under a lease, operating
agreement, or similar contractual arrangement as well as the director and his
staff.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, trust, company, corporation,
association, or other entity.
   VENUE OPERATOR. A person operating, managing, or controlling a portion of
the venue project by or for the city and includes both a third party engaged
under a lease or similar agreement as well as the director and his staff.
   VENUE PARKING FACILITY. Any parking lot or parking garage that (i) is
located within the venue project, whether owned or leased by the city or
another person, or (ii) is leased, licensed or otherwise used by a person
conducting an event in the venue project or is affiliated with such person, and
where the parking of motor vehicles is permitted for persons attending an event
in or otherwise visiting the venue project, regardless of whether those persons
actually do attend an event in or otherwise visit the venue project.
   VENUE PROJECT. A multipurpose arena at the intersection of Harley Avenue and
Gendy Street, other adjacent support facilities, and any related
infrastructure, as approved by a majority of the voters of the city voting in
the special election held November 4, 2014, which adjacent support facilities
include the facilities now existing or hereafter constructed on the campus of
the Will Rogers Memorial Center and a livestock support building and landscaped
event plaza in the immediate vicinity of the arena. The area designated as the
venue project is depicted in the shaded portion of Diagram VP1.
   Diagram VP1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8138.jpg]
 
   VENUE PROJECT FUND. The fund established by the city council under
Resolution No. 4387-12-2014 or any account within such fund.
(Ord. 22743-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-71 TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax on each motor vehicle parked
at a venue parking facility at the rate of 50% of the charge imposed, but not
to exceed $5, on each motor vehicle parking at a venue parking facility.
   (b)   The tax imposed under this article shall be calculated based on and be
added to the full cost, excluding the amount of any other tax that may apply,
of the parking charge. The tax is a part of the parking charge, is a debt owed
to the person required to collect the tax by the person paying the parking
charge, and is recoverable at law in the same manner as the parking charge.
   (c)   The tax shall be collected 24 hours per day, seven days per week,
beginning on the date as of which the multipurpose arena in the venue project
is issued a certificate of occupancy and continuing so long as bonds or other
obligations, including revenue or refunding obligations, for the planning,
acquisition, establishment, development, construction, or renovation of the
venue project are outstanding and unpaid.
(Ord. 22743-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-72 TAX COLLECTION.
   (a)   (1)   The city manager shall have the authority to establish any rules
and regulations necessary to implement and collect the tax, including, but not
limited to, the establishment of procedures for allocation of revenues and
imposition and collection of the tax; the development of record-keeping,
reports, and filing requirements related to the number of motor vehicles
parking in a vehicle parking facility during a given period of time; the
development of tax collection procedures and protocols, and auditing
requirements to ensure that the proper amount of tax has been collected and
deposited with the city.
      (2)   A parking facility operator or other person required to maintain
records under the rules shall be required to allow inspection of such records
by the city and its internal or external auditors on request.
      (3)   It is anticipated that items and services that are taxable and
nontaxable under this article may be bundled together and sold as a unit for a
single, undifferentiated payment. The rules for allocation of revenues and
imposition of the tax shall include, at a minimum, methods for unbundling such
items and services and imputing a reasonable portion of such a payment to each
individual item and service with tax to be imposed on the imputed portion of
the payment.
      (4)   Rules for record-keeping and reporting shall require, at a minimum,
the following information be made available:
         a.   The total number of motor vehicles parked in each venue parking
facility owned by such owner in the previous calendar month;
         b.   The aggregate amount of all tax proceeds collected in the
previous calendar month; and
         c.   Any other information that the director reasonably requires.
   (b)   A parking facility operator shall be responsible for (i) ensuring the
tax imposed under this article is collected for and remitted to the city on or
before the due date in accordance with this article and any rules and
regulations established by the city manager pursuant to §
32-72(a) and (ii) filing reports and otherwise making available information
concerning collection and remittance of tax in accordance with rules adopted
under §
32-72(a). A parking facility operator may delegate the duty of collecting taxes
and reporting data for a specific event to an event sponsor. Neither the person
collecting the tax nor the event sponsor will be entitled to retain any
percentage of the tax as reimbursement for any costs associated with collection
of the tax.
   (c)   (1)   A parking facility operator is responsible for remitting tax
revenues and filing required reports for a monthly collection/reporting period
as of the due date.
      (2)   A delinquency occurs if, by the twenty-fifth day of the month after
the end of the monthly collection/reporting period:
         a.   The tax is not remitted or postmarked; or
         b.   The report is not filed or postmarked.
      (3)   If the twenty-fifth day of the month does not fall on a business
day, then the next business day shall be the date by which the tax must be
remitted or postmarked and the report must be filed or postmarked.
(Ord. 22743-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-73 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of the tax shall be deposited into the Venue Project Fund and
may be used only for purposes authorized by the act.
(Ord. 22743-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
§ 32-74 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if that person:
      (1)   Has an obligation to collect the tax under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-72(a); and
      (2)   Fails to collect the tax imposed under this article on any motor
vehicle parking charge.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to remit
collected tax proceeds under this article or under rules adopted by the city
manager in accordance with §
32-72(a) and fails to remit any tax proceeds as and when required.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to maintain
records under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-72(a) and fails to produce such records as and when required.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-72(a) and fails to submit a report as and when required.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if that person is obligated to submit
reports under this article or under rules adopted by the city manager in
accordance with §
32-72(a) and submits a report containing false information.
   (f)   An offense under this section shall constitute a misdemeanor criminal
offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (g)   The director shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
article.
   (h)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under this section, if a
person is obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under rules
adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-72(a) and is delinquent in doing so, that person shall pay a late fee equal
to the greater of (i) 5% of the outstanding amount then due or (ii) $25. The
person or owner will also be personally liable for the full amount of any taxes
not remitted to the city.
   (i)   A person obligated to remit tax proceeds under this article or under
rules adopted by the city manager in accordance with §
32-72(a) who is delinquent in remitting tax proceeds shall also be liable for
paying interest in the amount of 10% per annum, with imposition of interest
commencing on the day after the due date.
   (j)   In addition to any criminal penalties and late fees imposed under this
section, an attorney acting on behalf of the city may bring suit against any
person who fails to collect any tax or to remit to the city any tax as required
by this article in order to collect any amounts due.
(Ord. 22743-06-2017, § 1, passed 6-6-2017, eff. 6-25-2017)
CHAPTER 33: TREES, SHRUBS, ETC.
Cross-reference:
   Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate the planting and preserving of ornaments and
shade trees in streets, etc., see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stats., Art. 1015(32)
Section
   
33-1   Supervision and control
   
33-2   Jurisdiction over public and private property
   
33-3   Use of protective guards during construction work
   
33-4   Contact with electrical wires; insulation; pruning
   
33-5   Permit required to attach wire, sign, etc., to trees
   
33-6   Permit required to plant, prune, etc., trees located on public property
   
33-7   Ownership of trees, etc., between sidewalks and curbs
§ 33-1 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   The department of park and recreation shall have jurisdiction, authority,
control and supervision over all trees, plants and shrubs planted or growing in
or upon the public highways and public places in the city, and the planting,
removal, care, maintenance and protection thereof.
(Code 1964, § 36-1) (Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994)
§ 33-2 JURISDICTION OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The department of park and recreation shall have the power to plant,
preserve, spray, trim, cable or remove any tree, shrub or plant on any street,
alley, avenue, land, lane, public ground or square belonging to the city. If
any tree or any part thereof is in an unsafe condition, or is injurious to the
common good, or to sewer pipes, pavements or improvements, or is infested and
dangerous to other trees, power is hereby given to the department of park and
recreation to remove such trees or part thereof, or spray such tree, or order
such tree or part thereof removed. If any tree or shrub on any private property
is infested and, in the opinion of the city forester, is infectious and liable
to spread any disease, or if any tree or shrub is dangerous to the public,
power is hereby given to the department of park and recreation to enter such
property and spray such tree or shrub, or remove same or any part thereof.
(1964 Code, § 36-2) (Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994)
§ 33-3 USE OF PROTECTIVE GUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION WORK.
   Whenever any person plans to do any sort of construction work around any
public tree, plant or shrub, proper guards, to be approved by the city
forester, shall be placed around such tree, plant or shrub.
(1964 Code, § 36-6)
§ 33-4 CONTACT WITH ELECTRICAL WIRES; INSULATION; PRUNING.
   Any person having any electrically charged wire which is in contact with any
tree, plant or shrub and which, in the opinion of the city forester, is
injurious to such tree, plant or shrub, shall remove such wire or shall place
proper insulation about such wire. If such tree, plant or shrub is to be
pruned, notice shall be served on the owner of such wires and current shall be
discontinued within 48 hours after notified, for the period necessary for
pruning or repairing such tree, plant or shrub.
(1964 Code, § 36-7)
§ 33-5 PERMIT REQUIRED TO ATTACH WIRE, SIGN, ETC., TO TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any cable, wire, rope, sign or
any other thing to any public tree without a permit from the department of
parks and recreation.
(1964 Code, § 36-9)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 33-6 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT, PRUNE, ETC., TREES LOCATED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, prune, remove, paint or
spray any tree, plant or shrub on any public highway or public place without
first securing a permit from the city forester.
   (b)   If more than one tree, plant or shrub is to be planted on the street,
the department of park and recreation shall require the applicant to fill in
the necessary form showing his or her intentions.
(1964 Code, § 36-10) (Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 33-7 OWNERSHIP OF TREES, ETC., BETWEEN SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
   All trees, plants and shrubs growing between the sidewalk and the curb are
the property of the city, and shall be under the control of the department of
park and recreation.
(1964 Code, § 36-11) (Ord. 11541, § 1(c), passed 4-12-1994)
CHAPTER 34: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   BUSES
      
III.   MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORTS
      
IV.   RESERVED
      
V.   TOW TRUCKS
      
VI.   GROUND TRANSPORTATION FOR HIRE
Cross-reference:
   Ambulances/emergency medical services, see
Ch. 5
   Motor vehicles and traffic, see
Ch. 22
   Regulation of vehicles at city-owned landing fields, see §
3-96
   Truck traffic, see §§
22-111 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Authority for home rule cities to license and control the operation of all
classes of vehicles, see Rev. Civil Stats., Art. 1175(20)
   Authority for licensing and regulating of vehicles carrying passengers for
hire, see Rev. Civil Stats., Art. 1175(21)
Section
Article I: In General
   
34-1—34-15   Reserved
Article II: Buses
   
34-16   Reserved
   
34-17   Radios, tape players
   
34-18   Reserved
   
34-19—34-35   Reserved
Article III: Motor Vehicle Escorts
Division 1: Generally
   
34-36   Definitions
   
34-37   Applicability
   
34-38   Escort service not mandatory
   
34-39   Equipment on escort vehicles; inspection
   
34-40   Advertising restrictions
   
34-41   Manner of travel of funeral procession
   
34-42   Carrying weapons
   
34-43   Limitation on services of escort guides
   
34-44   Identification of cortege; authority of guides to direct traffic
   
34-45—34-55   Reserved
Division 2: Business License
   
34-56   Required
   
34-57   Application
   
34-58   Investigation of application; recommendation to city manager
   
34-59   Factors to be considered
   
34-60   Insurance and indemnification policy
   
34-61   Terms of insurance policy
   
34-62   When additional insurance required; effect of failure to obtain
   
34-63   Issuance; payment of fee
   
34-64   Fee; transfer
   
34-65   Term; issuance not to create vested rights
   
34-66   Age restriction on issuance
   
34-67   Appeal from denial
   
34-68   Revocation; appeal
   
34-69   Posting at business establishment; surrender after revocation
   
34-70   Functions, powers and duties of police department
   
34-71—34-85   Reserved
Division 3: Driver’s Permit
   
34-86   Required; application
   
34-87   Investigation and approval of application; appeal from denial
   
34-88   Prerequisites and restrictions on issuance
   
34-89   Issuance; fee; transfer; expiration
   
34-90   Carrying; exhibit on demand
   
34-91   Revocation; appeal
   
34-92   Causes for revocation
   
34-93   Permit not to confer civil immunity
   
34-94—34-110   Reserved
Article IV: Reserved
   
34-111—34-175   Reserved
Article V: Tow Trucks
Division 1: Generally
   
34-176   Preamble
   
34-177   Definitions
   
34-178   Accidents covered
   
34-179   Administration
   
34-180   Right to a hearing
Division 2: Nonconsent Tow Company Requirements
   
34-181   Applicability of Division 2
   
34-182   Towing company required to register; and inspection for compliance
with all applicable state laws, rules, and regulations
   
34-183   Maximum distance of nonconsent tows
   
34-184   Reports required
   
34-185   Removal of debris from accident scene
   
34-186   Prohibited at scene unless called
   
34-187   Solicitation
   
34-188   Towing vehicles containing hazardous materials, and notification
Division 3: Law Enforcement Purpose Tows
   
34-189   Applicability of Division 3
   
34-190   Contracted services
   
34-191   Fees for contracted services
   
34-192   Prohibited charges for law enforcement purpose tows
   
34-193   Driver designation
Division 4: Compliance with State Requirements
   
34-194   Compliance with state laws and regulations required
Division 5: Enforcement
   
34-195   Violation of ordinance and fines
   
34-196   Defense emergency situations
   
34-197   Defense pushing or towing without tow trucks
   
34-198—34-199   Reserved
Article VI: Ground Transportation for Hire
Division 1: General Provisions
   
34-200   Scope of article
   
34-201   Definitions
   
34-202   Operating licenses
   
34-203   Compliance certification
   
34-204   Revocation of operating license
   
34-205   Fees
   
34-206   Compliance with federal, state and municipal law
   
34-207   Insurance requirements
   
34-208   Driver qualifications
   
34-209   Inspection of records
   
34-210   Requirements for hailable service
   
34-211   Rates and fares for hailable service
   
34-212   Rules and regulations for non- motorized vehicles for hire
   
34-213   Transitional provisions
   
34-214   Enforcement
   
34-215   Criminal penalties
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§§ 34-1—34-15 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: BUSES
Cross-reference:
   Parking of buses limited to two hours, see §
22-162.1
   Right turns from bus lanes restricted, see §
22-71
   Smoking prohibited on buses, see §
29.5-2
§ 34-16 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9572, § 2, adopted February 25, 1986, repealed §
34-16, pertaining to smoking in or on buses, as derived from 1964 Code, § 34-
27. Provisions regulating smoking are set out in
Ch. 29.5 of this code.
§ 34-17 RADIOS, TAPE PLAYERS.
   No person shall play any radio, tape player or like device on any motorbus
within the city. This section shall not prevent the playing of radios and like
devices when the noise is reasonably reduced through the use of headphones or
earphones.
(1964 Code, § 34-27.1) (Ord. 8179, § 1, passed 9-23-1980)
§ 34-18 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9572, § 2, adopted Feb. 25, 1986, repealed §
34-18, pertaining to display of signs prohibiting smoking, as derived from 1964
Code, § 34-28. Provisions regulating smoking are set out in
Ch. 29.5 of this code.
§§ 34-19—34-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORTS
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 34-36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT GUIDE. Any person licensed to engage in the business of
furnishing a private motor vehicle escort for hire who personally escorts or
guides any funeral cortege or overwidth, overlength or overheight motor vehicle
or any person employed by another person licensed to engage in the business of
furnishing private motor vehicle escort service for hire.
   OFFICIAL POLICE OFFICER’S BADGE. A badge of the size, type and design
approved for the use of regular police officers.
   PRIVATE MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT AGENCY. Any person engaged in the business of
furnishing private motor vehicle escorts for hire which employs one or more
persons as employees, assistants, clerks or motor vehicle escort guides.
(1964 Code, § 34-48)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 34-37 APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require licensing of
or to prohibit regularly employed officers or deputies of the state department
of public safety, the county sheriff or the police department from escorting
funeral corteges or oversized, overlength or overwidth vehicles upon the
streets and roadways of the city when assigned as an official duty by their
respective departments.
(1964 Code, § 34-49)
§ 34-38 ESCORT SERVICE NOT MANDATORY.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring funeral
directors or any other persons conducting funerals to contract, hire or employ
any private motor vehicle escort service to guide or escort any funeral cortege
in the city.
(1964 Code, § 34-50)
§ 34-39 EQUIPMENT ON ESCORT VEHICLES; INSPECTION.
   (a)   A funeral escort guide, while actively engaged in furnishing an
escort, shall use either a two-wheel or three-wheel motorcycle which is in good
condition and which is equipped with two lamps thereon that display a blue
light visible from directly in front of the center thereof. These lamps shall
be in addition to those required by state law. It shall be unlawful for escort
vehicles to be equipped with a siren.
   (b)   All escort motorcycles shall be inspected prior to use at a time and
place designated by the chief of police. No additional equipment may be added
after such motorcycle inspection unless the motorcycle is reinspected and
approved before use. Any motor vehicle used in performing such escort service
shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or his or her
authorized representative.
(1964 Code, § 34-67) (Ord. 8286, § 3, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-40 ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS.
   No person engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle
escorts for hire or owner or employee of a private motor vehicle escort agency
shall distribute, present or give away any cards, handbills or printed matter
of any kind which bear the words “police,” “official” or “officer” in
conjunction with advertising an escort service. No advertisement shall state,
imply or falsely misrepresent that a private motor vehicle escort service is
required by the police department, the city or by any city ordinances.
(1964 Code, § 34-68)
§ 34-41 MANNER OF TRAVEL OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   Funeral processions shall travel as close to the right edge of the roadway
as practical and at a safe and prudent speed. A funeral procession shall not
enter or travel upon any roadway, expressway or freeway which has a posted
speed limit of 55 mph between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between
the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. The above
restriction shall not apply on a legal holiday. The funeral procession shall
obey all traffic laws while on a roadway, expressway or freeway which has a
posted speed limit of 55 mph.
(1964 Code, § 34-69) (Ord. 8286, § 4, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-42 CARRYING WEAPONS.
   No escort guide, except regularly employed officers or deputies of the
department of public safety, the county sheriff’s department of public safety,
the county sheriff’s department or the city police department, who are working
as off-duty escort guides, shall have on or about his or her person or escort
vehicle any offensive or defensive weapon declared to be unlawful by any
statutes of the state.
(1964 Code, § 34-77) (Ord. 8286, § 7, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-43 LIMITATION ON SERVICES OF ESCORT GUIDES.
   A motor vehicle escort guide shall not engage in any escort service other
than that of escorting a funeral procession, consisting of the hearse and
cortege, from the place of service to the place of interment. A motor vehicle
escort guide may escort overheight, overlength or overwidth vehicles or loads
as defined in the state traffic code, but only after application for each
individual escort has been made to the chief of police, who shall have the
authority to approve or disapprove the escort and if approval is granted such
approval shall designate the route and time to be upon such route.
(1964 Code, § 34-78)
§ 34-44 IDENTIFICATION OF CORTEGE; AUTHORITY OF GUIDES TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   (a)   All funeral corteges within the city must be properly identified as
such by having all vehicles in the cortege turn on their headlights.
   (b)   All vehicles in any unescorted funeral cortege shall obey all traffic
laws on every roadway within the city. All vehicles in a funeral cortege which
have been properly designated and which are being led by motor escort guides
shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except fire apparatus,
ambulances and police vehicles, at any roadway intersection within the city,
and such procession may be escorted through stop signs or signalized
intersections without stopping, but the drivers of such motor vehicles shall
exercise due regard for the safety of all approaching vehicles, and funeral
processions being escorted hereunder shall be subject at all times to the
control of police officers of the city; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to overheight, overlength or overwidth vehicles or loads as
defined in the state traffic code nor to the operation of such vehicles in the
city as such vehicles shall at all times be subject to the traffic laws of the
city.
   (c)   Funeral escort guides shall not stop traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or force or direct such traffic to move off the roadway,
except that oncoming traffic may be stopped at intersections and other places
to assist the cortege in making left turns.
(1964 Code, § 34-79) (Ord. 8286, § 8, passed 3-10-1981)
§§ 34-45—34-55 RESERVED.
DIVISION 2: BUSINESS LICENSE
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 34-56 REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of furnishing a private motor vehicle
escort for hire within the city without first having obtained a license
certificate therefor; provided, that persons engaged in such business who are
employed by a duly licensed private motor vehicle escort agency shall not be
required to be individually licensed.
(1964 Code, § 34-51)
§ 34-57 APPLICATION.
   Any person intending to conduct a private motor vehicle escort agency or
business or furnish a private motor vehicle escort in the city shall file with
the chief of police a written application duly signed and verified as follows.
   (a)   If the applicant is a person, the application shall be signed and
verified by such person, and if the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall be signed by each partner, and if the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall be signed by the chief executive officer of such corporation.
   (b)   The application shall state the full name, age and residence of the
licensee, and shall specify the trade name and the address or location from
which the business or agency will operate and for which the license certificate
is desired, and such further facts as may be required by the chief of police to
show the good character, competency and integrity of each person so signing the
application.
(1964 Code, § 34-52)
§ 34-58 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; RECOMMENDATION TO CITY MANAGER.
   Upon filing an application for a license certificate to engage in the
business of conducting a private motor vehicle escort agency or furnishing
private motor vehicle escorts, the chief of police shall make or cause to be
made such investigation as he or she may deem necessary to determine the
fitness of the applicant for a license. Then the chief of police shall within
ten days forward the application with his or her recommendations to the city
manager.
(1964 Code, § 34-53)
§ 34-59 FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED.
   In approving or disapproving any license certificate to engage in the
business of conducting private motor vehicle escorts, the city manager shall
consider the following factors:
   (a)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony, or on renewal of
license, for the violation of any of the provisions of this article, during the
year next preceding the filing of this application;
   (b)   Whether the applicant is of good moral character and has a reputation
for being a peaceable law-abiding citizen; and
   (c)   Such other lawful matters considered pertinent and proper in arriving
at a fair and lawful consideration with respect to such application for a
license.
(1964 Code, § 34-54)
§ 34-60 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION POLICY.
   (a)   Before a license certificate under this division shall be issued to
any owner or operator of any private motor vehicle escort agency as defined in
this article, or before the renewal of such license certificate shall be
granted, the holder of such license certificate shall be required to file with
the city secretary and thereafter keep in full force and effect a policy of
public liability and property damage insurance, to be executed by an insurance
company duly and legally authorized to do business in the state and performable
in the county, and to be approved by the city manager, insuring the general
public and the city against any loss or damage that may result to any person or
property from the operation of such motor vehicle escort service.
   (b)   In addition, before any such license certificate is issued the holder
of such license shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city
against any losses or claims arising out of the operation of such motor vehicle
escort service.
(1964 Code, § 34-55) (Ord. 8286, § 1, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-61 TERMS OF INSURANCE POLICY.
   The liability and property insurance policy required by the preceding
section shall be noncancelable and shall insure against any damage or loss
resulting from the operation of such escort agency including damage or loss
caused by the acts or omissions of each escort driver used by such motor
vehicle escort agency licensed under this division, and shall have limits of
not less than $300,000 for injuries resulting from any one accident, and
$50,000 for damage to property resulting from any one accident. Such insurance
shall be for the protection of passengers riding in an escorted funeral
procession, the general public, the city and the servants, agents and employees
of the motor vehicle escort agency. Such policy of insurance shall be for a
period of at least one year and the date of such policy shall coincide with the
date of the license issued under this division and shall contain a provision
for a continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof,
notwithstanding any recovery thereon.
(1964 Code, § 34-56) (Ord. 8286, § 2, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-62 WHEN ADDITIONAL INSURANCE REQUIRED; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO OBTAIN.
   If the city manager shall determine, after a hearing duly had, and after ten
days’ notice is given to a licensee under this division that any standard
policy of insurance so filed by such licensee has become impaired so as to
afford less protection to the public than when originally filed, he or she
shall require a new or an additional policy so as to bring the protection of
such insurance to its original amount, and the licensee shall, within ten days
after receiving written notice of such requirement, provide the required new or
additional policy, failing which the license of the licensee shall
automatically terminate.
(1964 Code, § 34-57)
§ 34-63 ISSUANCE; PAYMENT OF FEE.
   The city manager shall have authority to grant a license certificate to
engage in the business of conducting private motor vehicle escorts without
further investigation or to cause further investigation to be made before
granting such license or disapproving the application. Upon the granting of
such license by the city manager, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
present the approved application to the assessor-collector of taxes and upon
the payment of the proper license fee the assessor-collector of taxes shall
accordingly issue the proper license certificate on a form to be prescribed by
the assessor-collector of taxes.
(1964 Code, § 34-58)
§ 34-64 FEE; TRANSFER.
   The fee for any license granted under this division to a private motor
vehicle escort agency shall be the sum of $60 per annum, which sum shall be
paid before such license certificate is issued. Such license certificate shall
not be transferable from the person to whom it is issued to another person.
(1964 Code, § 34-59) (Ord. 8809, § 2, passed 5-10-1983)
§ 34-65 TERM; ISSUANCE NOT TO CREATE VESTED RIGHTS.
   No license granted under the terms of this division shall extend for a
period in excess of one year. No such license shall be deemed to grant a vested
or property right, but such license shall remain subject to the terms and
provisions of this division and subject to such future regulations as shall be
promulgated by the city council by ordinance and any investment made by a
licensee shall be made subject to this division.
(1964 Code, § 34-60)
§ 34-66 AGE RESTRICTION ON ISSUANCE.
   No license certificate to engage in the business of furnishing private motor
vehicle escorts shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age, nor shall
any person under 18 years of age be employed as an escort guide by any person
licensed to engage in the business of furnishing motor vehicle escort service
for hire.
(1964 Code, § 34-61)
§ 34-67 APPEAL FROM DENIAL.
   If the city manager shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under
this division, the action of the city manager shall be final unless the
applicant shall, within ten days after the refusal to grant such license, file
a written appeal with the city secretary, addressed to the city council,
requesting a hearing by the council upon the question as to whether or not his
or her application shall be granted. If such appeal is filed, the city manager
shall provide the council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with
reference to the application in question, including the written application,
together with the action of the city manager and the reasons for such action.
The city council shall, within 30 days, grant a hearing thereon to determine
the correctness of the action of the city manager, at which hearing the council
may make such investigation as it may see fit, whether or not all the pertinent
facts appear in the application. It shall be discretionary with the city
council as to whether or not a license shall be granted and such action as the
council may take thereof shall be final and conclusive.
(1964 Code, § 34-62)
§ 34-68 REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   If a private motor vehicle escort agency licensed under the provisions of
this division is not being conducted in accordance with the laws of the state
or this article, or is being conducted in violation of the laws of the state or
this article or that an investigation reveals that the licensee falsified his
or her application, the city manager may at any time give notice in writing to
the operator, licensee, manager or other person in control of the operation and
maintenance of such private motor vehicle escort agency that the permit or
license issued for the operation and maintenance of such private motor vehicle
escort agency has been revoked and cancelled. The notice of revocation and
cancellation shall become a final revocation and cancellation after the
expiration of ten days from the date of the service of same upon the operator,
licensee, manager or other person in charge, unless on or before the expiration
of such ten days the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge
shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city
council in which it is requested that the council grant him or her a hearing
upon the question whether or not the permit or license shall be cancelled and
revoked. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed in this section, shall
operate a stay or postponement of the revocation and cancellation of the permit
issued, until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make a
final adjudication. Such hearing shall be held within the 30 days after the
date of the filing of such appeal, and such action and judgment of the council,
after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to
all parties.
(1964 Code, § 34-63)
§ 34-69 POSTING AT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT; SURRENDER AFTER REVOCATION.
   Immediately upon the receipt of the license certificate issued by the city
under this division, the licensee named therein shall cause such license
certificate to be posted and at all times displayed in a conspicuous place in
the office or location given as the business address in the application. Such
license certificate shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by
the chief of police or an authorized representative of the police department.
No person holding such license certificate shall post such certificate or
permit such certificate to be posted upon premises other than those described
therein or to which it has been transferred pursuant to the provisions of this
division or knowingly alter, deface or destroy such license certificate. Every
license certificate shall be surrendered to the chief of police within 72 hours
after its terms shall have expired or after notice in writing to the holder
that such license has been revoked. Failure to comply with any provisions of
this section shall be deemed sufficient cause for the revocation of the
license.
(1964 Code, § 34-64)
§ 34-70 FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   With regard to all applicants for a license to conduct a private motor
vehicle escort agency or furnish private motor vehicle escorts, the police
department shall have the following functions, powers and duties:
   (a)   To investigate qualifications for fitness of all applicants; and
   (b)   To investigate and aid in the prosecution of all violations of this
article and cooperate in the prosecution of offenders before any court having
jurisdiction to hear same;
   (c)   To inspect and approve or disapprove the equipment and uniforms worn
by funeral escort officers;
   (d)   To inspect and approve or disapprove motor vehicle equipment used in
making escorts.
(1964 Code, § 34-66)
§§ 34-71—34-85 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: DRIVER’S PERMIT
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 34-86 REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall engage in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle
escorts for hire upon the streets of the city unless such person operating such
vehicle for hire shall have a valid escort driver’s permit issued by the city.
It shall be the duty of each operator of a motorcycle for hire to apply to the
city manager for an escort driver’s permit upon blanks to be furnished by the
city secretary, giving the name, age, present address, address and place of
employment during the past two years, with the reasons for leaving, and whether
or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or if he or she has a
police record. Such applicant shall likewise attach to his or her application
for an escort driver’s permit affidavits from two reputable citizens attesting
to the character of the applicant.
(1964 Code, § 34-70) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-87 INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION; APPEAL FROM DENIAL.
   This city manager is authorized and directed, in considering the application
for a city escort driver’s permit as provided by the preceding section, to make
such investigation as he or she may deem necessary to determine the fitness of
the applicant for a permit and if, in the city manager’s opinion, such
applicant is unfit to operate a vehicle for hire on the streets of the city, it
shall be the duty of the city manager to refuse such permit; provided, that
upon refusal of the city manager to approve such application, the applicant
may, within ten days thereafter, appeal to the city council which shall, within
30 days thereafter accord to such applicant a hearing as to whether or not such
permit shall be granted.
(1964 Code, § 34-71) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-88 PREREQUISITES AND RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
   (a)   No escort driver’s permit shall be issued to any driver of a vehicle
operated for hire until the police department shall have taken fingerprints and
received from the applicant a photograph of himself or herself.
   (b)   Each applicant for an escort driver’s permit shall possess and show a
valid state motor vehicle operator’s license.
   (c)   No city escort driver’s permit shall be issued to any person under the
age of 18 years.
(1964 Code, § 34-72) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-89 ISSUANCE; FEE; TRANSFER; EXPIRATION.
   After the application for an escort drivers permit has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this division, it shall be the duty of the
assessor-collector of taxes to issue an escort driver’s permit to such
applicant for which a fee of $1.25 shall be charged. The permit, when issued,
shall not be transferable; however, it shall be lawful for the holder of such
permit to use the same permit if he or she changes employment from one motor
vehicle escort agency to another. Every such permit shall expire at midnight on
December 31 of the calendar year in which issued.
(1964 Code, § 34-73) (Ord. 8286, § 6, passed 3-10-1981; Ord. 8809, § 3, passed
5-10-1983)
§ 34-90 CARRYING; EXHIBIT ON DEMAND.
   It shall be the duty of any operator engaged in furnishing escort service
for hire to have his or her city escort driver’s permit on or about his or her
person and shall show same to any city police officer upon demand.
(1964 Code, § 34-74) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-91 REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   The city manager, upon recommendation of the chief of police, shall have the
authority to revoke for cause any city escort driver’s permit issued under the
terms of this division; provided, however, that the permittee may within ten
days thereafter appeal to the city council, which shall, within 30 days
thereafter, accord to such permittee a hearing as to whether or not such permit
should be reinstated or revoked and the decision of the council in such
instance shall be final.
(1964 Code, § 34-75) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-92 CAUSES FOR REVOCATION.
   The following acts, among others, by the permittee are declared to be cause
for revocation, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (a)   Conviction of a felony or driving while under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs;
   (b)   Flagrant violations of the state or city traffic code;
   (c)   Unauthorized use of red lights;
   (d)   Exercising or attempting to exercise police powers not granted by this
article;
   (e)   Addition of equipment to uniform or motorcycle prohibited by this
article or other ordinances of the city or the statutes of the state which are
not authorized by the chief of police; and
   (f)   Falsifying an application for such escort driver’s permit.
(1964 Code, § 34-76) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§ 34-93 PERMIT NOT TO CONFER CIVIL IMMUNITY.
   No funeral escort guide shall, by virtue of any permit as such heretofore or
hereafter issued under this division or pursuant to any other law or ordinance
be deemed to be an officer, agent, employee or representative of the city while
engaging in any activity of any character whatsoever undertaken for private
hire, profit or reward or while performing any act done in the course of his or
her own business or affairs or while performing any act done or undertaken in
connection with or in furtherance of, any private employment, business or
undertaking for which such funeral escort guide is hired or engaged, nor shall
any such permit be construed to confer upon the holders any privilege or
immunity not expressly granted by this article other than the authority to make
such arrests as granted any other private citizen.
(1964 Code, § 34-80) (Ord. 8286, § 5, passed 3-10-1981)
§§ 34-94—34-110 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 15655, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 2003, repealed Art. IV, §§ 34-111 through
34-150, which pertained to taxicabs. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted
provisions designated as a new Art. VI to read as herein set out. See also the
Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion.
§§ 34-111—34-175 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: TOW TRUCKS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 12924, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 18, 1997, repealed Art. V, §§ 34-176
through 34-196, concerning wreckers, in its entirety and added new §§
34-176 through
34-192. Former §§ 34-176 through 34-196 derived from 1964 Code, §§ 39-1 through
39-21; Ord. 6494, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 1971; Ord. 7043, § 1, adopted August
12, 1974; Ord. 7682, §§ 1 through 4, adopted December 27, 1977; Ord. 7912, § 1,
adopted June 5, 1979; Ord. 8123, § 1, adopted July 1, 1980; Ord. 8557, §§ 2, 3,
adopted April 13, 1982; Ord. 9871, § 1, adopted May 19, 1987; Ord. 10033, §§ 3,
5, adopted December 22, 1987; Ord. 10634, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 12, 1990; Ord.
11692, adopted October 4, 1994.
   Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, adopted May 15, 2018, repealed Art. V, §§ 34-176
through 341-92, concerning wreckers, in its entirety and added new §§ 34-176
through 34-197, and renamed Art. V Tow Trucks. Former §§ 34-176 through 34-192
derived from Ord. 12924, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 18, 1997; Ord. 15573, §§ 1, 2,
adopted May 27, 2003; Ord. 15708, § 1, adopted September 30, 2003; Ord. 16011,
§§ 2, 3, adopted June 29, 2004; Ord. 16380, § 1, adopted April 19, 2005; and
Ord. 16664, § 1, adopted October 25, 2005. See also the Code Comparative Table.
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 34-176 PREAMBLE.
   (a)   It is the policy of the City of Fort Worth to ensure its ability to
efficiently procure towing and tow-related services as it relates to the
removal of wrecked, disabled and illegally parked vehicles from public streets
and other public property. In adopting
Chapter 34, Article V, Division 3, the city is ensuring that towing performed
in connection with a city contract is administered in an efficient manner that
helps protect the public's health and safety.
   (b)   Nothing in this article provides for the establishment of maximum
rates for non-consent private property tows. However, to protect the public's
safety and welfare, the city has adopted Divisions 2 and 4 of this article to
provide the minimum requirements with which nonconsent towing companies in the
City of Fort Worth must comply. Unless specifically provided for otherwise
herein, this article does not regulate consent tows, as defined herein.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-177 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section or as they may
otherwise be defined under state law governing the towing and storage of
vehicles, including but not limited to Tex. Transportation Code Chapters 2303
and 2308, as they may be amended from time to time.
   ACCIDENT. Any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled as
defined in this section.
   CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned
by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession,
custody, or a legal right to control the vehicle, including tows for the
repossession of vehicles. The term does not include a law enforcement purpose
tow, an incident management tow, or a private property tow.
   DISABLED. That status of any vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be
driven upon a public roadway as the result of some occurrence other than a
wreck, including, but not limited to, mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire,
or the elements or vandalism, so as to reasonably necessitate that such vehicle
be removed by a tow truck.
   DROP FEE. The fee charged for a private property tow while the towed vehicle
is still on the premises from which it is being towed.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.
      (1)   Any substance classified as a hazardous material under state law or
federal law or under a rule adopted pursuant to state or federal law; or
      (2)   A chemical, petroleum product, gas or other substance that, if
discharged or released, will or is likely to create an imminent danger to
individuals, property or the environment.
   INCIDENT. A traffic event that adversely affects normal traffic operations.
   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT TOW. Any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is
summoned to the scene of an accident or to an incident, including the removal
of a vehicle, commercial cargo, and debris from an accident or an incident.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSE TOW. Any tow of a vehicle, commercial cargo, or
debris in which the tow truck is summoned at the request of the police
department to remove a vehicle, commercial cargo, or debris for a law
enforcement purpose, as determined by the police department. This term includes
tows authorized under Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 545. The term also
includes an incident management tow, other than a driver-designated tow under
this article that results from an accident or incident to which a police
officer was dispatched and was present at the scene for any amount of time and
for which a tow was requested.
   NONCONSENT TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow,
including:
      (1)   A law enforcement purpose tow;
      (2)   A private property tow; and
      (3)   An incident management tow.
   OPERATE. To drive or to be in physical control of a tow truck.
   PARKING FACILITY. Public or private property used, wholly or partly, for
restricted or paid vehicle parking. The term includes:
      (1)   A restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted
parking facility; and
      (2)   A commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area
serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home that charges a fee for
parking, apartment complex, property governed by a property owners'
association, or government owned property leased to a private person,
including:
         a.   A portion of the right-of-way of a public roadway that is leased
by a governmental entity to the parking facility owner; and
         b.   The area between the facility's property line abutting a county
or municipal public roadway and the center line of the roadway's drainage way
or the curb of the roadway, whichever is farther from the facility's property
line.
   POLICE CHIEF. The chief of police of the Fort Worth Police Department and
any designees.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Fort Worth Police Department and any designees.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle authorized by a parking
facility owner without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
   PUBLIC ROADWAY. A public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public
way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
   TOW TRUCK. A motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical
device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another motor vehicle. The term
does not include:
      (1)   A motor vehicle owned and operated by a governmental entity,
including a public school district;
      (2)   A motor vehicle towing:
         a.   A race car;
         b.   A motor vehicle for exhibition; or
         c.   An antique motor vehicle.
      (3)   A recreational vehicle towing another vehicle;
      (4)   A motor vehicle used in combination with a tow bar, tow dolly, or
other mechanical device if the vehicle is not operated in the furtherance of a
commercial enterprise;
      (5)   A motor vehicle that is controlled or operated by a farmer or
rancher and used for towing a farm vehicle;
      (6)   A motor vehicle that:
         a.   Is owned or operated by an entity the primary business of which
is the rental of motor vehicles; and
         b.   Only tows vehicles rented by the entity;
      (7)   A truck-trailer combination that is owned or operated by a dealer
licensed under Tex. Occupations Code Chapter 2301 and used to transport new
vehicles during the normal course of a documented transaction in which the
dealer is a party and ownership or the right of possession of the transported
vehicle is conveyed or transferred; or
      (8)   A car hauler that is used solely to transport, other than in a
consent or nonconsent tow, motor vehicles as cargo in the course of a
prearranged shipping transaction or for use in mining, drilling, or
construction operations.
   TOW TRUCK BUSINESS. The business of towing, moving or removing vehicles
through the use of a tow truck for a commercial purpose.
   TOWING COMPANY. An individual, association, corporation, or other legal
entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow
trucks over a public roadway in this state but does not include a political
subdivision of this state.
   TILT BED/ROLL BACK CAR CARRIER. A motor vehicle designed and equipped as to
be capable of lifting another vehicle upon itself for the purpose of
transporting a motor vehicle that cannot be safely transported by a tow truck.
   VEHICLE. A device in, on, or by which a person or property may be
transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable
automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer but does not
include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail
or track.
   VEHICLE OWNER. A person:
      (1)   Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title
issued for the vehicle under Tex. Transportation Code Chapter 501, or Tex.
Parks and Wildlife Code Chapter 31, as applicable;
      (2)   In whose name the vehicle is titled under Tex. Transportation Code
Chapter 502, or Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code Chapter 31, as applicable, or a
member of the person's immediate family;
   (c)   Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement;
   (d)   Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under
the terms of a chattel mortgage; or
   (e)   Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled
to repossess the vehicle.
   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY. A garage, parking lot, or other facility that is
owned by a person other than a governmental entity, located no more than one
mile outside the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth, and used to store
at least ten vehicles each year and is operated by a person who holds a license
issued pursuant to Tex. Occupations Code Chapter 2303.
   WRECKED. The status of any vehicle that has been damaged as the result of
overturning or colliding with another vehicle or object so as to reasonably
necessitate that such vehicle be removed by a tow truck.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018; Ord. 25674-08-2022, § 1, passed 8-
23-2022, eff. 9-1-2022)
§ 34-178 ACCIDENTS COVERED.
   (a)   The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall also apply to
all accidents and incidents occurring on a public roadway, regardless of
whether or not the final resting place of a vehicle is upon a public roadway
immediately after the accident or incident.
   (b)   This section shall be construed to include those accidents or
incidents in which a vehicle, immediately before becoming wrecked or disabled,
was:
      (1)   Driven off a public roadway intentionally or unintentionally,
because of some real or perceived emergency;
      (2)   Driven off a public roadway maliciously, or with an intent to
commit suicide; or
      (3)   Driven, pushed or forced off a public roadway and the vehicle owner
or the driver of the vehicle is not present.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-179 ADMINISTRATION.
   The police chief shall administer and enforce this article. The city may
enter into a contract to delegate authority to administer all or part of this
article to a third-party vendor, other than: 1) any authority related to §
34-195 or 2) the right to choose which towing companies will perform towing
services for the city. Selection of a vendor shall be done in accordance with
the laws of the State of Texas. If the city enters into such a contract, the
contract shall specify the authority and responsibilities of the third-party
vendor or towing companies. Any responsibilities outlined in this article that
are not delegated to the third-party vendor or the towing companies through the
contract are retained by the police chief.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-180 RIGHT TO A HEARING.
   If a vehicle has been removed and placed in a vehicle storage facility
without the consent of the vehicle owner or operator, the vehicle owner or
operator may request a hearing pursuant to Tex. Occupations Code Chapter 2308,
to determine whether probable cause existed for the removal and storage of the
vehicle. All notices must be served on the City of Fort Worth Police
Department, Care of the Fort Worth City Secretary, 200 Texas Street, Fort
Worth, Texas 76102.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
DIVISION 2: NONCONSENT TOW COMPANY REQUIREMENTS
§ 34-181 APPLICABILITY OF DIVISION 2.
   Division 2 shall apply to all towing companies or any person or entity
engaged in the tow truck business that performs nonconsent tows within the City
of Fort Worth, including any towing company, or any person or entity that
performs law enforcement purpose tows for the city.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-182 TOWING COMPANY REQUIRED TO REGISTER; AND INSPECTION FOR COMPLIANCE
WITH ALL APPLICABLE STATE LAWS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   This section applies only to towing companies that perform nonconsent
tows in the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   No towing company shall operate a tow truck used for nonconsent tows
within the city limits without first registering with the city. The
registration shall expire on September 30 of each year. The registration fee
shall be $50 per year.
   (c)   Each registration shall be made in person at the office of the police
chief or at such other location that may be designated on a form to be provided
by the police department. Such registration shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of the towing company, the number and types of tow trucks to
be operated, the true owner of the towing company concerned, and a list of
property locations within the city that the towing company is authorized by a
property owner or agent to perform nonconsent tows.
   (d)   The police chief shall inspect all tow trucks to ensure compliance
with all applicable state laws, rules and regulations. The inspection fee for
each tow truck is $30. No inspection certificate to operate a tow truck within
the city shall be issued to a towing company until every tow truck proposed to
be used by that towing company complies with at least the minimum requirements
set by applicable state laws, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-183 MAXIMUM DISTANCE OF NONCONSENT TOWS.
   Nonconsent towed vehicles must be taken to a vehicle storage facility that
is:
   (a)   Within one mile of the corporate limits of the City of Fort Worth; and
   (b)   No more than 20 miles from the location from which the vehicle was
removed.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018; Ord. 25674-08-2022, § 2, passed 8-
23-2022, eff. 9-1-2022)
§ 34-184 REPORTS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Each towing company performing nonconsent tows of vehicles within the
city, will provide a weekly written report to the police department of all
vehicles towed as a nonconsent tow from any public roadway or parking facility,
during the previous one-week period, which shall include the following
information:
      (1)   Make, model and color of the vehicle towed;
      (2)   License number and/or V.I.N. of the vehicle;
      (3)   Location of the origin of the pull;
      (4)   Location of the destination of the pull;
      (5)   The date and time the pull was made; and
      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the party requesting the
service.
   (b)   In addition to providing a weekly written report, each towing company
towing vehicles within the city will provide the same information
telephonically or electronically to the police department immediately upon
leaving the scene of any nonconsent tow. Under no circumstances shall
notification exceed 45 minutes from the time the tow truck leaves the scene of
any nonconsent tow originating within the city.
   (c)   Written reports shall be provided electronically in the manner
designated by the police chief. Telephonic notification shall be provided to
the telephone number designated by the police chief. Information on where and
how to submit electronically or telephonically shall be published on the police
department's website and shall be provided to each towing company at the time
the towing company completes its annual registration.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-185 REMOVAL OF DEBRIS FROM ACCIDENT SCENE.
   Each towing company called to an accident or incident, that provides a
towing service, shall completely remove all resulting wreckage and debris from
the public roadway before departing from the accident or incident site. Removal
of wreckage will not be considered completed by merely sweeping debris to the
curbline. All such wreckage shall be removed from the accident or incident site
completely.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-186 PROHIBITED AT SCENE UNLESS CALLED.
   No person shall drive a tow truck to or near the site of an accident or
incident within the city unless such person has been called to the site by the
owner or operator of the vehicle, by his or her authorized representative, or
by the police department. A towing company whose assistance has been requested
by the owner of a disabled or wrecked vehicle, shall notify the police
department electronically or telephonically, in the same manner in which
required reports are made pursuant to this article, of his or her intention to
be present on the scene, prior to proceeding to the site of the disabled or
wrecked vehicle.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-187 SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person shall solicit in any manner directly or indirectly, on the
public roadways of the city, at or near an accident or incident site within the
city, any business regarding wrecked or disabled vehicles regardless of whether
the solicitation is for the purpose of removing, repairing, wrecking, storing,
trading or purchasing such vehicle.
   (b)   The presence of any person engaged in the tow truck business or other
businesses for which solicitation is hereby prohibited, either as owner,
operator, employee or agent on any public roadway at or near the site of an
accident or incident within one hour after the happening of such accident or
incident shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this
section.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-188 TOWING VEHICLES CONTAINING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, AND NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   Towing company must be in compliance with all applicable federal and
state laws, rules, and regulations regarding the transportation of hazardous
materials in order to tow a vehicle which contains or is reasonably believed to
contain hazardous materials.
   (b)   In the event a towing company seeks to tow a motor vehicle or trailer
containing, or reasonably believed to contain, hazardous materials, and the
materials have leaked or appear to be leaking, the towing company shall
immediately advise the Fort Worth Fire Department of the leakage. The motor
vehicle or trailer will not be moved until inspected by the fire department.
The fire department will be the sole authority in determining the appropriate
precautions to be taken prior to authorizing the motor vehicle or trailer to be
moved by the towing company.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
DIVISION 3: LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSE TOWS
§ 34-189 APPLICABILITY OF DIVISION 3.
   Division 3 shall apply to all towing companies or any person or entity that
manages or performs law enforcement purpose tows for the city. Any entity
contracted with the city under this division must comply with Division 2 and
Division 3 of this article.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-190 CONTRACTED SERVICES.
   (a)   Management and execution of all law enforcement purpose tows and
related storage at vehicle storage facilities shall be undertaken pursuant to
one or more contracts, subcontracts, or both.
   (b)   Contracted services with the city must be procured in accordance with
applicable state law. The city enters into these contracts as a market
participant to facilitate the efficient procurement of needed services and to
promote safety and efficiency.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-191 FEES FOR CONTRACTED SERVICES.
   All fees for contracted services shall be established by contract including
the maximum rates, fees, and costs.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-192 PROHIBITED CHARGES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSE TOWS.
   No entity may charge or attempt to charge a fee related to a law enforcement
purpose tow, or a fee related to storage of a towed vehicle at vehicle storage
facilities under this division that is:
   (a)   In excess of the fee established by contract;
   (b)   For a service not performed or equipment not used; or
   (c)   Not authorized by the laws of the State of Texas or authorized by city
ordinance.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-193 DRIVER DESIGNATION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to a tow from an accident or incident at
which the driver or owner of the vehicle is physically present.
      (1)   A police officer at an accident or incident who determines that a
vehicle needs to be towed from the scene shall:
         a.   Allow the driver of the vehicle to designate a towing company,
automotive repair shop, automobile club, or automobile dealer to remove the
vehicle;
         b.   Inform the driver that towing fees for driver-designated towing
companies are not regulated by the city and that the responding company is
required by state law and by ordinance to hold an incident management tow
license; and
         c.   Assist, if requested, the driver in contacting the entity
designated under this division.
      (2)   If the driver does not make an election under division (a)(1) of
this section for any reason the police officer at an accident or incident scene
shall inform the driver of the vehicle that a towing company contracted to
perform towing services for the city will be contacted to remove the vehicle.
      (3)   The police officer at an accident or incident scene shall attempt
to obtain an affirmative election from the vehicle driver under this section.
Failure to make an affirmative election shall be deemed an election to use a
contracted towing company under division (a)(2) of this section.
      (4)   An entity towing a vehicle under division (a)(1) must be authorized
in accordance with state law to perform incident management tows. Towing a
vehicle without such authorization shall constitute a violation of this
article. Each tow performed without authorization is a separate violation.
      (5)   The requirements of this provision allowing for driver designation
do not apply if the vehicle:
         a.   Is operated by a person an officer arrests for an alleged offense
and the officer is required by law to take the person into custody; or
         b.   Is, in the opinion of the officer, a hazard, interferes with a
normal function of a governmental agency, or because of a catastrophe,
emergency, or unusual circumstance is imperiled. A hazard may include, but is
not limited to, a wrecked or disabled vehicle that is blocking a lane of
traffic or otherwise impeding traffic on a public roadway.
   (b)   A driver designation of a towing company in accordance with divisions
(a)(1) and (a)(4) of this provision is not considered a law enforcement purpose
tow.
   (c)   A tow under division (a)(2) (driver does not make designation) or
division (a)(5) (driver designation is not available) is considered a law
enforcement purpose tow and is subject to the requirements of this division and
applicable city towing contracts.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
DIVISION 4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REQUIREMENTS
§ 34-194 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   (a)   All individuals and entities engaged in the tow truck business within
the City of Fort Worth shall at all times comply with all laws, rules, and
regulations pertaining to towing operations, insurance requirements, and
minimum safety standards as adopted and amended from time to time by the State
of Texas, regarding the operation of tow trucks for nonconsent tows. This
requirement shall include but is not limited to Texas laws, rules, and
regulations related to private-property tows, drop fees and procedures, and
parking facility signage requirements.
   (b)   All vehicle storage facilities shall at all times comply with all
laws, rules, and regulations, as adopted and amended from time to time by the
State of Texas, pertaining to vehicle storage operations when receiving
vehicles in connection with non-consent tows. This requirement shall include
but is not limited to Texas laws, rules, and regulations related to fees, sign
requirements, notice requirements, reporting requirements, and access
requirements.
   (c)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to eliminate or reduce any
requirement under the laws, rules, and regulations of the State of Texas that
apply to an individual or entity engaged in the tow truck business or to a
vehicle storage facility.
   (d)   An individual or entity engaged in the tow truck business that
violates a state law, rule, or regulation or a provision of this article
related to nonconsent towing commits a violation under this article.
   (e)   The owner or operator of a vehicle storage facility that is in
violation of a state law, rule, or regulation or a provision of this article
related to the operation of a vehicle storage facility commits a violation
under this article.
   (f)   The purpose of this section is solely to allow the city to enforce the
laws, rules, and regulations of the State of Texas to ensure the safety of its
citizens. This section is not regulatory in nature. It does not and is not
intended to impose any additional regulatory requirements on an individual or
entity engaged in the tow truck business.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
DIVISION 5: ENFORCEMENT
§ 34-195 VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE AND FINES.
   A violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-196 DEFENSE EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to noncompliance with this article that
the person in question reasonably believed that he necessarily must act
immediately to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an
incident or accident.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 34-197 DEFENSE PUSHING OR TOWING WITHOUT TOW TRUCKS.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under this article that a
person pushed or towed a vehicle with a vehicle other than a tow truck if the
person can demonstrate that such pushing or towing was done in a safe manner,
and did not reasonably require use of a tow truck.
(Ord. 23222-05-2018, § 1, passed 5-15-2018)
§§ 34-198—34-199 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: GROUND TRANSPORTATION FOR HIRE
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, adopted June 28, 2016, repealed and replaced §§ 34-
200 through 34-214 and repealed §§ 34-215 through 34- 349. Former §§ 34-200
through 34-349 derived from Ord. 21389-08-2014, § 1, adopted August 19, 2014
and Ord. 21986-12-2015, § 3, adopted December 8, 2016. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34-200 SCOPE OF ARTICLE.
   (a)   This article governs the operation of all vehicle for hire services in
the corporate limits of the city.
   (b)   This article does not apply to a vehicle for hire service or to a
person operating a vehicle for hire service that is:
      (1)   Transporting a person from a point outside the corporate limits of
the city to a destination inside the corporate limits of the city if the
vehicle for hire leaves the corporate limits of the city without receiving a
new passenger inside the corporate limits of the city and the vehicle for hire
service is licensed by another governmental entity;
      (2)   Operated under state or federal authority unless subject to the
city's regulatory authority; or
      (3)   Operated by a funeral home in the performance of funeral services.
   (c)   Nothing in this article shall excuse a vehicle for hire service from
complying with the rules, regulations and fees required by the Dallas-Fort
Worth International Airport Board. A vehicle for hire service's compliance with
the rules, regulations and fees required by the Dallas-Fort Worth International
Airport Board shall not excuse the vehicle for hire service from complying with
this article.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-201 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. The area of Fort Worth bounded on the east by I-
35W; on the south by a line one-half block south of Vickery Boulevard and
extending west to the centerline of I-30; on the west by a line extending north
and south with the east property line of the City of Fort Worth Water Treatment
Plant to West Tenth Street and along West Tenth Street to the Clear Fork of the
Trinity River and along the Clear Fork to the Trinity River; on the north by
the center of the Trinity River to the extension of Jones Street and thereafter
by Bluff Street, as set forth in
Appendix A, to the City Code, Zoning Regulations.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Fort Worth.
   COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. A sworn and notarized certification signed by an
applicant for an operating license or a licensee.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the city's transportation and public works
department.
   DRIVER. Any individual who drives or operates a vehicle for hire in the
corporate limits of the city to provide vehicle for hire services.
   GROUND TRANSPORTATION COORDINATOR or COORDINATOR. An employee of the ground
transportation office designated by the director to administer and enforce the
ground transportation program.
   GROUP CYCLE. A non-motorized vehicle with the carrying capacity of 16
passengers operating on a pre-arranged and predetermined schedule with fixed
pickup and destination points.
   HAILABLE SERVICE. A motorized vehicle for hire service that can be
immediately summoned by a passenger communicating in person with the driver of
the vehicle.
   HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE. A chauffeured non-motorized vehicle drawn by a horse
and used to transport persons for hire that typically operates in designated
areas or on approved routes.
   LICENSEE. A person, association or corporation that is licensed to operate a
vehicle for hire service under this article.
   MOTORIZED VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Every vehicle for hire that is self-propelled.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Every vehicle for hire that is propelled by
a human or an animal, including but not limited to group cycles, horse-drawn
carriages, and pedicabs.
   OPERATING LICENSE. A license issued by the city authorizing a vehicle for
hire service to operate within the corporate limits of the city.
   PEDICAB. A non-motorized vehicle with three or more wheels propelled by
human power or human-assisted power with seating for one or more passengers.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision,
agency, trust, partnership, or two or more persons having joint or common
economic interest.
   STREET. Any street, alley, lane, right-of-way or highway within the
corporate limits of the city.
   SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR OWNERSHIP. Any business entity that is owned or
controlled by 51% or more of the same persons who own or control another
business entity.
   TAXIMETER. A device that mechanically or electronically computes and
registers in dollars and cents for viewing by the passenger, the fare based
upon the distance traveled, the time the vehicle for hire is engaged, or any
other basis for charges which are specified in the rates of fares set by the
city council for hailable vehicle for hire services.
   VEHICLE. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property
on a public street within the corporate limits of the city.
   VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Every motorized or non-motorized vehicle that is
chauffeured that transports passengers over city streets for a fare or
compensation. The term VEHICLE FOR HIRE shall not include:
      (1)   Vehicles operated by a transportation authority or transit
authority in accordance with state or federal law;
      (2)   Vehicles involved in an organized car pool not available to the
general public;
      (3)   A vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise, grant of
privilege or permit issued by the city under its authority outside of this
article; or pursuant to permission duly granted by proper authority of the city
under its authority outside of this article for a vehicle to operate over a
regular route upon a set schedule; a vehicle being operated as a chartered bus
not available to the general public and under a contract to carry 12 or more
passengers; or any vehicle that is not available to the general public;
      (4)   Vehicles being used as ambulances; or
      (5)   Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by the person who
drives the vehicle, unless such a vehicle is transporting persons for
compensation.
   VEHICLE FOR HIRE SERVICE. The business of offering transportation to
customers in one or more vehicles for hire in exchange for a fee or
compensation.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-202 OPERATING LICENSES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a vehicle for
hire in the corporate limits of the city unless the driver and vehicle for hire
are operating under a valid operating license.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a person to employ, permit or allow another
to drive, operate or cause to be operated any vehicle for hire in the corporate
limits of the city unless that person is a licensee in possession of a valid
operating license.
   (c)   Any person desiring to operate a vehicle for hire service in the
corporate limits of the city shall submit an application for an operating
license on a form provided by the ground transportation coordinator. The
applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed
vehicle for hire service or who will own, control, or operate the digital
network or application through which drivers provide the proposed vehicle for
hire service. No application shall be considered for approval unless it meets
all the requirements of this article. Each application must contain the
following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, if a natural person, or, if
a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its
principal place of business and the names of all its officers and directors
together with their respective business addresses, as well as a copy of the
articles of incorporation, the trade name, if any, under which the applicant
proposes to operate and the address of the place or places of business from
which the applicant proposes to operate;
      (2)   A nonrefundable operating license fee must be submitted with the
application; and
      (3)   The compliance certification required by this article.
   (d)   Upon receipt of a completed application for an operating license in
compliance with this article and payment of the required fee, the ground
transportation coordinator shall issue an operating license to the applicant,
unless the applicant is prohibited by this article from receiving an operating
license.
   (e)   Except as provided in § 34-213, an operating license shall commence on
the date of issuance and shall expire two years from the date of issuance. A
licensee shall apply for a new operating license at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date of the operating license.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-203 COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION.
   (a)   A compliance certification shall be submitted to the ground
transportation coordinator with each application for an operating license and
one year after the issuance of each operating license.
   (b)   A compliance certification shall contain the following language:
      (1)   I certify that within the past 12 months, the undersigned has
conducted a national criminal background and driver's license check on each
driver who will operate a vehicle for hire under the operating license to
verify that the driver meets the qualifications in
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code.
      (2)   I certify that the undersigned will conduct a national criminal
background and driver's license check before allowing any new driver to operate
a vehicle for hire under the operating license who has become associated with
the undersigned since the last compliance certification to verify that the
driver meets the qualifications in
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code.
      (3)   I certify that the undersigned shall not allow any person to
operate a vehicle for hire under the operating license if the person does not
meet the qualifications in
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code.
      (4)   I certify that within the past 60 days, the undersigned has
verified that all vehicles that will operate as a vehicle for hire under the
operating license are covered by an insurance policy that meets the
requirements of
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code and comply with the vehicle inspection
and emission testing requirements of the State of Texas.
      (5)   I certify that before allowing any new vehicle to operate as a
vehicle for hire under the operating license that has become associated with
the undersigned since the last compliance certification, the undersigned shall
verify that the vehicle is covered by an insurance policy that meets the
requirements of
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code and complies with the vehicle
inspection and emission testing requirements of the State of Texas.
      (6)   I certify that the undersigned shall not allow any vehicle to
operate as a vehicle for hire under the operating license if the vehicle is not
covered by an insurance policy that meets the requirements of
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code, or the vehicle does not comply with
the vehicle inspection and emission testing requirements of the State of Texas.
      (7)   I hereby certify that the undersigned shall comply with all
requirements of
Chapter 34, Article VI, of the city code and federal, state and municipal laws
in providing vehicle for hire services in the corporate limits of the city.
   (c)   A licensee commits an offense and the operating license is subject to
revocation in accordance with the provisions of this article if the licensee
knowingly fails to submit a compliance certification to the ground
transportation coordinator one year after the issuance of an operating license.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016; Ord. 22489-11-2016,
§ 1, passed 11-1-2016, eff. 11-4-2016)
§ 34-204 REVOCATION OF OPERATING LICENSE.
   (a)   Prior to revocation of an operating license, the director shall send
the licensee written notice of any violation by certified mail, return receipt
requested. A licensee shall have 30 days from receipt of a written notice of a
violation to provide written proof to the director that the licensee did not
violate this article as set forth in subsection (b). Failure of the licensee to
submit a written response to the director as required by this subsection shall
result in revocation of the operating license.
   (b)   The director shall have the authority to revoke a licensee's operating
licensee if a licensee:
      (1)   Fails to submit a compliance certification as required by this
article;
      (2)   Fails to perform a national background check and driver's license
check as required by this article;
      (3)   Fails to verify that a vehicle is covered by an insurance policy
and meets the state requirements for vehicle inspection and emission testing as
required by this article; or
      (4)   Knowingly allows a driver or vehicle to operate in violation of
this article.
   (c)   An operating license that is revoked shall be of no force and effect
from and after the date of revocation.
   (d)   A licensee whose operating license is revoked in accordance with this
article will not be granted an operating license before the expiration of 24
months from the date of revocation.
   (e)   A business entity that has substantially similar ownership to a
licensee whose operating license has been revoked in accordance with this
article, will not be granted an operating license before the expiration of 24
months from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-205 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees applicable to this
article which shall be on file in city secretary's office.
   (b)   Each licensee shall pay the operating license fee as approved by city
council before the issuance of an operating license. Fees may be pro-rated for
any partial period for which an operating license is issued. The ground
transportation coordinator shall provide each licensee with written notice of
the due date for any pro-rated fees. A licensee shall pay the pro-rated fees by
the due date.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-206 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAW.
   Licensees and drivers shall comply with all federal, state and municipal
laws while providing vehicle for hire services.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-207 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Vehicles for hire that are subject to Chapter 1954 of the Tex.
Insurance Code must comply with the requirements of that chapter at all times.
   (b)   Vehicles for hire that are not subject to Chapter 1954 of the Tex.
Insurance Code must provide and maintain at all times insurance coverage that
meets the minimum requirements of Chapter 1954 of the Tex. Insurance Code, or
the requirements set forth in subsection (c).
   (c)   A vehicle for hire that is not subject to Chapter 1954 of the Tex.
Insurance Code or elects to not maintain the insurance coverage meeting the
requirements of Chapter 1954 of the Tex. Insurance Code, shall have in force,
24 hours, seven days a week the amount and character of insurance coverage for
vehicles for hire as required by this subsection.
      (1)   The minimum insurance required under this subsection must:
         a.   Be obtained from a carrier that is admitted and licensed to
transact insurance in the State of Texas or an eligible surplus lines insurer
authorized under the laws of the State of Texas;
         b.   Be written on an occurrence basis;
         c.   Cover the vehicle for hire and any driver of the vehicle for
hire;
         d.   Name the City of Fort Worth as an additional primary insured;
         e.   Provide minimum coverage in an amount no less than $500,000
combined single limit liability (CSL) per occurrence;
         f.   Provide that all claims will be paid on a first dollar basis by
the insurance provider;
         g.   Not be obtained from an assigned risk pool; and
         h.   Not contain policy exclusions that would change or limit coverage
for passengers entering or exiting the vehicle.
      (2)   All liability insurance coverage must include a rider that provides
that at all levels of coverage there must be notification to the city in
writing not less than 30 days before canceling or making a material change in
the policy.
      (3)   A driver or licensee of a vehicle for hire shall not have
operational control in any insurance company providing coverage to a vehicle
for hire utilized by the driver or licensee.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-208 DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   To qualify as a driver, a person must:
      (1)   Hold a valid driver's license or operator's license issued by any
state of the United States, Washington D.C., or any territory of the United
States;
      (2)   Not be under indictment, have charges pending, have been convicted,
or have been placed on probation or deferred adjudication for the following
offenses:
         a.   Criminal homicide as described in Tex. Penal Code Chapter 19;
         b.   Aggravated kidnapping as described in Tex. Penal Code § 20.04;
         c.   An offense involving trafficking of persons as described in Tex.
Penal Code Chapter 20A;
         d.   Continuous sexual abuse of a young child or children as described
in Tex. Penal Code § 21.02;
         e.   Indecency with a child as described in Tex. Penal Code § 21.11;
         f.   Improper relationship between educator and student as described
in Tex. Penal Code § 21.12;
         g.   Sexual assault as described in Tex. Penal Code § 22.011;
         h.   Aggravated sexual assault as described in Tex. Penal Code §
22.021;
         i.   Sale or purchase of a child as described in Tex. Penal Code §
25.08;
         j.   Aggravated robbery as described in Tex. Penal Code § 29.03;
         k.   Sexual performance by a child as described in Tex. Penal Code §
43.25;
         l.   Employment harmful to children as described in Tex. Penal Code §
43.251;
         m.   Possession or promotion of child pornography as described in Tex.
Penal Code § 43.26;
         n.   Electronic transmission of certain visual material depicting a
minor as described in Tex. Penal Code § 43.261;
         o.   Intoxication manslaughter as described in Tex. Penal Code §
49.08;
         p.   Criminal attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit any
offense described in subsections (a)(2)a. through (a)(2)o.; and
         q.   An offense under the laws of another state, federal law or
another country in which the elements of the offense under the laws of that
state, federal law or country are substantially similar to the elements of an
offense listed in subsections (a)(2)a. through (a)(2)p.;
      (3)   Except as provided by subsection (2), not be under indictment, have
charges pending or within the previous seven years have been convicted of,
released or discharged from probation, parole or deferred adjudication for any
felony offense as defined by the laws of this state, another state, federal law
or the law of another country;
      (4)   Except for an offense that is punishable by a fine only, not be
under indictment, have charges pending or within the previous three years have
been convicted of, released or discharged from probation, parole or deferred
adjudication for any misdemeanor offense as defined by the laws of this state,
another state, federal law or the laws of another country;
      (5)   Within the previous three years, not have been convicted of or
placed on deferred adjudication or deferred disposition for an offense
involving the operation of a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding 100 miles per
hour;
      (6)   In any ten year period, not have been convicted of or placed on
probation or deferred adjudication for three or more offenses in which the
elements of the offense involve the operation of a motor vehicle, boat, or
aircraft while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
      (7)   Not be required to register as a sexual offender under the laws of
this state, another state, federal law or the laws of another country; and
      (8)   Not have been convicted of, or placed on deferred adjudication or
deferred disposition within the previous three years for more than three moving
traffic violations arising out of separate transactions within any 12 month
period.
   (b)   A driver shall not operate a vehicle for hire for the purpose of
providing vehicle for hire services if the driver does not meet the driver
qualifications in this section.
   (c)   A licensee shall not intentionally, knowingly or recklessly allow a
person to operate a vehicle for hire to provide vehicle for hire services if
the person does not meet the driver qualifications in this section.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-209 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   (a)   The city may make a written request to a licensee to inspect the
licensee's records relating to a driver or the licensee if the city receives a
complaint or information that a driver or licensee does not meet the
requirements of this article.
   (b)   A licensee shall make the requested records available for inspection
by the city at a location within the corporate limits of the city, within ten
calendar days of the licensee receiving a written request from the city.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-210 REQUIREMENTS FOR HAILABLE SERVICE.
   No person shall provide hailable service unless:
   (a)   A taximeter is installed in the vehicle that accurately calculates the
rate of fare; and
   (b)   The name of the licensee and rate information is permanently displayed
on the outside of the rear door or front door, in letters not less than two and
one-half inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths inch wide.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-211 RATES AND FARES FOR HAILABLE SERVICE.
   (a)   All persons providing hailable service shall comply with this section.
   (b)   No person providing hailable service shall charge a fare that exceeds
the following maximum rates:
      (1)   General fare:
         a.   Initial meter drop: $2.25.
         b.   Each one-ninth mile: $0.20.
         c.   Traffic delay per one through one-half minutes: $0.45.
         d.   Each extra passenger (up to manufacturer's rated seating
capacity): $2.00.
      (2)   Gasoline surcharge:
         a.   A gasoline surcharge may be added to the fare when the average
weekly retail price of regular grade gasoline in the State of Texas exceeds
$2.00 per gallon as determined by the United States Department of Energy,
Energy Information Administration.
         b.   The gasoline surcharge will be calculated in $0.50 increments and
applied per trip. For every $0.50 increase or decrease in the average price per
gallon of gasoline above the $2.00 threshold, the per trip surcharge fee will
be adjusted $0.50 up or down to reflect the change in the average gasoline
price as shown by the following chart:
 
Average price of gasoline (per gallon)        Amount of surcharge (per trip)
$2.00 or less                                 No surcharge
$2.01 to $2.50                                $0.50
$2.51 to $3.00                                $1.00
$3.01 to $3.50                                $1.50
Each additional $0.50 increase in the average Additional $0.50 per trip
per gallon price of gasoline
 
   (c)   A flat rate of $40.00 may be charged for a trip originating in the
Central Business District and terminating at the Dallas-Fort Worth
International Airport, provided that such flat rate is not in excess of the
maximum meter rate.
   (d)   No person shall demand an additional charge for luggage, bags or
parcels being carried by a passenger or passengers.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a vehicle providing hailable
service from charging a rate or fare that is less than the maximum amounts
allowed by this section.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-212 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (a)   The director shall have the authority to establish rules governing the
location, routes and operating hours of non-motorized vehicles for hire.
   (b)   Before adopting, amending or abolishing a rule, the director shall
hold a public hearing on the proposal.
   (c)   The director shall fix the time and place of the hearing, and shall
provide notice of the hearing in accordance with the Open Meetings Act,
(Chapter 551, Tex. Government Code, as amended). In addition, the director
shall notify each licensee of the hearing using the licensee's last known
address on file with the ground transportation coordinator. The licensee's
failure to receive notice of the hearing shall not invalidate any rule
established by the director. A copy of each rule shall be on file in the city
secretary's office.
   (d)   After the public hearing, the director shall notify each licensee of
the director's action and shall post an order, adopting, amending or abolishing
a rule on the official bulletin board at City Hall and on the city's website
for a period of not fewer than ten calendar days. The order becomes effective
immediately upon expiration of the ten calendar day posting period.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate a ruled adopted by the
director in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-213 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by this article, a valid operating
license that was issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall
continue to be valid until the operating license expires.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by this article, a licensee who holds a
valid operating license that was issued prior to the effective date of this
ordinance shall not be limited to the number of vehicles for hire specified in
the operating license. The licensee may operate an unlimited number of vehicles
for hire under the operating license as long as the licensee complies with the
remaining provisions of this article for each vehicle for hire operated under
the operating license.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-214 ENFORCEMENT.
   The director, the director's designee, and the ground transportation
coordinator are primarily responsible for the enforcement of this article and
are authorized to issue warning and citations to any person violating this
article. The Fort Worth police department, the Fort Worth city marshal's
office, or any other peace officer shall also have the authority to enforce
this article and are authorized to issue warnings and citations to any person
violating this article.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
§ 34-215 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   A violation of any provision of this article is a Class C misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each separate occurrence of a
violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   If an offense defined under this article does not include a culpable
mental state, then a culpable mental state is not an element of the offense and
the offense shall be one of strict liability.
   (c)   The issuance of a citation shall not limit the director's authority to
revoke an operating license or the city's ability to pursue civil remedies as
provided by state law.
(Ord. 22308-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-28-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
CHAPTER 35: WATER AND SEWERS
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   METERS
      
III.   CHARGES
      
IV.   RESERVED
      
V.   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
      
VI.   LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONSERVATION
      
VII.   INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
      
VIII.   RECLAIMED WATER
Charter reference:
   Authority of city manager relative to city waterworks department, see
Ch. VIII, § 1
   Authority of council to acquire adequate water supply within or without
city, see
Ch. XXVII, § 10
   Waterworks department, see
Ch. XIV, § 1
Cross-reference:
   Cable television, see
Ch. 8
   Department of transportation and public works, see §§
2-146 et seq.
   Floodplain provisions, see §§
7-301 et seq.
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Subdivision ordinance, see
Ch. 31
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Statutory reference:
   Authority of cities with respect to city-owned utilities generally, see Tex.
Local Government Code Chs. 551 through 580
   Powers of cities relating to utilities, see Tex. Local Government Code Chs.
551 through 580
   Purity of water supply, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 10
   Sanitary requirements of state law as to construction and operation of
municipal water and sewage disposal plants, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, §§ 11
through 13, 20
   Water delivered to common carriers, see V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 22
Section
Article I: In General
   
35-1   Definitions
   
35-2   Reserved
   
35-3   When dwellings required to have kitchen sink and flush rim water closet
   
35-4   Construction, maintenance of water lines and services
   
35-5   Replacement of sewer mains at time of construction of buildings
   
35-6, 35-7   Reserved
   
35-8   Payment of sewer charges prerequisite to collection for water services
   
35-9   Notice to make sewer connection
   
35-10   Liability for usage; discontinuance of service for failure to pay
claims
   
35-11   Permit required to turn water on or off at street; exception
   
35-12   Supplying water for use on other premises
   
35-13   Unlawful extension of water and sewer lines
   
35-14   Right of entry for inspection
   
35-15   Reserved
   
35-16   When separate connections permitted
   
35-17   Unauthorized taps, connections
   
35-18   Use of fire hydrants
   
35-19   Injuring, tampering with water or sewer lines
   
35-20   Provisions incorporated into consumer contracts
   
35-21   Reservation of right by city
   
35-22   Dams, embankments, fills across watercourses
   
35-23   Emergency authority
   
35-24   Adequacy of supply
   
35-25   Temporary discontinuance for construction, maintenance or emergency
reasons
   
35-26   Nonessential water use restrictions
   
35-27—35-35   Reserved
Article II: Meters
   
35-36   Generally
   
35-37   Separate meter required
   
35-38   Purchase; repairs
   
35-39   Monthly readings; customer charges; straight connections
   
35-40   Bypassing meters
   
35-41—35-55   Reserved
Article III: Charges
Division 1: Generally
   
35-56   Water and sewer rates within city
   
35-57   Definitions
   
35-57.1   Fire lines and fire protection systems; charges; discontinuance and
restoration of service
   
35-57.2   Water meters
   
35-57.3   Reduction and/or enlargement of water meters; charges
   
35-57.4   Water tap connections
   
35-57.5   Sewer tap connections
   
35-57.6   Deep sewer
   
35-57.7   Water and sewer taps in unimproved streets
   
35-58   Assessment front footage charges for service connection
   
35-58.1   Water and wastewater system facility access fees
   
35-59   Rates for public quarters on military installations
   
35-60   Uses outside city
   
35-61   Deposit required
   
35-62   Estimation when meter defective
   
35-63   Payable and delinquent accounts
   
35-64   Use of security deposits
   
35-65   Security deposit refunds
Division 2: Water and Wastewater Impact Fees
Subdivision I: General Provisions
   
35-66   Short title
   
35-67   Purpose
   
35-68   Authority
   
35-69   Definitions
   
35-69.1   Establishment, composition and functions of capital improvements plan
advisory committee for water and wastewater impact fees
   
35-70   Applicability
   
35-70.1   Impact fee as condition of development approval
   
35-70.2   Land use assumptions
   
35-70.3   Impact fees per service unit
   
35-70.4   Assessment of impact fees
   
35-70.5   Computation and collection of impact fees
   
35-70.6   Suspension of fee collection
   
35-70.7   Credits against impact fees
   
35-70.8   Establishment of accounts
   
35-70.9   Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts
   
35-70.10   Appeals
   
35-70.11   Refunds
   
35-70.12   Rebate
   
35-70.13   Updates to plan and revision of fees
   
35-70.14   Use of other financing mechanisms
   
35-70.15   Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation
   
35-70.16   Relief procedures
   
35-70.17   Exemption from division
Subdivision II: Water Facilities Impact Fees
   
35-71   Water benefit area
   
35-72   Water capital improvements plan
   
35-73   Water facilities impact fees
   
35-74   Enlargement of connection by existing development
   
35-75   New connection by existing development
   
35-75.1   Prior code provisions
Subdivision III: Wastewater Facilities Impact Fees
   
35-76   Wastewater benefit area
   
35-77   Wastewater capital improvements plan
   
35-78   Wastewater facilities impact fees
   
35-79   Enlargement of connection by existing development
   
35-80   New connection by existing development
   
35-80.1   Prior code provisions
Division 3: Sewer per Acre Charges
   
35-81   Purpose
   
35-82   Definitions
   
35-83   Criteria for per acre charge sewer mains; developer initiated project
   
35-84   Calculation of the per acre charge
   
35-85   Assessment and payment of the per acre charge; refund to a developer;
administration
   
35-86   Adoption of division
Division 4: Water Main Capacity Charges
   
35-87   Purpose
   
35-88   Definitions
   
35-89   Developer’s responsibility
   
35-90   Adoption of an ordinance
   
35-91   Assumptions to be used to calculate maximum day demand
   
35-92   Calculation of the water main capacity charge
   
35-93   Assessment and payment of the water main capacity charge; refund to a
developer and city; administration
Division 5: Sewer Capacity Charges
   
35-94   Purpose
   
35-95   Definitions
   
35-96   Developer’s responsibility
   
35-97   Adoption of an ordinance
   
35-98   Assumptions used for sewer peak discharge rate calculation
   
35-99   Calculation of sewer capacity charge
   
35-100   Assessment and payment of the sewer capacity charge; reimbursements
and administration
Article IV: Reserved
   
35-101—35-130   Reserved
Article V: Private Sewage Disposal
   
35-131   Approval prerequisite to issuance of a building permit
   
35-132   Permits for on-site sewage disposal systems other than sanitary
sewers; delegation of authority to another governmental entity
   
35-133   Withholding permit upon determination of adverse health effect
   
35-134   Cleaning by licensed persons only
   
35-135   Required connections with sewers
   
35-136—35-150   Reserved
Article VI: Lawn and Landscape Irrigation Conservation
   
35-151   Lawn and landscape irrigation restrictions
   
35-152   Rain sensing devices and freeze gauges
   
35-154   Essential services
   
35-155   Administrative fee
   
35-156   Procedures for paying administrative fees or requesting a hearing on
the fees
   
35-157   Re-establishment of service to double check valves that have been
locked off
Article VII: Installation and Maintenance of Irrigation Systems
   
35-158   Definitions
   
35-159   License required
   
35-160   Permit required
   
35-161   Water conservation
   
35-162   Irrigation plan and as-built design: minimum standards
   
35-163   Design and installation: minimum requirements
   
35-164   Review of the irrigation system by owner
   
35-165   City inspection required
   
35-166   Maintenance, alteration, repair or service of irrigation systems
   
35-167   Reclaimed water; other water supply sources
   
35-168   Advertisement requirements
   
35-169   Contracts
   
35-170   Fees
Article VIII: Reclaimed Water
Division 1: General Provisions
   
35-171   Purpose
   
35-172   Definitions
Division 2: Reclaimed Water Service
   
35-173   Provision of reclaimed water service
   
35-174   Request for reclaimed water service
   
35-175   Proof of compliance with the minimum design and operation standards
   
35-176   Cross-connections with potable water mains prohibited
   
35-177   Distribution mains and the policy for the installation of community
facilities
   
35-178   Reclaimed water agreement
   
35-179   Discontinuance of service
   
35-180   City’s responsibilities
   
35-181   User’s responsibilities
   
35-182   Use of reclaimed water
   
35-183   Annual inspection; right of inspection of reclaimed water system
onsite facilities
   
35-184   Identification of reclaimed water onsite facilities
   
35-185   Maintenance of reclaimed water service pipes
   
35-186   Violations; prohibited uses
   
35-187   Offenses
   
35-188   Rates and charges
   
35-189   Inaccurate meter readings
   
35-190   Billing
   
35-191   No grant or transfer of water right or ownership interest
Division 3: Transportation of Reclaimed Water
   
35-192   Reclaimed water transportation
   
35-193   Reclaimed water transportation permit required
   
35-194   Reclaimed water transportation permit application procedures
   
35-195   Vehicles and containers requirements
   
35-196   Reclaimed water transportation permit modification
   
35-197   Issuance and display of reclaimed water transportation permit
   
35-198   Grounds for reclaimed water transportation permit denial
   
35-199   Reclaimed water transportation permit conditions
   
35-200   Transporter responsibilities
   
35-201   Transportation offenses
   
35-202   Grounds for suspension or revocation of reclaimed water transportation
permit
   
35-203   Suspension or revocation of reclaimed water transportation permit;
request of a hearing
   
35-204   Hearings
   
35-205   Responsibilities for users of reclaimed water transportation
   
35-206   Additional reclaimed water transportation permit holder
responsibilities
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
§ 35-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   CITY WATERWORKS or WATERWORKS. The city waterworks system and mains, all
filtration plants operated by the city, and all other works of the city
directly connected therewith, and all plants, properties and appliances
incident to and connected with the operation of the waterworks, including the
sanitary sewerage system, sewage treatment plants and facilities therefor of
the city.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid wastes resulting from any commercial,
manufacturing or industrial operations or processes.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, association of persons or corporation, including a
public, private or municipal corporation.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The liquid waste which may or may not contain solids, from
the plumbing facilities or sanitary conveniences of a building, dwelling unit,
business building or unit, factory or institution.
(1964 Code, § 37-1)
Cross-reference:
   Definitions and rules of construction generally, see §
1-2
§ 35-2 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed § 35-2,
which pertained to Water Department, Establishment and Organization, See also
the Code Comparative Table.
§ 35-3 WHEN DWELLINGS REQUIRED TO HAVE KITCHEN SINK AND FLUSH RIM WATER CLOSET.
   (a)   No building shall be constructed as a dwelling in the city within 100
feet of any public water supply line unless there is installed in the building
a kitchen sink and a flush rim water closet complete with vent pipes to provide
water into the building and drains out of the building. The required plumbing
fixtures and piping shall be maintained so long as the building is used as a
dwelling. Whenever water under pressure is made available by the extension of
water lines to within 50 feet of the lot on which such building is located,
then connections shall be made thereto and the plumbing drains shall be
connected to a sanitary sewer if available or otherwise to a septic tank as
provided in
Article V of this chapter.
   (b)   The term DWELLING, when used in this section, shall mean a building,
all or part of which is designed for occupancy by one or more persons,
temporarily or permanently, as a place of residence.
(1964 Code, § 37-2)
§ 35-4 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OF WATER LINES AND SERVICES.
   Every person engaged in the business of furnishing water for domestic or
industrial use in the city shall construct and maintain his or her lines and
services as follows:
   (a)   Depth. All pipelines and mains used for the purpose of distributing
water for domestic or industrial purposes shall be constructed and installed in
the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city at least 36 inches
from the top of the pipe to the improved grade as fixed and established by the
director of the water department.
   (b)   Type “K” copper tubing required. All pipelines or service lines used
for the purpose of conveying water from the main or distributing line to the
meter shall be of type “K” copper tubing and shall be installed and constructed
at least 30 inches below the established grade to the top of the pipe.
   (c)   Water main replacement in public ways. All water mains in the streets,
alleys or public thoroughfares where permanent placement with concrete base is
to be constructed, shall be replaced with pipe meeting water department
specifications in effect as of the time the replacement is to be made.
   (d)   Digging in streets. No pipeline or service line shall be constructed
and no repairs shall be made on lines already installed, which require any
character of excavation or digging in the streets, alleys and public
thoroughfares of the city, without first making application and securing from
the director of public works a permit to do such work.
   (e)   Requirements of National Board of Fire Underwriters. All water
distribution system of mains shall be designed to meet all requirements of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters as to adequate capacities for public fire
protection and public fire hydrant spacing.
(1964 Code, § 37-3) (Ord. 10026, § 1, passed 12-18-1987; Ord. 18319-09-2008, §
10, passed 9-30-2008)
§ 35-5 REPLACEMENT OF SEWER MAINS AT TIME OF CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS.
   (a)   No building shall be constructed over an existing sanitary sewer main
until such sewer has been replaced with ductile iron pipe of a type and class
specified by the water department.
   (b)   Whenever it is necessary to relocate or replace an existing sewer main
to permit the construction of a building, such relocation or replacement shall
be accomplished by the city at the expense of the owner, or under the
supervision of the city by a contractor employed by the owner and approved by
the director of the water department.
(1964 Code, § 37-3.1) (Ord. 6685, § 1, passed 6-19-1972; Ord. 10026, § 2,
passed 12-18-1987)
§§ 35-6, 35-7 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 35-6 and 35-
7 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to daily water analyses,
reports and drinking water quality and derived from §§ 37-4 and 37-5,
respectively, of the 1964 Code.
§ 35-8 PAYMENT OF SEWER CHARGES PREREQUISITE TO COLLECTION FOR WATER SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of furnishing
water to consumers through pipelines or service lines maintained in the
streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city to collect a charge for
such water service unless at the same time the charge made under this chapter
relating to sewer charges is also collected for the benefit of the city, or
satisfactory evidence is furnished that such charge has been paid.
(1964 Code, § 37-6)
§ 35-9 NOTICE TO MAKE SEWER CONNECTION.
   It is hereby made the duty of the appropriate city officials or any police
officer, when directed or required so to do, to notify the owner or occupant of
premises upon which a dry closet may stand or exist, to discontinue the use of
same, and erect and build in lieu thereof a water closet with sewer and water
connections. Such notice shall not go into detail, but shall suffice if it
directs the attention of the owner, agent or occupant of such premises to such
conditions and the necessity of change thereof. Such notice, which shall be in
writing and signed by the officer serving the same, shall be executed by
serving same on the owner of such property and if he or she be a nonresident of
the city or absent therefrom, then upon the sales or rental agent. A notice
shall also be served upon the occupant of such premises by leaving same with
some member of the family of the occupant or serving it directly upon him or
her. Fifteen days after such notice has been served shall be allowed the owner
within which to comply with such notice.
(1964 Code, § 37-7)
Statutory reference:
   State law authorizing home rule cities to require sewer connections, see
Tex. Local Government Code Ch. 552
§ 35-10 LIABILITY FOR USAGE; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY
CLAIMS.
   All property owners, their agents and tenants shall be held responsible for
all water use including loss of water due to leakage in pipes or plumbing
inside the discharge side of the meter or on their property, and if this water
is not paid for according to the rates provided in this chapter when payment
therefor becomes due, the water service shall be discontinued by the city and
not turned on again until all claims are paid. If there is any change in tenant
as customer on rented property and there exist, at that time, charges in
arrears for past usage, the property owner or tenant shall be held to account
for payment for such usage before service will be extended and water furnished
to any new tenant. If any customer shall be indebted to the city for water or
sewerage service furnished or for leakage or repairs on any account at his or
her then or previous place of consumption, service shall be discontinued until
payment in full is made.
(1964 Code, § 37-8) (Ord. 25423-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-29-2022)
§ 35-11 PERMIT REQUIRED TO TURN WATER ON OR OFF AT STREET; EXCEPTION.
   No plumber or any other person shall turn water on or off from the street
stopcock without a written permit first being obtained from the city water
department, except only in case of repairs to the plumbing system through which
the city water is used.
(1964 Code, § 37-9)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, see
Ch. 20
§ 35-12 SUPPLYING WATER FOR USE ON OTHER PREMISES.
   No consumer shall supply water to other persons or to other families or
suffer them to take it, except for use on the premises, without the permission
of the director of the water department.
(1964 Code, § 37-10)
§ 35-13 UNLAWFUL EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES.
   After water or sewerage service lines are introduced into a building or upon
any premises, the same shall not be extended by any plumber or any other person
to any other premises for additional fixtures.
(1964 Code, § 37-11)
§ 35-14 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   Every person provided water or sewer service by the city directly or
indirectly shall at all reasonable times permit the director of the water
department or his or her agents to enter the premises and building for
examination of pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used,
and refusal by any consumer shall result in termination of water or sewer
service from the city until such permission is granted.
(1964 Code, § 37-12)
§ 35-15 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed § 35-15 in its
entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to hazardous cross-connections and
derived from § 37-13 of the 1964 Code.
§ 35-16 WHEN SEPARATE CONNECTIONS PERMITTED.
   All buildings used as hotels, flats or apartment houses, or other multiple
units, may provide separate connections and meters and sewer service lines to
the mains for each unit, whether an apartment, dwelling, business or other
unit.
(1964 Code, § 37-14)
§ 35-17 UNAUTHORIZED TAPS, CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than persons so authorized by the
director of the water department to tap any water line or main of the city, or
to make connections with same or extend service lines therefrom.
(1964 Code, § 37-15)
§ 35-18 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire department
or employee of the department in the scope of employment, to open or use water
from a fire hydrant, or to take off the cap without permission from the water
department.
(1964 Code, § 37-16)
§ 35-19 INJURING, TAMPERING WITH WATER OR SEWER LINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or in association with
others, to willfully break, injure or tamper with any part of the water or
sewer system of the city, for any purpose whatsoever, or in any other manner to
maliciously interfere with or prevent the running and operation of such system
and water supply therefor or any portion thereof.
(1964 Code, § 37-17)
§ 35-20 PROVISIONS INCORPORATED INTO CONSUMER CONTRACTS.
   All of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated in
every contract between the city and its water or sanitary sewerage service
customers, and each customer or consumer shall be charged with knowledge of the
provisions of this chapter and, by applying for and accepting water or sanitary
sewerage service from the city, to have assented to the provisions of this
chapter.
(1964 Code, § 37-18)
§ 35-21 RESERVATION OF RIGHT BY CITY.
   The right is reserved in the city and its water department to temporarily
discontinue, disconnect and reconnect without notice water and sanitary
sewerage service to all customers for the purpose of making repairs,
connections, extensions and cleaning of mains, machinery, reservoir or any part
of the city waterworks. None of the terms of this chapter shall ever be
construed as requiring the city water department to maintain a specified
constant pressure in its lines.
(1964 Code, § 37-19)
§ 35-22 DAMS, EMBANKMENTS, FILLS ACROSS WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or maintain a
dam, embankment or fill over or across any natural watercourse in the city for
the purpose of impounding or diverting water, except upon full compliance with
the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Before beginning the construction or building of any dam, embankment,
fill or obstruction over or across a natural watercourse in the city, or doing
any work in connection with the construction or building of such structure, a
person is hereby required to present an application for a permit to do such
construction work to the city council, and secure a permit from the city
council, authorizing such construction. Such application shall be accompanied
with a description of the project, showing its location, plans, specifications,
distance from the nearest streets and thoroughfares and the approximate number
of residences within a radius of 2,000 feet together with the general
description of the topography of the surrounding area, and such other pertinent
facts as may show that the water that is impounded or diverted will not
constitute a menace to the health of the community, will not impair the natural
drainage in the immediate area, and will not materially interfere with travel
over and along streets and thoroughfares in the vicinity.
   (c)   NATURAL WATERCOURSES, as used in this section, shall mean and include
any stream with bed and banks or any gully, ravine or valley through which
water ordinarily flows, either regularly or intermittently.
(1964 Code, § 27-7)
§ 35-23 EMERGENCY AUTHORITY.
   (a)   Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish the
city’s policy in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the city’s
water supply and to establish water restrictions to be enforced in case of
drought or emergency conditions. This section applies to:
      (1)   All persons and premises within the city using water from the water
system;
      (2)   All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the
city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the water system; and
      (3)   All wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent
provided in subsection (k) below.
   (b)   Drought contingency and emergency management plan. The provisions of
the most recently City Council-adopted Drought Contingency and Emergency Water
Management Plan are hereby adopted and incorporated into this code by
reference.
   (c)   Authority. The city manager is authorized to implement measures
prescribed when required by this section and by the drought contingency/
emergency water management plan approved by the city council. The director is
authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations,
not in conflict with this section or state and federal laws, in aid of
enforcement.
   (d)   Initiation of plan stages. The director, upon determination that
drought conditions or a water emergency exists, shall advise the city manager.
The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of the drought
contingency/emergency water management plan be initiated. To be effective, the
order must be:
      (1)   Made by public announcement to the news media;
      (2)   Published on the city’s website; and
      (3)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   (e)   Duration of stage; change. A stage will remain in effect until the
conditions that triggered initiation of the stage have been eliminated. If the
stage is initiated because of excessive demands, all initiated actions will
remain in effect through September 30 of the year in which they were triggered
unless the city manager determines that conditions exist that will allow
termination of the stage before September 30. Upon recommendation of the
director, the city manager may terminate, upgrade or downgrade the stage. Any
such change must be made in the same manner prescribed in subsection (d) above.
   (f)   Violation of section. A person commits an offense if he or she
knowingly makes, causes or permits a use of water contrary to the measures
implemented by the city manager as prescribed in the drought contingency/
emergency water management plan. For purposes of this subsection (f), it is
presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water
contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been
formally ordered consistent with the terms of subsection (d) above and:
      (1)   The manner of use has been prohibited by the drought contingency/
emergency water management plan;
      (2)   The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the drought
contingency/emergency water management plan; or
      (3)   The manner or amount used violates the terms and conditions of a
compliance agreement made pursuant to a variance granted by the director
pursuant to subsection (h) below.
   (g)   Penalties for violation. Any person who is convicted of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure
implemented in accordance with this section and the drought contingency/
emergency water management plan may be fined not more than $2,000 for each
offense in accordance with §
1-6(c). In addition, the following penalties shall apply:
      (1)   A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with
this section and stage 2 of the drought contingency/ emergency water management
plan shall be fined not less than $250;
      (2)   A person who is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with
this section and stage 3 of the drought contingency/ emergency water management
plan shall be fined not less than $500;
      (3)   If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with
this section and the drought contingency/emergency water management plan two
times, the director may install a flow restrictor in the water line to the
premises where the violations occurred to limit the amount of water that may
pass through the meter in a 24-hour period or a lock-out device to a backflow
assembly; and
      (4)   If a person is convicted of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with a measure implemented in accordance with
this section and the drought contingency/emergency water management plan three
times, the director may discontinue water service to the premises where the
violation occurred.
   (h)   Variances. During the times the emergency order is operative, the
director may grant variances only under the following circumstances and
conditions:
      (1)   The applicant signs a compliance agreement on a form provided by
the director, and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to use the water only
in the amount and manner permitted by the variance;
      (2)   Granting of the variance would not cause an immediate significant
reduction in the city’s water supply;
      (3)   Failure to approve the variance would result in an extreme hardship
or need relating to the health, safety or welfare of the applicant; and
      (4)   Granting the variance would not adversely affect the premises at
which the violation occurred.
   (i)   Revocation of variances. The director may revoke a variance when he or
she determines that:
      (1)   The conditions of subsection (h) above are not being met or are no
longer applicable;
      (2)   The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or
      (3)   Revocation is advisable to protect the health, safety or welfare of
other persons.
   (j)   Appeal. Denial or revocation of a variance by the director can be
appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
manager within ten days after issuance of the director’s decision. The city
manager’s decision shall be final.
   (k)   Wholesale service to customers outside the city. The director shall
advise customers receiving wholesale water service from the city of actions
taken under the drought contingency/emergency water management plan. The
director may restrict service to customers outside the city as permitted under
the contract and state law.
   (l)   Authority under other laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the authority of the mayor, the city council or the city manager to
seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster
relief act.
(Ord. 11572, § 1, passed 5-24-1994; Ord. 13912, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-24-1999; Ord.
15136, § 1, passed 6-18-2002; Ord. 16379, § 1, passed 4-19-2005; Ord. 18088, §§
1, 2, passed 5-13-2008; Ord. 20759-05-2013, passed 5-21-2013, eff. 5-28-2013;
Ord. 21194-04-2014, § 1, passed 4-8-2014, eff. 4-16-2014; Ord. 23569-02-2019, §
2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019; Ord. 23633-04-2019, § 1, passed 4-9-2019;
Ord. 26887-04-2024, § 2, passed 4-23-2024, eff. 5-3-2024)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “A,” as referenced in subsection (b) is not setout herein, but is on
file in the offices of the city.
§ 35-24 ADEQUACY OF SUPPLY.
   (a)   City supply must be adequate. Under no circumstances shall water be
furnished by the city to any applicant or customer unless the supply of the
city is adequate. In cases of emergency, priority of users of the city’s water
supply shall be determined by the director, subject to the requirements of
state law and §
35-23.
   (b)   Revisions. The city council may from time to time, upon recommendation
of the city manager and the director, make revisions in the emergency water
management plan approved under §
35-23(b) if prudent conservation requires the revisions.
(Ord. 11572, § 2, passed 5-24-1994)
§ 35-25 TEMPORARY DISCONTINUANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE OR EMERGENCY
REASONS.
   (a)   Reasons for temporary discontinuance. The director is authorized to
temporarily discontinue service to premises for the following reasons:
      (1)   When a main break or other failure in the water or wastewater
systems could injure persons, private or city property, or other parts of the
systems;
      (2)   To perform routine maintenance or repair to any part of the water
or wastewater systems;
      (3)   To perform emergency maintenance or repair to any part of the water
or wastewater systems;
      (4)   In other cases of emergency, when necessary to protect the general
health, safety or welfare of persons; or
      (5)   To make a connection to a newly constructed or relocated water or
wastewater main.
   (b)   Responsibilities upon temporary discontinuance. In all cases of
temporary discontinuance, the director must restore service as soon as is
practical and must take all reasonable steps necessary to protect the public
health and safety under the circumstances.
(Ord. 11572, § 3, passed 5-24-1994)
§ 35-26 NONESSENTIAL WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to all customers of or persons who
receive water from the city water supply:
   (a)   The following uses of water are defined as WASTING WATER and are
strictly prohibited:
      (1)   Permitting or causing water to flow, spray or otherwise move or be
discharged from the premises of any person responsible for any property within
the corporate limits of the city to or upon any street, alley or other public
right-of-way, ditch or drain, unless same is caused as a result of weather
conditions or such other uncontrollable events; and
      (2)   Failing to repair a leak in a private plumbing system or in an
irrigation system within five working days of the discovery or notification of
same.
   (b)   When referred to in this subsection (b), SWIMMING POOL shall mean any
portable or permanent structure containing or holding a body of water 24 inches
or more in depth and containing 1,000 gallons or more of water and intended for
recreational purposes, including a wading pool. All swimming pools utilizing
diamoteceous earth filters which are constructed 60 days after the effective
date of this section shall be equipped with filtration, pumping and
recirculation systems which provide for recycling of filter backwash water.
(Ord. 11572, § 4, passed 5-24-1994; Ord. 12582, § 1, passed 7-16-1996)
§§ 35-27—35-35 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: METERS
§ 35-36 GENERALLY.
   All water furnished by the city water department to its consumers shall be
measured by meters. The size, type and right to own and control all meters
installed or used by consumers of its water shall be determined by the city
water department.
(1964 Code, § 37-20)
§ 35-37 SEPARATE METER REQUIRED.
   (a)   Two or more residential, business, commercial or industrial units
located on separate lots or tracts shall not be permitted to be supplied with
one water meter or sewer service connection where there is a water or sewer
main in front of the premises, but shall have separate water meters and
sewerage service connections.
   (b)   (1)   When there is a developed subdivision which on or before April
1, 1981, has existing paved streets under which exist water and sewer mains
with service taps of adequate size to serve each subdivision lot, and should a
lot of that subdivision on which no dwelling units have been constructed be
replatted into two lots to accommodate the construction of a dwelling unit on
each of the two replatted lots, the two lots thus created may be served by
extensions from the existing single water service line and the existing single
sewer service line, provided that such extensions have service taps of adequate
size as specified in §
35-57.4.
      (2)   Each such replat shall contain a provision that the owners of the
replatted lots shall share equally in the cost of repairing and maintaining
that portion of the sewer service line from the sanitary sewer main to the
point where the sewer line forms a wye to serve each lot; that each lot owner
shall be individually responsible for the cost of repairing and maintaining
that portion of the sewer service line which extends from the wye to serve his
or her lot; that each lot owner shall be individually responsible for the cost
of repairing and maintaining that portion of the water service line which
extends from the discharge side of the water meter to serve his or her lot; and
that in no event shall the city be liable for maintaining or repairing the
water or sewer service lines which are herein made the responsibility of the
lot owners.
      (3)   Each such replat shall also provide that the property owner on
whose property the water or sewer service is introduced directly from the water
or sanitary sewer main shall grant to the adjacent property owner on whose
property the water or sewer service is extended such easements necessary to
permit the adjacent property owner to enter upon the property where the service
is introduced for the purpose of repairing or maintaining the extension line
serving his or her lot or that portion of the sewer service line shared jointly
by the two lot owners.
(1964 Code, § 37-21) (Ord. 8308, § 1, passed 3-31-1981)
§ 35-38 PURCHASE; REPAIRS.
   All meters larger than two inches shall be purchased by the water user
through the city water department and if repairs on the same become necessary,
such repairs shall be made by the city water department and the charges
therefor shall be paid by the consumer. The rules for paying such charges shall
be the same as the rules concerning those for payment of water or sewer
service.
(1964 Code, § 37-22)
§ 35-39 MONTHLY READINGS; CUSTOMER CHARGES; STRAIGHT CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Meters shall be read and the customer notified monthly of the amount
of water or sewer service charges incurred by that customer for such month.
Such notice may be furnished by depositing a bill for water and/or sewer
service charges with the United States postal service directed to the last
known address of the customer. Such water and sewer service charges shall be
paid pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the city council and amended
from time to time. If such water and sewer charges are not paid after notice is
given pursuant to such rules and regulations, field action may be taken by
dispatching a service representative to lock, plug or remove the water meter
and/or disconnect the sewer line. A disconnect charge according to the city's
adopted fee schedule in §
35-56(l) will be added to the customer's account for field action for
delinquent nonpayment, and payment of the delinquent account while conducting
such field action shall not relieve the customer of the disconnect fee. In
cases where the water and/or sewer service has been terminated, such service or
services shall not be restored until the total amount due, including all
charges prescribed in this section, has been paid in full.
   (b)   When water service has been terminated by a locking device and the
water service line or meter installation or lock has been removed or damaged,
an additional broken lock charge as specified in §
35-56(l) shall be assessed to the customer's account.
   (c)   All customers requesting the activation of water and/or sewer service
will be requested to place a deposit in accordance with §
35-61.
   (d)   For all customers requesting a transfer of service, a charge shall be
assessed on the customer's account as specified in §
35-56(l).
   (e)   The customer shall be assessed a reactivation fee for all work
performed by the city in setting a meter or activating/reactivating water and/
or sewer service a fee as specified in §
35-56(l).
   (f)   A non-sufficient funds fee will be added to the customer's account for
all checks, bank drafts, credit card or debit card charges returned or refused
payment from a customer's bank. If the customer does not remit payment for the
returned charge, the city may terminate service and assess a fee as specified
in §
35-56(l).
   (g)   A straight connection is defined as any type of device installed in
lieu of a water meter, connecting the city's water service pipe to a private
service pipe for the purpose of obtaining unmetered water. Whenever a straight
connection is found in lieu of a water meter, the straight connection shall be
removed by the city and a straight connection charge as specified in §
35-56(l) will be made applied to the customer's account for the removal of such
straight connection. When a straight connection is found at a location where
there is no record of a request for service to the location, a special charge
for the straight connection removal shall be added at the time of future
activation, for subsequent activation and to all estimated water billings and
fees, and it shall be paid by the party requesting the activation.
   (h)   Resumes. All customers requesting account information and history such
as consumption and associated charges will not be charged for this service
unless the historical information requested exceeds three years. If the
information requested is for the time period greater than one year, a charge as
specified in §
35-56(l) will be added to the customer's account.
   (i)   Meter testing. All customers requesting a meter test will be provided
with one meter test per year, per customer account, at no charge. Any customer
requesting more than one meter test per year will be assessed a charge as
specified in §
35-56(l), provided that the meter test indicated that the meter is functioning
properly and is usable at another location. No charge will be assessed to the
customer if the meter is not functioning properly.
   (j)   Meter replacement. The city will only replace meters that are found
not to be properly functioning after testing and validation. If a meter
replacement is requested after a meter test determines the meter to be
functioning properly, a meter replacement charge as specified in §
35-56(l) will be applied to the customer's account.
   (k)   After hours service connection charge. All customers requesting the
connection of service outside of normal business hours will be assessed a
charge as specified in §
35-56 (l), for field action for the after-hours service.
   (l)   Same day service charge. All customers requesting the same day
connection of service will be assessed a charge according as specified in §
35-56 (l) for field action for the same day service which will be added to the
customer's account.
(1964 Code, § 37-23) (Ord. 5715, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 6325, § 1, passed 6-29-
1970; Ord. 7091, § 1, passed 11-11-1974; Ord. 8360, § 1, passed 6-16-1981; Ord.
8680, § 1, passed 11-16-1982; Ord. 8958, § 1, passed 10-25-1983; Ord. 9179, §
1, passed 8-28-1984; Ord. 9433, § 1, passed 7-23-1985; Ord. 11717, § 7, passed
11-1-1994; Ord. 18835-09-2009, § 1, passed 9-22-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; Ord.
23990-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 4-1-2020)
§ 35-40 BYPASSING METERS.
   Whoever by any means or devices prevents water from passing through any
meter connected directly or indirectly with the lines or mains of the city
waterworks, whether sewer service customer only or both water and sewer, or
from registering the amount of water passing through such meter, or prevents or
obstructs a meter from accurately registering the quantity of water supplied,
or in any way interferes with its purpose, action or just registration, or
whoever, without the consent in writing of the director of the water department
diverts any water from any pipes, lines or mains of the waterworks, or
otherwise uses or causes to be used any water produced or distributed by the
waterworks, or retains possession thereof, or refuses to deliver any meter or
other appliance loaned to him or her by the water department for the purpose of
furnishing water through same and registering the quantity thereof, shall be
deemed in violation of these rules and regulations and shall be for each such
offense fined as hereinafter provided. The presence at any time on or about any
meter, water lines or mains of the city, whether such meter, if any, is owned
or operated by the city or others, of a pipe or any device or pipes resulting
in the diversion of water or the prevention of its free passage and
registration by any such meter, or resulting in the diversion from such meter,
or resulting in the prevention of water reaching the meter, or resulting in the
prevention of just registration of the meter or meters or resulting in the
taking of any water except through a meter as above set forth shall constitute
prima facie evidence on the part of the person owning or having custody or
control of the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is
located, of knowledge of the existence thereof and knowledge of such existence
to the person who would be benefited by the failure of the water to be
accurately metered shall further constitute prima facie evidence of intention
on the part of such person or persons to defraud, and shall bring such person
prima facie within the scope, meaning and penalties of this section and
article.
(1964 Code, § 37-24)
§§ 35-41—35-55 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: CHARGES
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
Editors’s note:
   See the editor’s note at Div. 2.
§ 35-56 WATER AND SEWER RATES WITHIN CITY.
   (a)   The following definitions shall apply in this section:
      ABNORMAL SEWAGE. Any sewage having a suspended solids or B.O.D. content
which is, in the judgment of the director of the water department,
significantly in excess of, or below, that found in normal sewage, but is
otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage system.
      B.O.D. (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure as specified in standard methods in five days at 20°C
expressed as parts per million by weight (milligrams per liter).
      COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER CLASS. Shall consist of those customers which have
three or more living units served by a single water meter, or which have one or
more businesses served by a single water meter.
      DIRECTOR. The director of the water department of the City of Fort Worth
or his or her authorized representative.
      INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER CLASS. Shall consist of those customers whose sewage
contains waste water from a product manufactured, processed or fabricated by
the customer.
      LIVING UNIT. A residential unit providing complete, independent, living
facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
cooking, eating and sanitation.
      MONITORED GROUP CLASS. Shall consist of those customers determined by the
director of the water department to be producers of waste water that is, in his
or her judgment, abnormal sewage.
      NONRESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER CLASS. Shall consist of the industrial customer
class and the commercial customer class.
      NORMAL SEWAGE. Sewage which when analyzed shows by weight a daily average
of not more than 240 mg/l of suspended solids and not more than 210 mg/l of
B.O.D., and which is otherwise acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage
system.
      RECLAIMED WATER. Highly treated effluent from Fort Worth’s wastewater
treatment plant, supplied through the reclaimed water transmission and
distribution system, which meets or exceeds the requirements for Type I
reclaimed water uses, as set forth by Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, §
210.33.
      RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER CLASS. Shall consist of those customers which have
no more than two living units served by a single water meter.
      STANDARD METHODS. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
      WHOLESALE CUSTOMER. A municipality, town, village or other governmental
entity or private firm contracting with a governmental entity for the provision
of water, reclaimed water and/or wastewater service.
   (b)   (1)   The following schedule of rates per month, or fraction thereof,
shall be the charges to all residential and nonresidential customers for
furnishing water to such customers located within the city. The residential
monthly volume charge for water service shall be the charges to the residential
class, as defined in this chapter, for furnishing water to residential water
customers located within the city. The nonresidential monthly volume charge for
water service shall be the charges to the nonresidential customer class, as
defined in this chapter, for furnishing water to nonresidential water customers
located within the city.
Retail Water Rates
Monthly Service Charge for Water
Meter Size (Inches) Monthly Charge
Retail Water Rates
Monthly Service Charge for Water
Meter Size (Inches) Monthly Charge
3/4 × 5/8          $13.75
3/4 × 3/4          $14.00
1                   $29.05
1-1/2               $57.25
2                   $89.35
3                   $236.35
4                   $404.85
6                   $859.35
8                   $1,501.15
10                  $2,249.95
 
      (2)   The monthly volume charge for water service is as follows:
Residential Customer Class
Cubic Feet Rate
Residential Customer Class
Cubic Feet                                                                Rate
First 600 or less cubic feet of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet  $2.28
For the next 600 cubic feet of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet   $3.19
For the next 1,200 cubic feet of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet $4.29
For all in excess of 2,400 cubic feet of water used per month, per 100    $5.37
cubic feet
Commercial Customer Class
All usage of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet                     $2.78
Industrial Customer Class
All usage of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet                     $2.80
Irrigation Meters
First 10,000 or less cubic feet of water used per month, per 100 cubic    $3.08
feet
For all in excess of 10,000 cubic feet of water used per month, per 100   $4.13
cubic feet
Gas Well Drillers
All usage of water used per month, per 100 cubic feet per month           $5.85
 
      (3)   The service charges set out in the foregoing schedules are based
upon the amount of water used as measured by meters.
   (c)   The following schedule of rates per month, or fraction thereof, shall
be the charges to all residential and nonresidential customers for furnishing
sewerage service to such customers located within the city. The residential
monthly volume charge for sewerage service shall be the charges to the
residential class, as defined in this chapter, for furnishing sewerage service
to residential sewer customers located within the city. The nonresidential
monthly volume charge for sewerage service shall be the charges to the
nonresidential customer class, as defined in this chapter, for furnishing
sewerage service to nonresidential sewer customers located within the city.
      (1)   Monthly service charge for sewerage service only.
Meter Size (inches) Monthly Charge
Meter Size (inches) Monthly Charge
3/4 × 5/8          $7.90
3/4 × 3/4          $8.20
1                   $14.55
1-1/2               $39.50
2                   $63.20
3                   $118.50
4                   $197.50
6                   $395.00
8                   $632.00
10                  $908.50
12                  $1,698.50
 
      (2)   a.   A monthly volume charge shall also be charged to residential
customers in the amount of $4.30 per 100 cubic feet of water used, and to
nonresidential/non-monitored customers in the amount of $4.25 per 100 cubic
feet of water used, or wastewater produced, as more specifically set forth
hereinafter.
         b.   The monthly volume charges for residential class customers will
be based on the individual customer’s average monthly water use during the
preceding winter quarter months of December, January and February. The volumes
used to compute these charges are based on the amount of water used by the
residential class customer as measured by a meter. Where no preceding winter
quarter average is available from records, the director shall estimate a volume
to be used for this monthly volume charge.
         c.   The monthly charges to the nonresidential/non-monitored customers
will be based on total water use as measured by appropriate meters, with the
provision that if a customer can prove, to the satisfaction of the director,
that a significant portion of the metered water usage does not enter the
sanitary sewers, the customer will be charged for only that volume entering the
sewers, as determined by a method approved by the director.
   (d)   (1)   The director shall establish a monitored group class, consisting
of those customers whose wastewater strength is, in his or her judgment,
abnormally high or whose wastewater contains limited substances or materials,
and charges to customers in this class shall be computed in accord with the
following five-part rate schedule:
 
Monitored Group
Volume charge, per 100 cubic feet                                $2.78
BOD strength charge, per pound of BOD                            $0.2697
Suspended solids strength charge per pound of suspended solids   $0.1978
Dissolved solids strength charge, per pound of dissolved solids  $0.0420
(applicable to gas well drillers)
Monitoring and pretreatment charge = Total actual cost
 
      (2)   The monitoring charge shall consist of all cost for personnel,
material and equipment used to collect and analyze samples from the customer’s
wastewater to determine the strength of the wastewater produced and, when
appropriate, to inspect pretreatment facilities, to administer pretreatment
permit systems and to enforce ordinance requirements. Pretreatment requirements
primarily affect industries that are subject to 40 C.F.R. part 403, General
Pretreatment Regulations.
      (3)   This schedule shall replace all other charges previously made for
industrial waste strength.
   (e)   All customers connected to the sanitary sewerage system who have a
source of water supply that is in addition to, or in lieu of, the city water
supply must have a meter approved and tested by the department on that source
of water supply and the volume charge as set forth hereinbefore shall be based
on the sum of the volumes delivered by all sources of supply. Such method of
volume determination will not be applicable if the customer installs a meter
approved by the water department on the waste water produced by the customer
before it enters the city sanitary sewer.
   (f)   Charges paid by municipal departments for water and sewerage services
shall be paid for at the rates in effect.
   (g)   The following schedule of rates per month, or fraction thereof, shall
be the charges to all wholesale customers for furnishing water to such
customers:
 
Rates for Wholesale Water Service
Volume ($/1,000 gallons)*   $0.9278
Maximum Day ($/MGD excess)  $123,326.00
Maximum Hour ($/MGD excess) $21,546.00
Customer ($/Meter/Month)    $25.00
*plus raw water cost
 
 
Raw Water Service
All uses inside Tarrant Regional Water District per 1,000 gallons per  $1.55970
month
All uses outside Tarrant Regional Water District per 1,000 gallons per $1.55970
month
 
   (h)   The following schedule of rates per month, or fraction thereof, shall
be the charges to all wholesale customers for furnishing wastewater services to
such customers:
 
Rates for Wholesale Wastewater Service
Volume ($/1,000 gallons) $1.7770
BOD ($/pound)            $0.5851
TSS ($/pound)            $0.3440
Customer ($/month)       $75.00
 
   (i)   The standby charge per month, per 1,000 gallons is $0.8936.
   (j)   (1)   The following schedule of rates per month, or fraction thereof,
shall be the charges to all wholesale customers for furnishing reclaimed water
to such customers:
 
Rates for Wholesale Reclaimed Water Service
Volume ($/1,000 gallons)
October 1, 2010 to September 30, 2012 $1.45
October 1, 2012 to September 30, 2014 $1.50
 
      (2)   Starting October 1, 2014, the wholesale reclaim water service rates
will increase by 5% annually until such time as the cumulative amount of the
annual system deficits has been recovered.
      (3)   The customer shall be charged on a monthly basis the volume rate
charge multiplied by a minimum 50% of the customer’s contracted average monthly
amount (annual amount divided by 12 months) in order to establish a minimum
cash flow to meet the operating and debt expenditures for the system.
   (k)   A permit/contract fee up to $5,000 will be assessed for a ground water
remediation discharge permit. The term of the permit/contract shall not exceed
two years. In addition to a volume charge based on current rates, a monthly
service fee of $4.50 will be assessed.
   (l)   Rates.
Account Services
New Meter Set                            $60
Standard Activation/Transfer             $20
Same Day Activation/Transfer             $25+
Same Day After Hours Activation/Transfer $50+
Other Field Services
First meter test/investigation per 12-   No Charge
months
Additional test/investigation per 12-    $75
months*
Investigation By Appointment             $100
Meter Replacement by Request             Actual Cost
Replacement Installation by Request (<   $60
2")
Replacement Installation by Request (>   Actual Cost
2")
Tampering/Theft
Tampering, damage, inactive/unauthorized $150 + estimated use + cost of damage
consumption
Meter Removal                            $60
 
Delinquency
Late Payment                      10% past due
Disconnect/Lock/Shut off          $20
Broken Lock                       $25
Standard Reactivation             $20
Same Day Reactivation             $25+
Same Day After Hours Reactivation $50+
+ equals the standard charge plus the additional charge.
 
(1964 Code, § 37-25) (Ord. 5432, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 6325, § 2, passed 6-29-
1970; Ord. 6888, § 1, passed 8-13-1973; Ord. 7380, § 1, passed 7-12-1976; Ord.
7586, § 1, passed 8-2-1977; Ord. 7981, § 1, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. 8158, § 1,
passed 8-18-1980; Ord. 8264, § 1, passed 2-10-1981; Ord. 8387, § 1, passed 9-1-
1981; Ord. 8618, § 1, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 8619, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-17-1982;
Ord. 8905, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 8906, § 1, passed 8-30- 1983; Ord.
9179, § 2, passed 8-28-1984; Ord. 9180, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-28-1984; Ord. 9432,
§§ 1, 2, passed 7-23-1985; Ord. 9433, § 2, passed 7-23-1985; Ord. 9696, §§ 1—3,
passed 8-19-1986; Ord. 10143, §§ 1—4, passed 7-26-1988; Ord. 10173, § 1,
passed9-27-1988; Ord. 10373, §§ 1—6, passed 8-29-1989; Ord. 10672, §§ 1—3,
passed 9-18-1990; Ord. 10196, §§ 1—3, passed 9-17-1991; Ord. 11172, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-22-1992; Ord. 11298, §§ 1—3, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 11336, §§ 1—3,
passed 6-15-1993; Ord. 11395, §§ 1—3, passed 9-14-1993; Ord. 11678, §§ 1—3,
passed 9-20-1994; Ord. 11717, §§ 1—4, 8, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. 12113, §§ 1—3,
passed 8-20-1995; Ord. 12114, §§ 1—3, passed 8-20-1995; Ord. 12669, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-10-1996; Ord. 12670, §§ 1—3, passed 9-10-1996; Ord. 13145, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 13146, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 13575, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 13576, §§ 1—3, passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 13944, §§ 1—3,
passed 9-21-1999; Ord. 14347, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14348, §§ 1—3, passed
9-26-2000; Ord. 14349, § 1, passed 9-26-2000; Ord. 14762, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-28-
2001; Ord. 14796, §§ 1—3, passed 10-2-2001; Ord. 15253, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-24-
2002; Ord. 15254, §§ 1—3, passed 9-24-2002; Ord. 15693, §§ 1—3, passed 9-23-
2003; Ord. 15694, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-23-2003; Ord. 16141, § 1, 2, eff. 10-1-
2004; Ord. 16154, §§ 1—3, passed 10-5-2004; Ord. 16623, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-27-
2005; Ord. 16624, §§ 1—3, passed 9-27-2005; Ord. 16932, § 1, passed 5-9-2006;
Ord. 17208, § 1, passed 9-26-2006; Ord. 17801, §§ 1—3, passed 9-25-2007; Ord.
17798, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-25-2007; Ord. 18316-09-2008, § 1, passed 9-30-2008,
eff. 1-1-2009; Ord. 18317-09-2008, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-30-2008; Ord. 18835-09-
2009, §§ 2, 3, passed 9-22-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; Ord. 18836-09-2009, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-22-2009; Ord. 18990-01-2010, §§ 1—3, passed 1-12-2010, eff. 10-1-2010;
Ord. 19376-09-2010, §§ 1—3, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 19377-09-2010, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 19909-09-2011, §§ 1—3, passed 9-20-2011, eff. 10-1-2011;
Ord. 19910-09-2011, §§ 1—3, passed 9-20-2011, eff. 1-1-2012; Ord. 20405-09-
2012, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord. 20407-09-2012, §§ 1, 2,
passed 9-18-2012, eff. 10-1-2012; Ord. 20946-09-2013, §§ 1—3, passed 9-17-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014; Ord. 20947-09-2013, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-17-2013, eff. 10-1-2013;
Ord. 21448-09-2014, §§ 1—4, passed 9-9-2014, eff. 1-1-2015; Ord. 21449-09-2014,
§§ 1, 2, passed 9-9-2014, eff. 10-1-2014; Ord. 21855-09-2015, §§ 1—3, passed 9-
1-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; Ord. 21856-09-2015, §§ 1—3, passed 9-1-2015, eff. 10-1-
2015; Ord. 22375-08-2016, §§ 1—3, passed 8-30-2016, eff. 10-1-2016; Ord. 22374-
08-2016, §§ 1—3, passed 8-30-2016, eff. 1-1-2017; Ord. 22890-09-2017, §§ 1—3,
passed 9-12-2017, eff. 10-1-2017; Ord. 22891-09-2017, §§ 1—3, passed 9-12-2017,
eff. 1-1-2018; Ord. 23377-09-2018, §§ 1—3, passed 9-11-2018, eff. 10-1-2018;
Ord. 23429-09-2018, §§ 1—2, passed 9-25-2018, eff. 10-1-2018; Ord. 23818-09-
2019, §§ 1—4, passed 9-10-2019, eff. 1-1-2020; Ord. 23819- 09-2019, §§ 1—3,
passed 9-10-2019, eff. 10-1-2019; Ord. 23990-12-2019, § 2, passed 12-17-2019,
eff. 4- 1-2020; Ord. 24450-09-2020, §§ 1—3, passed 9-22-2020, eff. 10-1-2020;
Ord. 24504-10-2020, § 1, passed 10-27-2020; Ord. 25035-09-2021, §§ 1—3, passed
9-14-2021, eff. 10-1-2021; Ord. 25692-09-2022, § 1—3, passed 9-13-2022, eff.
10-1-2022; Ord. 26450-09-2023, §§ 1—3, passed 9-19-2023, eff. 10-1-2023; Ord.
26451-09-2023, §§ 1, 3, 4, passed 9-19-2023, eff. 1-1-2024; Ord. 27105-08-2024,
§§ 1—4, passed 8-27-2024, eff. 1-1-2025; Ord. 27213- 10-2024, §§ 1, 2, passed
10-15-2024, eff. 10-1-2024; Ord. 27920-08-2025, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-26-2025, eff.
10-1-2025; Ord. 27924-08-2025, §§ 1—4, passed 8- 26-2025, eff. 1-1-2026)
§ 35-57 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENT (CFA). A contract between a developer and the
city for the construction of community facilities, on a property in which the
city has or will have an ownership or other legal interest, that the city
requires to be constructed as a condition of plat or plan approval, or the
issuance of a building permit.
   LONG TAP. A service tap crossing beyond the centerline of the street to the
opposite side of the street to the property to be served.
   MISCELLANEOUS CONTRACTS. An agreement with the city's Water Department
engineering staff which allows for the city to provide engineering design
services and construction of water or wastewater infrastructure.
   COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENT (CFA). A contract between a developer and the
city for the construction of community facilities, on a property in which the
city has or will have an ownership or other legal interest, that the city
requires to be constructed as a condition of plat or plan approval, or the
issuance of a building permit.
   LONG TAP. A service tap crossing beyond the centerline of the street to the
opposite side of the street to the property to be served.
   MISCELLANEOUS CONTRACTS. An agreement with the city's Water Department
engineering staff which allows for the city to provide engineering design
services and construction of water or wastewater infrastructure.
   SANITARY SEWER TAP. A connection to the public sanitary sewer located in a
public street and the sanitary sewer service lateral line extended
approximately three feet behind the curb line adjacent to the property served
thereby; except in easements and alleys, where the sanitary sewer service
lateral is extended as close as possible to the private property line as is
deemed reasonable by the director.
   SHORT TAP. A service tap located on the same side of the street as the water
main that does not cross the centerline of the street.
   STANDARD METER. A three-quarter-inch by five-eighths-inch meter.
   TAP REMOVAL. The removal and/or abandonment of a water tap service line and
meter and/or sewer tap by the city.
   WATER TAP. The connection to the public water main and the water service
line extended to a point approximately three feet behind the curb line adjacent
to the property served thereby, to the point of the meter connection; except in
easements and alleys where the water tap connection and water service line is
extended as close as possible to the private property line as is deemed
reasonable by the director.
(1964 Code, § 37-26) (Ord. 5432, § 2, passed - -; Ord. 5875, §§ 1—6, passed -
-; Ord. 6325, § 3, passed 6-29-1970; Ord. 6685, § 2, passed 6-19-1972; Ord.
6888, § 2, passed 8-13-1973; Ord. 7094, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-11-1974; Ord. 7380,
§ 2, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 7981, § 2, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. 8158, § 2, passed
8-18-1980; Ord. 8264, § 2, passed 2-10-1981; Ord. 8387, § 2, passed 9-1-1981;
Ord. 8618, § 2, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 8619, § 3, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 8680,
§ 2, passed 11-16-1982; Ord. 8905, § 3, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 8906, § 2,
passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 9179, § 3, passed 8-28-1984; Ord. 9180, § 3, passed 8-
28-1984; Ord. 9432, § 3, passed 7-23-1985; Ord. 9433, § 3, passed 7-23-1985;
Ord. 9696, §§ 4—6, passed 8-19-1986; Ord. 9982, § 1, passed 10-13-1987; Ord.
10026, § 3, passed 12-18-1987; Ord. 10075, § 1, passed 3-15-1988; Ord. 10173, §
2, passed 9-27-1988; Ord. 10374, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-29-1989; Ord. 10678, § 1,
passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 11717, § 9, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. 12076, § 1, passed 8-
15-1995; Ord. 12669, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-10-1996; Ord. 12670, §§ 1—3, passed 9-
10-1996; Ord. 24061-02-2020, § 1, passed 2-18-2020, eff. 4-1-2020)
§ 35-57.1 FIRE LINES AND FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS; CHARGES; DISCONTINUANCE AND
RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
   (a)   No fire line or fire protection system shall be connected to the
public water main or supply without an approved meter or detector check device
with a bypass, except for a closed sprinkler system having an approved
automatic waterflow alarm system.
   (b)   The city shall install the necessary meters and service lines
connecting the fire line/fire protection system to the public water main or
supply to the detector check (on open systems) or to the curb line (on closed
systems) such installation to be done at the sole expense of the customer.
   (c)   The city shall maintain the fire line from the main to the curb line
on a closed fire system and from the main to the city side of the detector
check device on an open fire systems, but city shall not maintain the detector
check device. On combined domestic/fire line systems, the city shall maintain
the line from the main to the customer side of the meter.
   (d)   Periodic inspection of fire lines may be conducted by the city.
   (e)   The director may, upon ten days prior written notice to the city fire
marshal and customer, disconnect the fire line/fire protection system from the
public water main or supply if:
      (1)   An unauthorized connection to the public water main or supply
exists;
      (2)   Public water has been used from a fire line/fire protection system
for a purpose other than extinguishing a fire or for testing the fire line/fire
protection system;
      (3)   A fire line/fire protection system has been installed or used
without a required meter;
      (4)   A waste of water occurs from a fire line/fire protection system
through leaking pipes or fixtures and same is not repaired within ten days
after receiving notice; or
      (5)   Failure to pay the requisite monthly charge for the fire line.
   (f)   Upon disconnection of the fire line/fire protection system,
restoration of service shall not be made until the customer has remedied the
cause for disconnection.
   (g)   (1)   The monthly charges for connection to unmetered, automatic
sprinklers, or other fire lines installed and used for fire protection shall be
as follows:
 
Connection Size (Inches) Monthly Charge
4 and under              $16.95
6                        $25.50
8                        $33.95
10                       $56.40
12                       $105.10
 
      (2)   Charges for connection sizes larger than 12 inches shall be
determined by the director.
   (h)   All fire line/fire protection system systems shall comply in all
respects with the cross-connection control regulations.
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995)
§ 35-57.2 WATER METERS.
   (a)   Only one standard meter shall be attached to and be served by a three-
fourths-inch tap. No more than two standard meters or one one-inch meter shall
be attached to and served by a one-inch or three standard meters or three one-
inch meters shall be attached to and served by a one-and-one-half-inch tap. Not
more than one two-inch, four one-inch or six standard meters shall be attached
to and served by a two-inch tap.
   (b)   In instances where fire protection is not a factor and good
engineering practices permit, and upon written authorization from the director,
multiple small meter settings may be made at a single location instead of a
three-inch or larger meter at such location, but such multiple small meter
settings shall be made entirely at the customer’s cost. The customer’s cost
shall include tap installation, meters, meter fittings, meter boxes, meter
deposits and impact fees for each meter. The city shall retain ownership of all
of such facilities and equipment.
   (c)   Customers using a separate water meter for one or more seasonal
purposes (such as lawn watering, but not being limited thereto) shall in
addition to any volume charges pay the minimum monthly charge prescribed for
each meter size throughout the year.
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995)
§ 35-57.3 REDUCTION AND/OR ENLARGEMENT OF WATER METERS; CHARGES.
   A property owner may request that the water meter providing service to the
owner’s property be reduced or enlarged in size. A charge shall be made by the
city for each reduction or, in addition to any impact fee, enlargement of size
of the water meter. The charge to be made for the reduction or enlargement,
exclusive of any impact fee, shall be as follows:
 
Water Meter Reduction
Size Reduction (Inches) Charge
1 to 3/4                $40
1-1/2 to 3/4            $70
1-1/2 to 1              $70
2 to 1-1/2              $90
2 to 1                  $90
 
Water Meter Enlargement
Size Enlargement (Inches) Charge
3/4 to 1                  $40
3/4 to 1-1/2              $70
1 to 1-1/2                $70
1-1/2 to 2                $90
1 to 2                    $90
 
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995)
§ 35-57.4 WATER TAP CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   City installed tap. In the case where the city installs a two-inch or
smaller water tap, a charge shall be made for each tap made to a water main.
The charges shall be payable by the property owner prior to the tap being made
and shall be as follows:
 
Water Tap Fees
Pavement 1-inch         1.5-inch      2-inch
         Short   Long   Short  Long   Short  Long
Unpaved  $2,5000 $3,000 $2,700 $3,200 $2,900 $3,300
Asphalt* $3,000  $3,200 $3,200 $3,400 $3,400 $3,700
Concrete $3,000  $3,700 $3,200 $4,300 $3,400 $4,600
 
   *See also section (b) below for additional asphalt pavement repair fees.
   (b)   City installed tap within asphalt pavement. Any tap connection
performed within an asphalt street constructed more than two years prior to the
proposed tap connection will be assessed an additional charge associated with
the age and pavement condition index (PCI) as adopted by the city council.
   (c)   Taps within new pavement. Proposed tap connections within concrete or
asphalt pavement less than two years of age will not be performed by the city
and will be required to be made under a Community Facilities Agreement (CFA)
between the customer and the city.
   (d)   Other taps. Any tap connection larger than two inches, or involving
unusual circumstances, shall be made through the Community Facilities Agreement
process between the customer and the city or through the city's Miscellaneous
Contracts.
      (1)   Community Facilities Agreement. The customer shall comply with the
requirements of the CFA process and pavement repair in accordance with the
city's Utility Construction Policy.
      (2)   Miscellaneous contract. At the discretion of the city, tap
installations may be eligible to be performed through the city's Miscellaneous
Contracts. Any installations requiring excavation in a newly paved street
(within two years of age) are not eligible for the Miscellaneous Contract
process. Construction within the city's Downtown Central Business District are
not eligible for the Miscellaneous Contract process unless granted prior
approval from the Water Department Director. The Miscellaneous Contract may be
used for the following types of infrastructure:
         a.   Fire line taps;
         b.   Water service lines two-inches, or smaller; and
         c.   Water service taps greater than two-inches. Three-inches and
greater will require a meter vault in accordance with standard details.
   (e)   New developments. Developers shall pay the full cost of all water
service taps constructed by contract in new developments through a CFA.
   (f)   Pavement removal. In the case that installation of a water tap
connection requires the removal of pavement, the city and/or pre-qualified
contractor will abide by the city's Utility Construction Policy for all
pavement cuts or excavations within the city right-of-way and easements. All
construction must be in accordance with city standard construction
specifications. All pre-planned utility construction within city right-of-way,
including drainage or other applicable easements, requires a Street Use Permit
for Utility Construction ("Permit") prior to construction.
   (g)   Other fee. The tap charges shall be in addition to the applicable fees
provided for in the city plumbing code and in any other city codes, including,
but not limited to, impact fees.
   (h)   Violations. Any service connection made in violation of the City Code
may be removed at the property owner's expense.
   (i)   Ownership and maintenance.
      (1)   The water tap and service line installation shall be constructed at
the expense of the property owner/customer. The city shall then be the owner of
the tap and service line.
      (2)   The city shall maintain water service connections from the main to
the meter.
   (j)   Tap removal. The permanent removal or abandonment of a water service
line or meter may be performed under a Community Facilities Agreement (CFA),
Miscellaneous Projects or the city and comply with city's Utility Construction
Policy.
      (1)   The city shall not perform a removal of a tap within concrete or
asphalt pavement less than two years of age and will be required to be made
under a Community Facilities Agreement.
      (2)   If the tap removal request is through the city, a removal fee as
shown below shall be due and payable to the city prior to the tap being
removed. Any tap connection removed within an asphalt street constructed more
than two years prior to the proposed tap connection will be assessed an
additional charge associated with the age and pavement condition index (PCI) as
adopted by the City Council in accordance with the city's Utility Construction
Policy.
 
Water Tap Removal Fees
Pavement Fee
Unpaved  $1,400
Asphalt* $1,400*
Concrete $2,800
 
* Additional asphalt pavement repair fees will apply.
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995; Ord. 17619, § 1, passed 6-19-2007, eff. 10-
1-2007; Ord. 24061-02-2020, § 2, passed 2-18-2020, eff. 4-1-2020; Ord. 26452-
09-2023, § 1, passed 9-19-2023, eff. 10-1-2023)
§ 35-57.5 SEWER TAP CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   City installed tap. The city may install sewer taps eight-inches, or
smaller, with a depth not exceeding eight feet of cover. The property owner and
or customer shall pay a charge as detailed below for any sanitary sewer tap
installed by the city prior to the tap being made.
 
 
Sewer Tap Fees
Pavement  4"            6"*            8"*
          Short  Long   Short  Long    Short  Long
Unpaved   $2,600 $3,200 $3,100 $3,750  $3,600 $4,250
Asphalt** $4,200 $5,300 $7,000 $8,000  $8,600 $9,600
Concrete  $3,500 $7,900 $7,500 $10,200 $8,600 $11,500
 
*See also Section (b) for additional costs associated with manholes.
** See also section (c) below for addition asphalt pavement repair fees.
   (b)   Manhole requirement. All sewer taps greater than four-inch require
connection to an existing or installed manhole and shall be contracted and paid
for by the customer. If a connection to an existing manhole cannot be made, an
additional charge of $4,200 shall be payable by the property owner for the new
manhole installation.
   (c)   City installed tap within asphalt pavement. Any tap connection
performed within an asphalt street constructed more than two years prior to the
proposed tap connection will be assessed an additional charge associated with
the age and pavement condition index (PCI) as adopted by the city council in
accordance with the city's Utility Construction Policy.
   (d)   Taps within new pavement. Proposed tap connections within concrete or
asphalt pavement less than two years of age will not be performed by the city
and will be required to be made under a CFA between the customer and the city.
   (e)   Other taps. Any sanitary sewer tap involving unusual conditions,
connections to the city's deep sewer system, connections to mains exceeding
eight feet of depth, or taps larger than eight inches shall be made through the
Community Facilities Agreement process between the customer and city or through
the city's Miscellaneous Contracts.
      (1)   Community Facilities Agreement. The customer shall comply with the
requirements of the CFA process and pavement repair in accordance with the
city's Utility Construction Policy.
      (2)   Miscellaneous contract. At the discretion of the city, tap
installations may be eligible to be performed through the city's Miscellaneous
Contracts. Any installations requiring excavation in a newly paved street
(within two years of age) are not eligible for the Miscellaneous Contract
process. Construction within the city's Downtown Central Business District are
not eligible for the Miscellaneous Contract process unless granted prior
approval from the Water Department Director. The Miscellaneous Contract may be
used for any size of sewer tap where the depth of cover does not exceed 12
feet.
   (f)   New developments. Developers shall pay the full cost of all sewer
service taps constructed by contract in new developments through a CFA.
   (g)   Pavement removal. In the case that installation of a sewer tap
connection requires the removal of pavement, the city and/or pre-qualified
contractor will abide to the city's Utility Construction Policy for all
pavement cuts or excavations within the City of Fort Worth rights of way (ROW)
and easements. All construction must be in accordance with city standard
construction specifications. All pre-planned utility construction within city
right-of-way, including drainage or other applicable easements, requires a
Street Use Permit for Utility Construction ("Permit") prior to construction.
   (h)   Other fees. The tap charges shall be in addition to the applicable
fees provided for in the city plumbing code and in any other city codes,
including, but not limited to, impact fees.
   (i)   Grade verification. Prior to any construction of a building sewer
lateral, the property owner shall verify in writing that the sewer lateral is
capable of being installed to such a grade that will permit a sanitary sewer
tap to be made by the city and that will meet all applicable city codes.
Verification will be made by a drawing depicting the grade of the sanitary
sewer lateral and the elevation of the sanitary sewer tap. In the absence of
such verification, that portion of any building sewer to be constructed by the
plumber or the person securing the permit shall not be constructed prior to the
completion of the sanitary sewer tap by the water department forces.
   (j)   Violations. Any service connection made in violation of the City Code
shall be removed at the property owner's expense.
   (k)   Ownership and maintenance.
      (1)   The sanitary sewer tap shall be constructed at the expense of the
owner/customer. The city shall then own and maintain the sewer tap upon
completion and acceptance.
      (2)   The city shall maintain wastewater service connections from the
main to the property line.
   (l)   Tap removal. When a property owner requests permanent removal or
abandonment of a sanitary sewer service line, then the tap removal shall be
made through the Community Facilities Agreement process between the customer
and city or through the city's Miscellaneous Contracts. The city shall not
perform any sewer tap removal.
      (1)   Community Facilities Agreement. The customer shall comply with the
requirements of the CFA process and pavement repair in accordance with the
city's Utility Construction Policy.
      (2)   Miscellaneous Contract. At the discretion of the city, tap removal
may be eligible to be performed through the city's Miscellaneous Contracts. Any
installations requiring excavation in a newly paved street (within two years of
age) are not eligible for the Miscellaneous Contract process. Construction
within the city's Downtown Central Business District are not eligible for the
Miscellaneous Contract process unless granted prior approval from the Water
Department Director. The Miscellaneous Contract may be used for any sewer tap
removal where the depth of cover does not exceed 12 feet.
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995; Ord. 17619, § 1, passed 6-19-2007, eff. 10-
1-2007; Ord. 24061-02-2020, § 3, passed 2-18-2020, eff. 4-1-2020; Ord. 26452-
09-2023, § 1, passed 9-19-2023, eff. 10-1-2023)
§ 35-57.6 DEEP SEWER.
   In part of the downtown area the city maintains a separate sanitary sewer
system to serve the basements of the buildings located in that area. The
separate system is referred to as the deep sewer. The construction of the sewer
tap shall be done by the city, or the plumber or person holding the permit may
be permitted by the plumbing inspector to construct the sewer tap in accordance
with requirements of the city plumbing code and all other applicable ordinances
of the city. Any work done by the city in making a deep sewer connection shall
be paid for by the plumber or other person holding a plumbing permit relating
to such deep sewer connection.
(Ord. 12076, § 2, passed 8-15-1995)
§ 35-57.7 WATER AND SEWER TAPS IN UNIMPROVED STREETS.
   (a)   In cases where the city council has directed that an unimproved street
be paved and such unimproved street contains existing water or sewer mains but
no sanitary sewer or water taps have been extended to one or more of the
abutting lots, in order to prevent future paving cuts, the city is authorized
to install or cause to be installed a sanitary sewer tap or water tap to
connect the water or sewer mains to each such lot.
   (b)   If the applicable charges for water or sanitary sewer taps installed
under this section are not paid prior to the date such street is improved by
paving, an additional $30 shall be charged for each water or sanitary sewer
tap. These charges shall be payable at the time the property is connected to
the water or sewer line in the city.
   (c)   The owner of each abutting lot served by each water tap constructed
under this section shall pay the appropriate charge for such tap as stated in §
35-57.4.
   (d)   The owner of each abutting lot served by each sewer tap constructed
under this section shall pay the appropriate charge for such tap as stated in §
35-57.5.
(1964 Code, § 37-26) (Ord. 5432, § 2, passed - -; Ord. 5875, §§ 1—6, passed -
-; Ord. 6325, § 3, passed 6-29-1970; Ord. 6685, § 2, passed 6-19-1972; Ord.
6888, § 2, passed 8-13-1973; Ord. 7094, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-11-1974; Ord. 7380,
§ 2, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 7981, § 2, passed 9-18-1979; Ord. 8158, § 2, passed
8-18-1980; Ord. 8264, § 2, passed 2-10-1981; Ord. 8387, § 2, passed 9-1-1981;
Ord. 8618, § 2, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 8619, § 3, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 8680,
§ 2, passed 11-16-1982; Ord. 8905, § 3, passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 8906, § 2,
passed 8-30-1983; Ord. 9179, § 3, passed 8-28-1984; Ord. 9180, § 3, passed 8-
28-1984; Ord. 9432, § 3, passed 7-23-1985; Ord. 9433, § 3, passed 7-23-1985;
Ord. 9696, §§ 4—6, passed 8-19-1986; Ord. 9982, § 1, passed 10-13-1987; Ord.
10026, § 3, passed 12-18-1987; Ord. 10075, § 1, passed 3-15-1988; Ord. 10173, §
2, passed 9-27-1988; Ord. 10374, §§ 1, 2, passed 8-29-1989; Ord. 10678, § 1,
passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 11717, § 9, passed 11-1-1994; Ord. 12076, § 1, passed 8-
15-1995)
§ 35-58 ASSESSMENT FRONT FOOTAGE CHARGES FOR SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (a)   Generally. In addition to other connection charges provided in this
chapter, a front footage charge shall be paid for all service connections made
to all water and sanitary sewer mains in the following cases:
      (1)   Service connections or extensions made to serve adjacent property
from an approach facility constructed by a developer, single-customer property
owner or the city;
      (2)   Service connections or extensions made to serve adjacent property
from an approach facility that has been replaced at developer, single-customer
property owner cost or the city; and
      (3)   Service connections or extensions made to serve adjacent property
from an approach facility installed by multiple single-customer property owners
or the city.
      (4)   Service connections or extensions made to serve adjacent property
from a frontage main connecting from an approach main constructed or replaced
by a developer, single-customer property owner, multiple single-customer
property owners or the city.
   (b)   Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as follows when used
in this section.
      APPROACH MAIN.  A portion of the sanitary sewer or water main from the
point of connection to the existing main to the nearest property corner of the
developing property.
      CITY PARTICIPATION. The portion of the construction cost that the city
reimburses a developer under the policy for the installation of community
facilities.
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment other than a one- or two-unit
residence.
      DEVELOPER. Any type of new customer other than "single-customer property
owner."
      DEVELOPMENT COST.
         a.   The cost incurred by the city related to either a city-initiated
sanitary wastewater or water main or the city participation costs in a
developer-initiated wastewater or water main, which costs are based upon the
costs contained in the contracts awarded for the construction of the water
main, regardless of the final cost;
         b.   The cost incurred by a developer related to the construction of a
developer-initiated wastewater or water main based solely on the cost of the
contracts awarded for the construction of such wastewater or water main,
without regard to the final cost; or
         c.   Both a. and b.
      DEVELOPER'S DEVELOPMENT COST PERCENTAGE. The development cost incurred by
the developer divided by the development cost, expressed as a percentage.
      FRONT FOOTAGE. The number of linear feet in that portion of a property
boundary abutting a street, alley or easement containing a sanitary sewer or
water main for which front footage charges are collected for connection.
      FRONTAGE MAIN. The portion of the sanitary sewer or water main located
within the frontage of the developing property.
      FRONTAGE MAIN ELIGIBILITY. Frontage main eligibility may only occur when
the property's frontage main is shared with another property on the opposing
side of the street right-of-way to the developer's property is owned by a
separate landowner not affiliated with the developer.
      SINGLE-CUSTOMER PROPERTY OWNER. An existing occupied residential
establishment or an existing commercial establishment.
   (c)   Sewers crossing through property served. In the case of an easement
containing a sanitary sewer for which footage charges are collected for
connection, which sewer crosses through the property served, the boundary on
which the front footage charge is to be based shall be the length of the sewer
within the limits of such property measured along the centerline of such sewer.
   (d)   Determination of front footage. Front footage to be used in
application of front footage charges shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   The front footage charge shall apply directly to property platted
into lots or tracts of land;
      (2)   Front footage charge shall be determined by using the longest
boundary length abutting a street, alley or easement containing a wastewater or
water facility serving the property or computed as one-six of the perimeter of
such property, whichever is greater. The payment of front footage charges by
the customer shall be the greater amount as calculated above;
      (3)   The front footage charge shall be calculated as prescribed by the
method in the policy for installation of community facilities for water and
sewer;
      (4)   The director shall be authorized to collect the front foot charge
in the amounts established by city council pursuant to this section and the
policy for installation of community facilities, whichever is greater; and
      (5)   The applicable front footage charges required hereunder for water
or sanitary sewer service connections shall be paid before the filing of a
final plat, or before a plumbing permit can be issued; and
      (6)   The front footage charge for frontage main eligibility shall be
one-half the prescribed calculated method in the policy of installation of
community facilities for water and sewer for service connections or extensions
made to serve adjacent property.
   (e)   Determination of the front foot charge for the appropriate pipe size.
Front footage amounts to be used to determine the front footage charge
calculated in subsection (d) above:
      (1)   The appropriate pipe size is determined based on the approved water
and sewer studies of the subsequent developments that will benefit from the
connection to the existing approach main or by the water department director's,
or his or her designee's, approval.
      (2)   The front foot charges are as follows:
 
Size of Connecting Pipe Water FFC
8-inch or Smaller       $43.23
10-inch                 $54.22
12-inch                 $57.73
16-inch                 $75.57
 
Size of Connecting Pipe Sewer FFC
Size of Connecting Pipe Sewer FFC
8-inch or Smaller       $54.26
10-inch                 $56.46
12-inch                 $65.70
15-inch                 $74.94
18-inch                 $84.18
21-inch                 $93.44
24-inch                 $115.95
 
   (f)   Administration of front foot charge.  The administration of front foot
charges is as follows:
      (1)   The water department shall be responsible for the collection,
refund and maintenance of front foot charges collected.
      (2)   The payment of the front foot charge assessed hereunder shall be
paid prior to the filing of final plat, or before a plumbing permit can be
issued.
      (3)   A four percent (4%) annual cost adjustment shall be added to each
prescribed front footage charge. The annual cost adjustment increase shall be
assessed on January 1st of each year.
      (4)   Approach main reimbursement may be equal to, but not greater than,
100% of the cost for the water or wastewater approach main incurred by
developer.
      (5)   Frontage main reimbursement may be equal to, but not greater than
50% of the cost for the frontage main incurred by the developer.
      (6)   Front foot charges will be assessed for a period of 20 years,
commencing on the date that the city accepts the water or wastewater main.
      (7)   Collections and reimbursements of front foot charges will cease
when the developer has been fully reimbursed or the time period for assessment
of front foot charges has lapsed, whichever occurs first.
      (8)   Reimbursement shall be made solely from front foot charges
collected by the city during the period that front foot charges are assessed
for the water or wastewater service line connections and point of connections
to the water or wastewater main extension.
      (9)   Any assignment of front foot charges must be approved by the water
department director prior to the execution of the assignment.
      (10)   Existing community facilities agreements with mains, or other
facilities, eligible for front foot charge collections will continue under the
policy that was in effect at the time the agreement was executed.
      (11)   The reimbursement limit, together with the project number, date
construction was completed, permanent record number of main, limits of portion
of the main upon which front foot charges are collectible, and name of the
entity entitled to the refund shall be documented by the city.
      (12)   Upon written request by the developer during the month of
November, reimbursements will be made annually during the last two months of
the calendar year from which front foot charges were paid to the city.
      (13)   It is the responsibility of the developer/landowner requesting the
refund to prove their eligibility to receive the reimbursement due.
      (14)   In the event the developer/single customer property owner fails to
request a reimbursement of front foot charges within six months after the
expiration of the eligibility to receive funds, such un-reimbursed front foot
charges shall become the property of the city.
      (15)   The amount of refund due to the developer each year shall be the
assessed front foot charge collected that year multiplied by the developer's
development cost percentage. The remaining portion of the amount collected that
year shall be retained by the city as an offset against the development cost
incurred by the city.
      (16)   The city will recover the city development cost for city-initiated
approach water and/or sewer main projects or city participation in a developer-
initiated approach water and/or sewer main. The city's collection time will
cease when city development cost has been fully reimbursed.
(1964 Code, § 37-26.1) (Ord. 5925, § 1, passed - -; Ord. 7059, § 1, passed 9-
16-1974; Ord. 7116, § 1, passed 1-20-1975; Ord. 7413, § 1, passed 8-30-1976;
Ord. 7621, § 1, passed 9-13-1977; Ord. 7673, § 1, passed 12-13-1977; Ord. 7710,
§ 1, passed 3-7-1978; Ord. 7753, § 1, passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 7908, § 1, passed
9-12-1978; Ord. 7851, § 1, passed 11-30-1978; Ord. 7893, § 1, passed 3-13-1979;
Ord. 7922, § 1, passed 6-12-1979; Ord. 7974, § 1, passed 9-11-1979; Ord. 8019,
§ 1, passed 12-18-1979; Ord. 8063, § 1, passed 3-11-1980; Ord. 8106, § 1,
passed 6-10-1980; Ord. 8122, § 1, passed 7-1-1980; Ord. 8165, § 1, passed 9-9-
1980; Ord. 8241, § 1, passed 12-23-1980; Ord. 8287, § 1, passed 3-10-1981; Ord.
8361, § 1, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 8423, § 1, passed 9-22-1981; Ord. 8487, § 1,
passed 12-15-1981; Ord. 8542, § 1, passed 3-30-1982; Ord. 8576, § 1, passed 6-
1-1982; Ord. 8661, § 1, passed 10-5-1982; Ord. 8706, § 1, passed 12-21-1982;
Ord. 8865, § 1, passed 7-12-1983; Ord. 8952, § 1, passed 10-18-1983; Ord. 8995,
§ 1, passed 12-22-1983; Ord. 9126, § 1, passed 6-19-1984; Ord. 9270, § 1,
passed 12-18-1984; Ord. 9438, § 1, passed 7-30-1985; Ord. 9534, § 1, passed 12-
17-1985; Ord. 9654, § 1, passed 6-17-1986; Ord. 9892, § 1, passed 6-16-1987;
Ord. 10030, § 1, passed 12-22-1987; Ord. 10122, § 1, passed 6-7-1988; Ord.
10220, § 1, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 10326, § 1, passed 6-20-1989; Ord. 10463, §
1, passed 12-12-1989; Ord. 10583, § 1, passed 5-25-1990; Ord. 10622, § 1,
passed 6-26-1990; Ord. 10752, § 1, passed 12-18-1990; Ord. 10855, § 1, passed
6-4-1991; Ord. 10978, § 1, passed 12-19-1991; Ord. 17622, § 1, passed 6-19-
2007, eff. 10-1-2007; Ord. 21342-07-2014, § 1, passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 23708-06-
2019, § 1, passed 6-25-2019; Ord. 26623-12-2023, §§ 1, 2, passed 12-12-2023,
eff. 1-1-2024)
§ 35-58.1 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM FACILITY ACCESS FEES.
   (a)   Definitions. When used in the section, the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit required by the city for the construction of
any new dwelling or building.
      COMMERCIAL. Any customer served by a single meter or meters that is
engaged in any type of business, except the processing, fabrication or
manufacturing of any goods or products and any type of dwelling unit.
      COMMERCIAL-MULTIPLE UNIT. Any customer that has a single meter or meters
serving more than one business per meter and/or three or more dwelling units
per meter.
      DIRECTOR. The director of the water department of the City of Fort Worth,
or his or her authorized representative.
      GENERAL BENEFIT FACILITY. Wastewater facilities that provide utility
services and benefits common to all customers of the utility; this includes
wastewater treatment plants, control systems and appurtenances, and all major
collectors and interceptors that are 18 inches and greater in diameter.
      INDUSTRIAL. Any customer served by one or more water meters whose sewage
contains wastewater from a product fabricated, processed or manufactured by the
customer.
      INDUSTRIAL-MONITORED CLASS. Any customer determined by the director to be
a producer of any sewage having a suspended solids or B.O.D. content which is
significantly in excess of that found in normal sewage, but is otherwise
acceptable into the city sanitary sewerage system.
      INITIAL WASTEWATER SERVICE. The first wastewater service to be provided
at a specific property location.
      INITIAL WATER SERVICE. The first water service to be provided at a
specific property location.
      LIVING AREA. The enclosed area of a dwelling that does not include
garages, carports and outside patios or porches.
      METER. A device that measures the quantity of water used. The types of
meters used herein are those described in the American Water Works Association
C700 through C703 and M6 Standards.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, cooperative corporation or
any combination of these persons or entities including a municipal corporation,
water supply or sewer service corporation or other political subdivision of the
state, or their lessees, trustees and receivers, owning or operating for
compensation equipment or facilities for the provision of potable water to the
public or for the collection and treatment of sewage for the public, but does
not include any person or corporation not otherwise a public utility that
furnishes the services only to itself or its employees or tenants as an
incident of that employee’s service or tenancy when that service is not resold
to or used by others.
      RESIDENTIAL. Any customer living in a dwelling having the necessary
living facilities for one unit that is served by a single water meter. This
class also includes a duplex dwelling where no more than two living units are
supplied water through a single meter.
   (b)   System facility access fee.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall be entitled to
initial wastewater service until payment of the appropriate system facility
access fee as set forth in subsection (c) hereof. Payment of the system access
fee is required as a condition precedent to establishing initial wastewater
service. All other conditions for initiating service, such as deposit
requirements, tap fees, extension agreements and service charges are covered
elsewhere in the city code and are in addition to the system access fee.
      (2)   Prior to the initial connection of any building, structure,
premises or lot after the effective date of this section to the city’s
wastewater system, the owner of that building, structure, premises or lot shall
pay the system facility access fee as established in subsection (c) below, such
fee to be paid in cash prior to the issuance of the building permit.
   (c)   Schedule of fees.
      (1)   The system facility access fees for the residential class using a
five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch water meter shall be those as set out
in Table I.
Table I
Living Area (sq. ft.) Wastewater System Access Fee
Table I
Living Area (sq. ft.) Wastewater System Access Fee
Under 1,000           $88
1,001—1,200         $102
1,201—1,400         $116
1,401—1,600         $130
1,601—1,800         $144
1,801—2,000         $158
Over 2,000            $172
 
      (2)   The system facility access fees for all other customer classes and
the residential class using a water meter larger than the five-eighths-inch by
three-fourths-inch meter shall be those as set out in Table II below.
Table II
Wastewater System Facility Access Fees
Meter                       1-1/
Size  5/8 × 3/4 in. 1 in.  2 in.  2 in.  2 in.   3 in.  3 in    4 in.   6 in.   8 in.   10 in.
and   Simple         Simple Simple Simple Turbine Simple Turbine Turbine Turbine Turbine Turbine
Type
Table II
Wastewater System Facility Access Fees
Meter Size  5/8 × 3/4 in. 1 in.  1-1/    2 in.   2 in.   3 in.   3 in    4 in.    6 in.    8 in.    10 in.
and Type    Simple         Simple 2 in.   Simple  Turbine Simple  Turbine Turbine  Turbine  Turbine  Turbine
                                  Simple
Equivalent
meter       1              2.5    5       8       10      15      24      42       92       160      250
factor
Residential See Tbl. I     $324   $649    $1,038  $1,297  N/A     N/A     N/A      N/A      N/A      N/A
Commercial  $409           $1,022 $2,044  $3,270  $4,088  $6,131  $9,810  $17,168  $37,606  $65,402  $102,190
Comm.       $481           $1,202 $2,403  $3,845  $4,807  $7,210  $11,536 $20,188  $44,222  $76,908  $120,168
multi-unit
Industrial  $194           $485   $969    $1,551  $1,938  $2,907  $4,652  $8,142   $17,832  $31,011  $48,455
Indust.-
monitored   $2,740         $6,849 $13,698 $21,917 $27,396 $41,094 $65,751 $115,064 $252,044 $438,338 $684,902
class
 
      (3)   The full amount of the fees set out in this section, as amended
from time-to-time through cost-of-service based studies, will be phased-in
gradually as specified below:
 
                                   Percentage of System Facility Access Fee in
                                   Effect During Fiscal Year to be Charged
For City of Fort Worth Fiscal Year Wastewater
Beginning October 1
1986                               20%
1987                               40%
1988                               60%
1989                               80%
1990                               100%
 
   (d)   Private and public facilities.
      (1)   If any property within or without the city’s corporate limits
utilizes a water well, a septic tank or an individual waste disposal system and
the property owner requests to be connected to the city’s wastewater system,
the customer shall be assessed the fee established by this section before the
property is connected to the city’s wastewater system. Should the property
owner request only a wastewater connection while retaining a private water
well, the appropriate fee to be assessed will be determined by the director of
the water department.
      (2)   A system facility access fee will not be assessed to any property
which is receiving service from a wastewater treatment plant owned by a public
utility when such public utility is acquired by the city and connected into the
city’s wastewater system.
   (e)   Clarifications and determinations. When a question arises as to the
classification of a customer’s service class and/or the appropriate meter size,
the director shall make the determination in accordance with the existing city
code as of the date the question arises. Any customer shall have the right to
request in writing from the director an interpretation or clarification of the
basis upon which a system facility access fee was assessed.
   (f)   Increasing size of meter.
      (1)   If a customer requests an increase in meter size to an existing
service, the customer shall pay the fee difference between the new level of
service and the existing level of service as set out in subsection (c) hereof.
The additional fee shall be paid prior to the installation of the enlarged
meter service.
      (2)   A request for additional sewer connections for improved property
shall not result in the assessment of an additional system facility access fee
so long as no increase in the size of the water meter is made.
   (g)   Dedicated funds.
      (1)   The system facility access fees together with all interest derived
therefrom that are generated by this section shall be deposited into a
dedicated fund account to be used solely for the financing of the construction,
design, inspection and other related expenses of general benefit wastewater
capital improvement projects.
      (2)   A separate dedicated fund shall be established for receipt of
proceeds from wholesale sewer customers of the city. This dedicated fund shall
not be commingled with fee proceeds from the retail customer class except to
the extent funds may be combined for expenditure on general benefit capital
facilities. Such funds collected from wholesale customers shall be used solely
for the purposes set out in the contracts between Fort Worth and its wholesale
customers.
   (h)   Timely utilization of fees. It is intended that the fees collected by
this section will be utilized in a timely manner to provide additional capacity
of general benefit facilities. For purposes of this section, timely utilization
of fees is determined to mean the encumbrance of funds for general benefit
contracts within five years from the date of the receipt of a fee. In the event
that such proceeds are not encumbered within five years of date of receipt,
such fees will be refunded to the present property owner upon written request.
   (i)   Waiver of fee. No system facility access fee shall be assessed an
application for initial wastewater service provided:
      (1)   All approach and on-site mains and facilities are in place and
final inspection has been conducted and accepted by the water department;
      (2)   Such application for the initial wastewater service is presented to
the city on or before May 1, 1987; and
      (3)   The application for a building permit for the same property as the
initial wastewater service application is presented to the city on or before
September 30, 1987.
(Ord. 9721, §§ 1—10, passed 9-23-1986; Ord. 9805, §§ 1—10, passed 1-27-1987;
Ord. 9853, §§ 1—9, passed 3-31-1987)
Cross-reference:
   Water and wastewater impact fees, see §§
35-66
    et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9721, adopted Sept. 23, 1966, added provisions designated as § 37-26.2
to the 1964 Code. Inclusion of the substantive provisions of said ordinance as
§
35-58.1 hereof has been at the editor’s discretion. The effective date of §
35-58.1 is May 1, 1987. Also it should be noted that Ord. 10601, § 1(3.06),
adopted June 5, 1990, as codified at §
35-80.1, provides for the replacement of access fees for new development, etc.
See §
35-80.1.
§ 35-59 RATES FOR PUBLIC QUARTERS ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.
   (a)   The term PUBLIC QUARTERS LOCATED ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS ADJACENT TO
THE CORPORATE BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY shall mean all housing units or projects
located upon land owned by the United States of America and operated by the
United States Air Force as places of residence for personnel stationed at
Carswell Air Force Base, a portion of such base being within or adjacent to the
corporate boundaries of the city.
   (b)   Charges for water and sewerage services rendered to public quarters
located on military installations adjacent to the corporate boundaries of the
city, whether such public quarters are within or without the corporate limits
of the city, shall be the same as the rates established or hereafter
established for consumers located within the corporate limits of the city, and
the minimum charge for such service shall be that applicable to the size of the
meter through which water is furnished without regard to the number of living
or other units served through such meters.
(1964 Code, §§ 37-27, 37-28)
§ 35-60 USES OUTSIDE CITY.
   (a)   The rates charged by the city for water furnished for use on premises
located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be one and
one-quarter times the rates charged for water furnished to premises within the
corporate limits.
   (b)   The rates charged by the city for rendering wastewater service to or
use of wastewater facilities by premises located within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city shall be one and one-quarter times the charge for
comparable service inside the corporate limits. Such charges for service shall
be applicable to wastewater ultimately received through the wastewater system
of the city.
   (c)   The charge for treating industrial waste originating from premises
located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be one and
one-quarter times the charge for treating comparable industrial waste
originating from premises within the corporate limits.
   (d)   Impact fees and tap or service connection fees for water and
wastewater service provided within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction
shall be the same as if the services were provided within the corporate limits.
No service shall be rendered through any water or wastewater connection unless
the charges are paid.
   (e)   The city may enter into a written agreement with any of its wholesale
municipal water or wastewater customers to provide retail water and/or
wastewater service to residents of the wholesale municipal customer at the same
rate and for the same service fees applicable to such service within the city.
   (f)   Nothing in this section or any other ordinance shall be construed to
compel the city to furnish water, wastewater or industrial waster service or
the services of its water, wastewater or industrial waste treatment plants to
any person, as defined in this chapter, located beyond the corporate limits and
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, or to continue such service once
initiated; and the city reserves the right to furnish such service to such
persons as it deems advisable and to at any time wholly or partially
discontinue the service upon violation of any of the terms of this chapter. No
water or wastewater service shall be furnished consumers beyond the corporate
limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction unless and until such
consumers shall furnish the city with satisfactory evidence that all plumbing,
including fixtures and appliances through which water or wastewater is to pass
have been approved by the city plumbing inspector. If additional plumbing is to
be installed on such premises after water or wastewater service has commenced,
such consumer shall secure a city plumbing permit for such additional
installations, and no water from the city waterworks or wastewater service
shall be provided such premises unless and until such additional plumbing
installations have been approved by the city plumbing inspector.
(1964 Code, § 37-29) (Ord. 16804, § 1, passed 1-31-2006)
§ 35-61 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Form of security. Unless exempted herein, all customers shall be
required to make a deposit in one of the following forms:
      (1)   Cash;
      (2)   Guarantee bond in a form and from a surety company acceptable to
the director of the water department;
      (3)   Letter of credit drawn on a state or federally chartered lending
institution located in Tarrant County, Texas; provided however, that in the
event the letter of credit is not renewed at least 15 days prior to the date of
expiration, the letter of credit may be drawn upon and the funds so received
shall become a cash deposit; and
      (4)   Assignment to the City of Fort Worth of certificate of deposit in a
state or federally chartered lending institution located in Tarrant County,
Texas.
   (b)   Amount. The director of the water department or his or her duly
authorized representative shall establish the amount of a security deposit
which will be sufficient to insure the city against loss due to nonpayment of
final bill.
   (c)   Failure to provide security. The director of the water department or
his or her duly authorized representative may refuse or discontinue service to
any person, firm or corporation who fails to make a required security deposit
or fails to increase the amount of the security deposit after having been
notified that an increase is required.
   (d)   Hardship cases. In cases of extreme hardship the director of the water
department or his or her duly authorized representative may allow single-family
residential service customers to make cash deposits in installments.
   (e)   Exemptions from security deposit requirement. A person is not required
to post a security deposit provided he or she has a satisfactory credit history
with the water department as determined by the director or his or her duly
authorized representative.
   (f)   Withdrawal of exemption. If a customer establishes an account without
a security deposit, but subsequently loses his or her satisfactory credit
history with the department, a security deposit may be required as a condition
for continued service.
   (g)   Exceptions to section. This section does not apply to governmental
entities or to wholesale service contracts.
(1964 Code, § 37-30) (Ord. 9937, § 1, passed 8-25-1987; Ord. 11922, § 2, passed
4-18-1995; Ord. 23990-12-2019, § 3, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 4-1-2020)
Cross-reference:
   Security deposit refunds, see §
35-65
§ 35-62 ESTIMATION WHEN METER DEFECTIVE.
   Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a
consumer since the previous reading, the right shall exist on the part of the
city water department to charge for water and sewer service on the basis of
three month’s average.
(1964 Code, § 37-31)
§ 35-63 PAYABLE AND DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   Bills for water and service charges shall become due and payable to
the city, in person, over the phone, by mail, online or as otherwise indicated
on the customer's bill within 21 days from the date of the bill. If a customer
has not paid the bill in full within 24 days of the date of the bill, a late
charge shall be assessed against all unpaid current charges on the bill
according to the specified in §
35-56(1).
   (b)   The owner, occupant or tenant of any premises receiving services shall
be responsible for the payment of the fees incurred for such premises for
services under this article.
   (c)   When an account becomes delinquent, the director may send the customer
a second bill. If the account is not brought current within ten days of the
date of the second billing, the city may suspend all city-provided utility
services until payment is made in full.
   (d)   After the city has terminated a customer's service for nonpayment or
if the account becomes delinquent, the director may file a lien against the
property that received the services in the amount of the delinquent fee. A lien
may not be filed against any property that is protected as a homestead by the
Texas Constitution.
   (e)   A notice of lien authorized by this section shall be filed in the real
property records in the county in which such property is located. The lien
shall contain a legal description of the property and the service account
number.
   (f)   The director may add the amount of delinquent charges, including
penalties, filing fees, interest and collection costs, if any, incurred upon
the property as of the date of execution of the lien. Should additional
delinquent charges be incurred subsequent to the date of the original lien's
execution, a correction lien may be executed and filed fixing the additional
delinquent charges. The correction lien, when filed of record, shall relate
back to the date of recording of the original lien and shall become a part of
the original lien.
   (g)   A lien filed pursuant to this section is inferior to a bona fide
mortgage lien that is recorded before the recording of the city's lien. The
city's lien is superior to all other liens including previously recorded
judgment liens and any liens recorded after the city's lien.
   (h)   The authority of the director to impose liens on real property for
nonpayment of service fees does not apply to property which has been properly
declared rental property pursuant to this subsection.
      (1)   The owner of any property which is rented to another person may
declare such property to be rental property not subject to lien if the service
account is in the name of the tenant.
      (2)   The declaration shall be in writing, specifically naming the
service address, declaring such to be rental property, and declaring that the
owner does not wish such property to be used as security for services provided
by the city.
      (3)   The declaration of rental property shall be valid only so long as
the person making the declaration owns the property, and rents the property to
another, and the tenant has services provided in his or her name. An owner may
revoke a declaration at any time by notifying the city in writing.
   (i)   A lien shall not apply to the services provided to the tenant prior to
the effective date of this section, nor shall it apply to services provided a
tenant in the tenant's name after a declaration is filed by the property owner.
   (j)   A lien may be appealed, modified and released as follows.
      (1)   Within 30 days after filing a lien pursuant to this section, the
director shall give notice to the property owner and the account holder that
such a lien has been filed on the property. Notice shall be delivered by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (2)   Within 30 days after receiving notice, the property owner may
appeal the filing of the lien to the director in writing. The director may hold
a hearing on the matter or may make a decision based upon the property owners
written appeal.
      (3)   The director shall authorize the release of the lien if the
property owner shows by a preponderance of the evidence that no bill for
services to the property is owing or that at the time the lien was filed the
property was protected as a homestead under the Texas Constitution.
      (4)   The director may modify or release the lien to reflect the true
amount of delinquency in payment for services to the property if the owner
proves by a preponderance of the evidence that a lesser bill is owing than that
alleged by the lien.
      (5)   The person last listed on the county tax rolls as being the owner
of the subject property shall be presumed to be the owner for purposes of this
subsection (j), and the address listed for the owner on the county tax records
shall be presumed to be the address of the owner.
      (6)   Whenever a person pays all interest, principal, and filing fees of
a lien validly filed pursuant to this section, the director shall execute a
release of that lien and surrender it to the paying party. The city shall not
be responsible for filing the release.
   (k)   The city attorney, at the request of the director, may file suit to
judicially foreclose the lien in a state court of competent jurisdiction.
(1964 Code, § 37-32) (Ord. 18835-09-2009, § 4, passed 9-22-2009, eff. 1-1-2010;
Ord. 23990-12-2019, § 4, passed 12-17-2019, eff. 4-1-2020; Ord. 25423-03-2022,
§ 2, passed 3-29-2022)
§ 35-64 USE OF SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   (a)   Accounting requirements. The director shall keep:
      (1)   Accurate records of all security deposits, including, but not
limited to, the depositor’s name, amounts deposited and deposits refunded; and
      (2)   Separate accounts of all security deposits.
   (b)   Administration of deposits. The director shall administer cash
security deposits in accordance with the following rules:
      (1)   A deposit will be applied toward payment of the final bill amount
due the city when a service account is closed or becomes inactive due to
delinquency, transfer of ownership or other reasons;
      (2)   A deposit made to secure service to premises may be transferred or
applied toward payment of a final bill; and
      (3)   A deposit, less amounts due for service, will be returned to the
customer when service is discontinued, unless the deposit is transferred to
another address.
(Ord. 9937, § 2, passed 8-25-1987)
§ 35-65 SECURITY DEPOSIT REFUNDS.
   (a)   Definition. As used in this section only, the term CUSTOMER means a
single-family residence or duplex and shall include a yard meter serving such
residence or duplex.
   (b)   Refund requirements. The director of the water department or his or
her duly authorized representative may refund a security deposit to the
customer when the customer meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The customer has been receiving service for 12 continuous months;
      (2)   The customer has acquired a satisfactory credit history with the
water department;
      (3)   The customer has not made payment during the past 12 months with a
check returned due to insufficient funds; and
      (4)   The customer has no delinquent bills outstanding.
   (c)   Refusal to refund. Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the director
of the water department or his or her duly authorized representative may refuse
to refund a security deposit where due to the circumstances of a customer’s
account there is a substantial risk of financial loss to the department.
   (d)   Review for eligibility. The director of the water department or his or
her duly authorized representative shall review all customer payment histories
at least once each year to determine eligibility for refund. Refunds will be
made in the following manner.
      (1)   A refund will normally be credited to a customer’s bill.
      (2)   If a refund is greater than the outstanding bill, the remaining
portion of the refund will be applied to the subsequent bills.
      (3)   If a customer no longer has an account for service or, in special
circumstances approved by the director of the water department, such refund may
be made by a check made payable to the customer.
(Ord. 9937, § 3, passed 8-25-1987)
DIVISION 2: WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES
Cross-reference:
   Water and wastewater system facility access fees, see §
35-58.1
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10601, § 1, adopted June 5, 1990, amended the code by adding provisions
designated as § 35-58.2. For purposes of classification, said provisions have
been included herein as Div. 2, §§
35-66 through
35-80.1 at the discretion of the editor. Sections
35-56 through
35-65 have been designated as Div. 1. See the Code Comparative Table for a
detailed analysis of inclusion. See also the editor’s note at §
35-58.1.
SUBDIVISION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35-66 SHORT TITLE.
   This division shall be known and cited as the Fort Worth Impact Fee
Division.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.01), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-67 PURPOSE.
   This division is intended to assure the provision of adequate public
facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each such
development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of capital improvements
necessitated by and attributable to such new development.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.02), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-68 AUTHORITY.
   This division is adopted pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 395
(Vernon 1990 Supp.) (SB336) and pursuant to the Fort Worth City Charter. The
provisions of this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the
city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other
city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution
for or in conjunction with this division.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.03), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-69 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this division.
   BENEFIT AREA. Either a water benefit area established pursuant to
Subdivision II of this division or a wastewater benefit area established
pursuant to
Subdivision III of this division, within the city and the city’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for capital
improvements or facility expansions will be collected for new development
occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended
for those improvements or expansions identified in the capital improvements
plan applicable to the benefit area for that category of capital improvement.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Either a water facility or a wastewater facility, with
a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned and operated by or on
behalf of the city.
   CITY. The City of Fort Worth, Texas.
   CREDIT. The amount determined under this division by which a wastewater
impact fee is reduced as a result of the payment of wastewater system access
fees imposed pursuant to §
35-58.1 of the city code by a new development prior to the effective date of
this division. CREDIT does not include a reduction in the amount of an impact
fee due for payment of connection charges defined in §
35-57 of the city code or for payment of front foot charges pursuant to §
35-58 of the city code.
   FACILITY EXPANSION. Either a water facility expansion or a wastewater
facility expansion.
   FINAL PLAT RECORDATION. The filing of the final plat with Tarrant County
following compliance with all conditions of approval pursuant to the city’s
subdivision regulations.
   IMPACT FEE. Either a fee for water facilities or a fee for wastewater
facilities imposed on new development by the city pursuant to this division in
order to generate revenue to fund or recoup the costs of capital improvements
or facility expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development.
IMPACT FEES do not include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for
such facilities, or the construction of such improvements. IMPACT FEES also do
not include connection charges defined in §
35-57 of the city code or front footage charges for wastewater and water lines
imposed pursuant to §
35-58 of the city code.
   IMPACT FEE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Either a water capital improvements
plan or a wastewater capital improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to
this division.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. The projections of population and employment growth
within the benefit area adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to
time, upon which the capital improvements plans are based.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. A project involving the construction, reconstruction,
redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of
any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which has the
effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility
expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such
activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the
city’s subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or
connection to the city’s water or wastewater system and which has not been
exempted from compliance with these regulations by provisions herein or by
schedules attached hereto. Said schedules are not set out herein, but are on
file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
   PLAT. The plan or map for the subdivision to be filed for record in Tarrant
County. PLAT includes replat.
   PLATTING. The act of preparing for approval and processing the plan or map
for the subdivision to be filed for record in Tarrant County, pursuant to the
city’s subdivision regulations. PLATTING includes replatting.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation or any other
legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the
property on which new development is to occur. PROPERTY OWNER includes the
developer for the new development.
   RECOUPMENT. The imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for
capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new
development.
   SERVICE UNIT. One equivalent meter unit, which is the standardized measure
of consumption, use or generation of wastewater or water facilities equivalent
to the consumption, use or generation of such facilities attributable to a
single-family dwelling unit utilizing a three-fourth-inch water meter.
   UTILITY CONNECTION. The physical connection of the new development to the
city’s water system or to the city’s wastewater system.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY. Land or easements and improvements associated with
wastewater treatment facilities, whether or not such facilities are owned and
operated by the city or in behalf of the city. WASTEWATER FACILITY excludes
wastewater collection mains and facilities.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of any existing
wastewater facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not
include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing
wastewater facility to serve existing development.
   WASTEWATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended
from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater
facilities expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and
which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten
years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition
of wastewater impact fees pursuant to this division.
   WATER FACILITY. Land or easements or improvements associated with water
treatment facilities, water storage and water pumping facilities. WATER
FACILITY excludes water distribution mains and facilities.
   WATER FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of any existing
water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include
the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing water
improvement to serve existing development.
   WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The adopted plan, as may be amended from
time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water facilities
expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are
attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and
which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water
impact fees pursuant to this division.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.04), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 27911-08-2025, § 1, passed 8-26-
2025)
§ 35-69.1 ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   There is hereby created a capital improvements plan advisory committee
for waste and wastewater impact fees (“committee”) which shall act in an
advisory capacity, in accordance with Tex. Local Government Code § 395.058.
   (b)   The committee shall consist of eight members appointed by the city
council. Seven members of the committee shall be residents of the City of Fort
Worth. One member shall reside in the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. At
least four of the eight committee members shall be representative of the real
estate, development, or building industries who are not employees or officials
of a political subdivision or governmental entity.
   (c)   The members of the committee shall be identified by place numbers one
through eight. The odd-numbered places shall expire on October 1 of each odd-
numbered year and the even-numbered places shall expire on October 1 of each
even-numbered year. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies
shall be filled for unexpired terms but no members may be appointed to a term
in excess of two years.
   (d)   Five members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of business. The members of the committee shall regularly attend
meetings and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (e)   The committee shall perform the following functions:
      (1)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
      (2)   Review capital improvements plans and file written comments;
      (3)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
plans;
      (4)   File semi-annual reports with respect to the progress of the
capital improvements plans and report to the city council any perceived
inequities in implementing the plans or imposing the impact fee; and
      (5)   Advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land
use assumptions, capital improvements plans, and impact fees.
   (f)   The city shall make available to the committee any professional
reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital
improvements plans.
   (g)   The city council shall adopt procedural rules for the committee to
follow in carrying out its duties.
(Ord. 27911-08-2025, § 2, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 35-70 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this division apply to all new development within the
corporate boundaries of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction which
lies within the benefit area. The provisions of this division apply uniformly
within each benefit area.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.05), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.1 IMPACT FEE AS CONDITION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   No final plat or replat for new development shall be approved within the
benefit area for recording without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this
division, and no building permit shall be issued nor shall any utility
connection be made until the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and
calculated herein.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.06), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.2 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   (a)   The land use assumptions for water facilities are attached hereto as
Exhibit “A” and are incorporated herein by reference.
   (b)   The land use assumptions for wastewater facilities are attached hereto
as Exhibit “B” and are incorporated herein by reference.
   (c)   The land use assumptions for the benefit area shall be updated
utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.07), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 11328, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-1-1993;
Ord. 13810, §§ 1, 2, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 15745, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-11-2003;
Ord. 15982, §§ 1, 2, passed 5-18-2004; Ord. 18518-03-2009, §§ 1, 2, passed 3-
24-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord.
22525-12-2016, §§ 1, 2, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-09-2021, §§
1, 2, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-
10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibits “A” and “B,” as referenced in subsections (a) and (b), are not set
out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the
city clerk.
§ 35-70.3 IMPACT FEES PER SERVICE UNIT.
   (a)   Maximum impact fees per service unit shall be calculated for
wastewater facilities within the wastewater benefit area and for water
facilities within the water benefit area and shall be the amount set forth in
Schedule 1, attached hereto and made a part of this division by reference.
   (b)   The impact fee per service unit for each category of capital
improvements, which is to be paid by each new development within the benefit
area, shall be that established by the city council, as may be amended from
time to time, and shall be not more than the maximum impact fee per service
unit established in subsection (a) above. Impact fees which are to be paid
shall be as set forth in Schedule 2A and Schedule 2B, attached hereto and made
a part of this division by reference.
   (c)   Impact fee Schedules 1 and 2 may be amended from time to time
utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.08), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 10871, § 2, passed 7-2-1991; Ord.
11328, §§ 3, 4, passed 6-1-1993; Ord. 13810, §§ 3, 4, passed 5-25-1999; Ord.
15745, §§ 3, 4, passed 11-11-2003, Ord. 15982, §§ 3, 4, passed 5-18-2004; Ord.
16648, §§ 1, 2, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 18593-05-2009, §§ 1, 2, passed 5-5-
2009, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-
2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, §§ 3, 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-
09-2021, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, §§ 3, 4,
passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 35-70.4 ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as
follows.
      (1)   For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the
city’s subdivision regulations following the effective date of this division,
assessment shall occur at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be the
amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth
in Schedule 1. The city, in its sole discretion, may provide the subdivider
with a copy of Schedule 1 prior to final plat approval, but such shall not
constitute assessment within the meaning of this division.
      (2)   For a development which has received final plat approval prior to
the effective date of this division, for which no replatting is necessary prior
to issuance of a building permit, and which plat has been recorded with Tarrant
County, or for lots which predate the city’s subdivision regulations and which
are exempt from platting requirements, assessment shall occur on the effective
date of this division, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per
service unit set forth in Schedule 1.
   (b)   Following assessment of the impact fee for a new development pursuant
to subsection (a) above, the amount of the impact fee per service unit for that
development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the
approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat
approval, in which case the impact fee will be reassessed at the Schedule 1
rate then in effect.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.09), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.5 COMPUTATION AND COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   The impact fees due for the new development shall be collected as
follows:
      (1)   For land located within the city limits, at the time that the
building permit is issued; or
      (2)   For property platted outside of the city limits, at the time an
application for an individual meter connection to the city’s water or
wastewater system is filed.
   (b)   Following the filing and acceptance of an application for a building
permit or the request for connection to the city’s water or wastewater system,
the city shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in the
following manner.
      (1)   The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by
multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the
impact fee due per service unit for the benefit area using the schedule then in
effect.
      (2)   The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable
credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in §
35-70.7.
   (c)   The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not
exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum impact fee per service
unit under Schedule 1 by the number of service units generated by the
development.
   (d)   If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has
expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall
be computed using Schedule 2 then in effect, and previous payments of impact
fees shall be credited against the new fees due.
   (e)   Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service
units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new
service units shall be determined by using Schedule 2 then in effect, and such
additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of
a new building permit, or prior to or at the time of the connection to the
city’s water or wastewater system, or enlargement of such connection.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.10), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 10871, § 1, passed 7-2-1991; Ord.
14759, § 1, passed 8-28-2001; Ord. 22525-12-2016, § 9, passed 12-6-2016, eff.
4-1-2017)
§ 35-70.6 SUSPENSION OF FEE COLLECTION.
   (a)   For any new development which has received final plat approval in
accordance with Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212, or pursuant to the
city’s subdivision regulations, or for which an application for final approval
has been made, prior to the effective date of this division, the city may
assess, but shall not collect any water impact fee as herein defined, on any
service unit for which a valid building permit is issued within one year
subsequent to the effective date of this division.
   (b)   If the building permit, which is obtained within the period provided
for in subsection (a) above subsequently expires, and no new application for a
building permit is approved within such period, the new development shall be
subject to the payment of an impact fee, as provided in §
35-70.5.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.11), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.7 CREDITS AGAINST IMPACT FEES.
   A property owner who has paid a wastewater system facility access fee may
reduce the amount of a wastewater impact fee due for a new development on that
lot or tract by the amount of the access fee paid, following written request
and approval by the city, provided that no construction has occurred on the lot
or tract and that no utility connection has been made.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.12), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.8 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for
each benefit area for each type of capital facility for which an impact fee is
imposed pursuant to this division. Each impact fee collected within the benefit
area shall be deposited in such account.
   (b)   Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are
deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be issued solely
for the purposes authorized in §
35-70.9.
   (c)   The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to
assure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the
purposes authorized in §
35-70.9. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as
are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this division;
provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of
time, but not to exceed ten years from the date that an impact fee has been
paid.
   (d)   The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees,
which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or
expended from each benefit area. The records of such accounts shall be open for
public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.13), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.9 USE OF PROCEEDS OF IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The impact fees collected for each benefit area pursuant to this
division may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital
improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital
improvements plan for the benefit area, including, but not limited to, the
construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition
costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney’s fees and
expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and
interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by
or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility
expansion.
   (b)   Impact fees collected pursuant to this division shall not be used to
pay for any of the following expenses:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements
other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan;
      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of any capital improvements or
facility expansion;
      (3)   Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements
to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
environmental or regulatory standards;
      (4)   Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements
to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that
impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing
existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital
improvements generated by new development; or
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.14), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.10 APPEALS.
   (a)   The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the
following decisions to the city council:
      (1)   The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
      (2)   The amount of the impact fee due;
      (3)   The denial of or determination of the amount of a credit;
      (4)   The application of a credit against an impact fee due; and
      (5)   The amount of a refund due, if any.
   (b)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the
amount of the fee or the amount of the credit was not calculated according to
the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for
determining credits.
   (c)   The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city
within 30 days following the decision. The development application may be
processed while the appeal is pending, if the notice of appeal is accompanied
by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an
amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.15), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.11 REFUNDS.
   (a)   Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant
to this division, which has not been expended within the benefit area within
ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded, upon application, to the
record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the
impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental
entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the
date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Tex. Revised Statutes
Article 1.03, Title 79 (V.T.C.S. Article 5069-1.03, Vernon’s Texas Civil
Statutes), or its successor statute. An impact fee shall be considered as
expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
   (b)   An impact fee collected pursuant to this division shall also be
considered expended if, within ten years following the date of payment, the
total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion authorized in
§
35-70.9 within the benefit area exceeds the total fees collected within the
benefit area for such improvements or expansions during such period.
   (c)   If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) above, the city
shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount
of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the
benefit area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The
refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due
per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which
the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
   (d)   Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansion
identified in the capital improvements plan for the benefit area, the city
shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual
costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service
unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fee per service unit paid,
the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee
paid per service unit by more than 10%. If the difference is less than 10%, no
refund shall be due. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by
multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development
for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that
amount.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.16), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.12 REBATE.
   If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has
been paid has expired, no utility connections for that category of capital
improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new
application has not been approved within six months of such expiration, the
city shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to
the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no
application for rebate pursuant to this section has been filed within this
period, no rebate shall become due.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.17), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.13 UPDATES TO PLAN AND REVISION OF FEES.
   (a)   The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital
improvements plans at least every five years, commencing from the date of
adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Tex. Local Government Code, Chapter
395, or in any successor statute.
   (b)   The city may review its land use assumptions, capital improvements
plans, impact fees and other factors such as market conditions more frequently
than provided in subsection (a) above to determine whether the land use
assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee
recalculated accordingly, or whether Schedules 1 or 2 should be changed.
   (c)   If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a)
above, the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions,
capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such
update by following the procedures in Tex. Local Government Code § 395.0575.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.18), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 21239-05-2014, 1, passed 5-13-
2014)
§ 35-70.14 USE OF OTHER FINANCING MECHANISMS.
   (a)   The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion
designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds,
through the information of public utility districts or other assessment
districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and
subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use
of impact fees.
   (b)   Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of
an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and
due against the property.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.19), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.15 IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION.
   Impact fees established by this division are additional and supplemental to,
and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the
development of land, the issuance of building permits or the connection of
utilities. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the
policies of city’s comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan,
the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies,
ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of
adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.20), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.16 RELIEF PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which
an impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether
any duty required by this division, other than those matters which may be
appealed pursuant to §
35-70.10, has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition
shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and
request that the duty be performed within 60 days of the request. If the city
council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this division and is
late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of
the date of the request and to continue until completion.
   (b)   The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this
division, upon written request by a property owner subject to this division,
following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of
such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the
property.
   (c)   If the city council grants a variance that reduces the amount of the
impact fee due for a new development under this division, it shall cause to be
appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the impact
fee and deposit such funds in the account for the benefit area in which the
property is located.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.21), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-70.17 EXEMPTION FROM DIVISION.
   Any building permit application which was duly accepted for filing prior to
the effective date of this division and which is subsequently granted, shall be
exempt from the assessment and payment of an impact fee, unless such
application thereafter expires.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(1.22), passed 6-5-1990)
SUBDIVISION II: WATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
§ 35-71 WATER BENEFIT AREA.
   (a)   There is hereby established a water benefit area, constituting the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted on Exhibit “C” attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   (b)   The boundaries of the water benefit area may be amended from time to
time, or new water benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures
in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.01), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 11328, § 5, passed 6-1-1993; Ord.
13810, § 5, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 15745, § 5, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 15982, §
5, passed 5-18-2004; Ord. 18518-03-2009, § 3, passed 3-24-2009; Ord. 20406-09-
2012, § 5, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, § 5, passed 12-
6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-09-2021, § 5, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-
2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, § 5, passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “C,” as referenced in subsection (a), is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
§ 35-72 WATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (a)   The water improvements plan for the City of Fort Worth is hereby
adopted as Exhibit “D” attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
   (b)   The water improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant
to the procedures in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.02), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 11328, § 6, passed 6-1-1993; Ord.
13810, § 6, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 15745, § 6, passed 11-11-2003, Ord. 15982, §
6, passed 5-18-2004; Ord. 18518-03-2009, § 4, passed 3-24-2009; Ord. 18593-05-
2009, § 3, 2, passed 5-5-2009, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, § 6, passed
9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, § 6, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-
2017; Ord. 25101-09-2021, § 6, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-
2025, § 6, passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “D,” as referenced in subsection (a), is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
§ 35-73 WATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   The maximum impact fees per water meter for water facilities are
hereby adopted and incorporated in Schedule 1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof by reference.
   (b)   The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be
paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in Schedule
2A and Schedule 2B attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
   (c)   The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended
from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.03), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 18593-05-2009, §§ 1, 2, passed 5-
5-2009, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-
2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, §§ 3, 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-
09-2021, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, §§ 3, 4,
passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 35-74 ENLARGEMENT OF CONNECTION BY EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
   If the property owner of any existing development within the benefit area
requests enlargement of a water meter presently serving the development, and no
new development is to occur on the property, the owner shall pay the fee
prescribed by §
35-70.5 for the increase in size of the meter prior to installation of the
enlarged meter.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.04), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-75 NEW CONNECTION BY EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
   If any existing development within the benefit area presently utilizes a
water well, a septic tank or an individual waste disposal system and the
property owner requests to be connected to the city’s water system, the
customer shall pay the fee prescribed by §
35-70.5 prior to connection to such system.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.05), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-75.1 PRIOR CODE PROVISIONS.
   After June 20, 1990, no front footage charges shall be collected for
connection to city-installed water lines or mains.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(2.06), passed 6-5-1990)
SUBDIVISION III: WASTEWATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
§ 35-76 WASTEWATER BENEFIT AREA.
   (a)   There is hereby established a wastewater benefit area, constituting
the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted on Exhibit “E”
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   (b)   The boundaries of the wastewater benefit area may be amended from time
to time, or new wastewater benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the
procedures in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.01), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 11328, § 7, passed 6-1-1993; Ord.
13810, § 7, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 15745, § 7, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 15982, §
7, passed 5-18-2004; Ord. 18518-03-2009, § 5, passed 3-24-2009; Ord. 20406-09-
2012, § 7, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, § 7, passed 12-
6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-09-2021, § 7, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-
2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, § 7, passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “E,” as referenced in subsection (a), is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
§ 35-77 WASTEWATER CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (a)   The wastewater improvements plan for the City of Fort Worth is hereby
adopted as Exhibit “F” attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
   (b)   The wastewater improvements plan may be amended from time to time,
pursuant to the procedures in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.02), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 11328, § 8, passed 6-1-1993; Ord.
13810, § 8, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 15745, § 8, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 15982, §
8, passed 5-18-2004; Ord. 18518-03-2009, § 6, passed 3-24-2009; Ord. 18593-05-
2009, § 4, passed 5-5-2009, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, § 8, passed 9-
18-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, § 8, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-
2017; Ord. 25101-09-2021, § 8, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-
2025, § 8, passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit “F,” as referenced in subsection (a), is not set out herein, but is
on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
§ 35-78 WASTEWATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES.
   (a)   The maximum impact fees per water meter for wastewater facilities are
hereby adopted and incorporated in Schedule 1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof by reference.
   (b)   The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are
to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in
Schedule 2A and Schedule 2B attached hereto and made a part hereof by
reference.
   (c)   The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities may be
amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in §
35-70.13.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.03), passed 6-5-1990; Ord. 18593-05-2009, §§ 1, 2, passed 5-
5-2009, eff. 6-1-2009; Ord. 20406-09-2012, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-18-2012, eff. 1-1-
2013; Ord. 22525-12-2016, §§ 3, 4, passed 12-6-2016, eff. 4-1-2017; Ord. 25101-
09-2021, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-21-2021, eff. 1-1-2022; Ord. 27745-06-2025, §§ 3, 4,
passed 6-10-2025, eff. 10-1-2025)
§ 35-79 ENLARGEMENT OF CONNECTION BY EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
   If the property owner of any existing development within the benefit area
requests enlargement of a water meter presently serving the development, and no
new development is to occur on the property, the owner shall pay the fee
prescribed by §
35-70.5 for the increase in size of the meter prior to installation of the
enlarged meter.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.04), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-80 NEW CONNECTION BY EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
   If any existing development within the benefit area presently utilizes a
water well, a septic tank, or an individual waste disposal system and the
property owner requests to be connected to the city’s wastewater system, the
customer shall pay the fee prescribed by §
35-70.5 prior to connection to such system.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.05), passed 6-5-1990)
§ 35-80.1 PRIOR CODE PROVISIONS.
   With respect to the providing of retail wastewater services within the
corporate limits of the city, this division replaces and supersedes those
provisions for payment of wastewater system facility access fees pursuant to §
35-58.1 of the city code. After the effective date of this division, all retail
wastewater system facility impact fees shall be imposed on or collected from a
new development subject to this division. After June 20, 1990, no front foot
charges shall be collected for connection to city-installed wastewater lines
and mains.
(Ord. 10601, § 1(3.06), passed 6-5-1990)
DIVISION 3: SEWER PER ACRE CHARGES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17623, § 1, adopted June 19, 2007, amended the title of Div. 3 to read
as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 3 was entitled,
“Per Acre Charges.” See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 35-81 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to allow developers and the city to recoup
some of the costs incurred that are associated with the construction of
sanitary sewer main extensions that meet the criteria contained herein.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002)
§ 35-82 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   APPROACH SEWER MAIN. A sewer main constructed by a developer and is that
portion of a sewer main from the connection an existing main to the closest
outer perimeter of the proposed development.
   CALCULATED SEWER BASIN AREA.
      (1)   The acres within a sewer basin area that will be subject to a per
acre charge. The CALCULATED SEWER BASIN AREA will be determined using the
natural basin area bounded by existing topographies as shown on USGS maps.
Boundaries of the area shall be provided by a metes and bounds description
overlaid on a city base map. The final CALCULATED SEWER BASIN AREA shall be
subject to the review and written approval by the city.
      (2)   The calculated basin area shall not include any sub-basins within
the basin area that are equal to or greater than 1,000 acres.
   CITY INITIATED SEWER MAIN. Any sewer main constructed by the city regardless
of the length and size of pipe constructed or the size of the sewer basin.
   CITY PARTICIPATION. The portion of the construction cost that the city
reimburses a developer under the policy for the installation of community
facilities. CITY PARTICIPATION includes the cost for over-sizing the developer-
initiated approach wastewater main.
   DEVELOPMENT COST; CITY INITIATED PROJECT. The cost incurred by the city
related to the construction of a city initiated sewer main based upon the cost
of the construction contracts awarded without regard to the final actual cost,
and may include the reasonable cost of easement acquisition, including costs
and legal fees associated with condemnation and design.
   DEVELOPMENT COST; DEVELOPER INITIATED PROJECT.
      (1)   The cost incurred by the developer related to the construction of
an approach sewer main based solely on the cost of the construction contracts,
reduced by the amount of any city participation, awarded without regard to the
final actual cost and may include the cost of easement acquisition and design,
subject to city written approval.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT COST excludes any developer incurred legal fees, real
estate agent fees or condemnation expenses incurred in easement acquisition.
   FRONTAGE MAIN. The portion of the wastewater or water main located within
the frontage of the developing property.
   FRONTAGE MAIN ELIGIBILITY (SEWER PER ACRE).  Frontage main eligibility may
only occur when the property's frontage wastewater main is shared with another
property on the opposing side the developer's property that is owned by a
separate landowner not affiliated with the developer.
   OTHER DEVELOPMENT. Any property located within the calculated basin area
that connects  to an approach sewer main constructed by a developer or a sewer
main constructed by the city.
   PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT. Property for which service is being requested that
requires the construction of an approach sewer main. The PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
must be delineated on a concept plan or a preliminary plat (if a concept plan
is not required) that has been filed with the city’s planning and development
department.
   SEWER BASIN AREA. The acres within the calculated basin area that are to be
assessed a per acre charge.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 16377, § 1, passed 4-19-2005; Ord.
17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 21251-05-2014, § 1, passed 5-20-2014; Ord.
23708-06-2019, § 2, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 35-83 CRITERIA FOR PER ACRE CHARGE SEWER MAINS; DEVELOPER INITIATED PROJECT.
   (a)   A per acre charge may be collected for an approach sewer main of any
length and size, constructed by a developer, provided the approach sewer main
meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The proposed development to be served by the approach sewer main
must be less than or equal to one-third of the calculated sewer basin area to
be served by the approach sewer main; and
      (2)   The sewer basin area to be served by the approach sewer main shall
be equal to or greater than 1,000 acres.
   (b)   It is the developer’s responsibility to provide all necessary
information for a determination to be made if a per acre charge is appropriate
for any given construction project.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 21251-05-2014, § 2, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 35-84 CALCULATION OF THE PER ACRE CHARGE.
   (a)   In order for a per acre charge to be assessed, the city council must
adopt an ordinance for that purpose. For approach mains constructed under a
developer initiated project, the per acre charge shall be calculated as
follows.
      (1)   Development cost shall be determined consistent with the
requirements of §
35-83 above.
      (2)   The developer is responsible for providing the calculated basin
area, together with any necessary exhibits as may be reasonably requested by
the city. An engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas shall prepare
the calculated basin area. Sub-basins of 1,000 acres or more shall not be
included in the calculation of the sewer basin area.
      (3)   The development cost is divided by the calculated basin area
expressed in acres to determine the per acre charge.
      (4)   An ordinance will be presented to the city council to establish the
per acre charge.
      (5)   The city shall be responsible for providing calculated basin area,
together with any necessary exhibits on wastewater mains that have city cost
participation for over-sizing the developer-initiated approach and/or frontage
wastewater main.
      (6)   Developer maybe eligible to recoup costs associated with
installation of a frontage wastewater main under a front foot charge if
applicable to language described above in the Frontage Main Eligibility (Sewer
Per Acre) definition. (Refer to Chapter 35 Water and Sewers, Article III,
Charges, Division 1, §
35-83 Assessment of Front Footage Charges for Service Connection, of the City
Code for more information.)
   (b)   For sewer mains constructed as a city initiated project, the per acre
charge shall be calculated as follows.
      (1)   Development cost shall be determined consistent with the
requirements of §
35-83 above.
      (2)   The city’s consultant engineer shall determine the calculated basin
area or the maps of the USGS may be used.
      (3)   The development cost is divided by the calculated basin area
expressed in acres to determine the per acre charge.
      (4)   An ordinance will be presented to the city council to establish the
per acre charge.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 3, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 35-85 ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF THE PER ACRE CHARGE; REFUND TO A DEVELOPER;
ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The water department shall be responsible for the collection, refund
and maintenance of per acre charges collected.
   (b)   Except as provided by subsection (c) below, a per acre charge shall be
assessed each acre within the calculated sewer basin area served by a sewer
approach main or by a sewer main constructed under a city initiated project,
without exclusion or reduction.
   (c)   Park property that is dedicated by final plat or by other instrument
prior to the filing of the final plat shall not be assessed.
   (d)   The payment of the per acre charge assessed hereunder shall be paid at
the time the final plat for the proposed development is ready to be filed, but
the plat shall not be filed until the per acre charge has been paid.
   (e)   A four percent (4%) annual cost adjustment shall be added to each
prescribed per acre charge. The annual cost adjustment increase shall be
assessed on January 1st of each year.
   (f)   A per acre charge will be assessed for a period of 20 years,
commencing on the date that the city accepts the wastewater main.
   (g)   Collections and reimbursements of a per acre charge will cease when
the developer has been fully reimbursed or the time period for assessment of
the per acre charge has lapsed, whichever occurs first.
   (h)   Reimbursement shall be made solely from the per acre charge collected
by the city during the period that the per acre charge is assessed for the
wastewater service line connections and point of connections to the approach
wastewater main.
   (i)   Any assignment of the per acre charge must be approved by the water
department director prior to the execution of the assignment.
   (j)   Existing community facilities agreements with wastewater mains, or
other facilities, eligible for per acre charge collections will continue under
the policy that was in effect at the time the agreement was executed.
   (k)   The reimbursement limit, together with the project number, date
construction was completed, permanent record number of the wastewater main,
limits of portion of the wastewater main upon which a per acre charge is
collectible, and name of the entity entitled to the refund shall be documented
by the city.
   (l)   Upon written request by the developer during the month of November,
reimbursements will be made annually during the last two months of the calendar
year from which per acre charges were paid to the city.
   (m)   It is the responsibility of the developer/landowner requesting the
refund to prove their eligibility to receive the reimbursement due.
   (n)   In the event the developer/single customer property owner fails to
request a reimbursement on a per acre charge within six months after the
expiration of the eligibility to receive funds, such un-reimbursed charges
shall become the property of the city.
   (o)   The amount of refund due to the developer each year shall be the
assessed per acre capacity charge collected that year multiplied by the
"developer's development cost percentage." The remaining portion of the amount
collected that year shall be retained by the city as an offset against the
development cost incurred by the city.
   (p)   The city will recover the city development cost for city-initiated
approach wastewater main projects or city participation in a developer-
initiated approach wastewater main. The city's collection time will cease when
city development cost has been fully reimbursed.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002; Ord. 20317-08-2012, § 1, passed 8-7-2012;
Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 4, passed 6-25-2019; Ord. 26623-12-2023, § 3, passed 12-
12-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
§ 35-86 ADOPTION OF DIVISION.
   The city council may adopt an ordinance assessing a per acre charge
calculated in accordance with this
Division 3 to be assessed within a basin area.
(Ord. 15095, § 1, passed 5-14-2002)
DIVISION 4: WATER MAIN CAPACITY CHARGES
§ 35-87 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to allow developers and the city to recover
a portion of the costs incurred that are associated with the construction of
water mains that meet the criteria contained in this division.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 35-88 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   APPROACH WATER MAIN. The portion of a newly constructed water main from an
existing main to the closest outer perimeter of a proposed development.
   CITY-INITIATED APPROACH WATER MAIN. Any approach water main constructed by
the city, regardless of the size or length of the pipe constructed.
   CITY PARTICIPATION. The portion of the construction cost that the city
reimburses a developer under the policy for the installation of community
facilities. CITY PARTICIPATION includes the cost for over-sizing the developer-
initiated approach water main.
   DEVELOPMENT COST.
      (1)   The cost incurred by the city related to either a city-initiated
approach water main or the city participation costs in a developer-initiated
approach water main, which costs are based upon the costs contained in the
contracts awarded for the construction of the water main, regardless of the
final cost and may include design and easement acquisition costs, including any
costs and legal fees associated with condemnation of any easement;
      (2)   The cost incurred by a developer related to the construction of a
developer-initiated approach water main based solely on the cost of the
contracts awarded for the construction of such water main, without regard to
the final cost and may include design and reasonable easement acquisition
costs, but excludes any legal and real estate agent fees and other condemnation
expenses; or
      (3)   Both.
   DEVELOPER’S DEVELOPMENT COST PERCENTAGE. The development cost incurred by
the developer divided by the development cost, expressed as a percentage.
   DEVELOPER-INITIATED APPROACH WATER MAIN. Any approach water main constructed
by the developer with city participation, regardless of the length and size of
the pipe.
   FRONTAGE MAIN.  The portion of the sanitary sewer or water main located
within the frontage of the developing property.
   FRONTAGE MAIN ELIGIBILITY.  Frontage main eligibility may only occur when
the property's frontage main is shared with another property on the opposing
side of the street right-of-way to the developer's property that is owned by a
separate landowner not affiliated with the developer.
   MAXIMUM DAY DEMAND. The water demand based on total projected capita of the
development at the maximum day design criteria. The calculation of the maximum
day demand is contained in the most current version of the city’s Policy and
Procedure for Processing Water and Wastewater Projects for Design and
Construction. For most normal uses, the MAXIMUM DAY DEMAND shall be based on
the previous known annual average usage multiplied by the maximum day peaking
factor.
   OTHER DEVELOPMENT. A property that connects directly to the approach water
main to which there is a water main capacity charge as a sole source of water
supply to the property. It includes property that connects indirectly to other
water mains that connect to the approach water main to which there is a water
main capacity charge as a sole source of water supply to the property. If the
property is connected to another existing water main for a dual source of water
supply for the purpose of water system looping and not for the demand needs of
the property, then the property is not considered as OTHER DEVELOPMENT. This is
determined by the comprehensive water study submitted for review.
   PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT. The property for which service is being requested that
requires the construction of the developer-initiated approach water main. The
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT must be delineated on a concept plan or a preliminary plat
(if a concept plan is not required) that has been filed with the city’s
development department.
   WATER MAIN CAPACITY CHARGE. A charge based on 1,000,000 gallons per day
(MGD) of maximum day demand generated by a development.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 21251-05-2014, § 3, passed 5-20-2014;
Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 5, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 35-89 DEVELOPER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is the developer’s responsibility to provide all necessary information to
be used to determine if a water main capacity charge is appropriate for any
given project.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 35-90 ADOPTION OF AN ORDINANCE.
   The city council shall adopt an ordinance prior to the collection of the
water main capacity charge assessed by this division for each specific water
main. Nothing contained herein requires the city council to adopt such an
ordinance, such adoption being in the sole discretion of the city council.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 35-91 ASSUMPTIONS TO BE USED TO CALCULATE MAXIMUM DAY DEMAND.
 
               Density                Average Daily Demand  Maximum Day Peak
                                                            Factor
Single-family  3.5 people/unit or 14
(attached or   people/acre            200 gpcd              2.25
detached)
Multifamily    2.5 people/unit or 52  180 gpcd              2.25
               people/acre
Commercial     1 person per 400 SF or 50 gpcd               2.25
               14 people/acre
               60 - 75 students per   Elementary-30 gpcd
Schools        acre                   Middle - 35 gpcd      2.25
                                      High school - 40 gpcd
 
   If the domestic annual average demand of the commercial, industrial or other
development is unknown during platting, the single-family density of 14 people
per acre and an average daily demand of 200 gallons per capita per day (GPCD)
with a maximum day peak factor of two and twenty-five hundredths shall be used.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 6, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 35-92 CALCULATION OF THE WATER MAIN CAPACITY CHARGE.
   For approach water mains constructed under a developer-initiated or city-
initiated approach water main project, the water main capacity charge shall be
calculated as follows.
   (a)   Development cost shall be determined consistent with the definitions
contained in §
35-88.
   (b)   For a developer-initiated approach water main, the developer is
responsible for providing all information, studies and exhibits that may be
reasonably requested by the city. For a city-initiated approach water main, the
city’s consultant engineer shall provide any necessary exhibits as requested by
the city.
   (c)   For a developer-initiated approach water main that the city has cost
participated to over-size the approach water main, the city shall be
responsible for providing calculated basin area, together with any necessary
exhibits on water mains that have city cost participation for over-sizing the
developer-initiated approach water main.
   (d)   For a developer-initiated frontage water main that the city has cost
participated to oversize, the water main capacity charge calculation shall be
based on the delta MGD capacity of over-sizing the developer-initiated approach
water main.
   (e)   Developer maybe eligible to recoup costs associated with installation
of a frontage water main under a front foot charge if applicable to language
described above in the Frontage Main Eligibility definition. Refer to Chapter
35 Water and Sewers, Article III, Charges, Division 1, § 35-58 Assessment of
Front Footage Charges for Service Connection, of the City Code for more
information.
   (f)   The water main capacity charge is calculated by dividing the
development cost by the water pipe’s net capacity. The water pipe’s net
capacity is determined in accordance with the most current version if the
city’s Policy and Procedure for Processing Water and Wastewater Projects for
Design and Construction, using a coefficient of roughness of 120. The maximum
pipe capacity will be based on a pipe friction loss of seven feet per 1,000
feet length of pipe or water velocity of seven feet per second, whichever is
more conservative. The net pipe capacity is equal to the maximum pipe capacity
subtract the minimum residential fire flow. Currently the minimum residential
fire flow per Fort Worth fire department is 1.44 MGD, which may change with
future adoption of the International Fire Code. See a table below for net
capacity based on pipe size.
 
Maximum Design Capacity for Water Mains (12 in. to 54 in.)
Water Main Size  Pipe Velocity  Pipe Friction   Maximum Capacity  Net Capacity
(I.D.)           (ft./sec.)     Loss            (MGD)             (MGD)
                                (ft./1,000 ft.)
12 in.           3.55           7.00            2.3               0.86
16 in.           5.43           7.0             4.9               4.86
24 in.           7.00           7.00            14.2              12.76
30 in.           7.00           5.37            22.2              20.76
36 in.           7.00           4.33            32.0              30.56
 
Maximum Design Capacity for Water Mains (16 in. to 54 in.)
Water Main Size  Pipe Velocity  Pipe Friction   Maximum Capacity  Net Capacity
(I.D.)           (ft./sec.)     Loss            (MGD)             (MGD)
                                (ft./1,000 ft.)
42 in.           7.00           3.64            43.5              42.06
48 in.           7.00           3.14            56.8              55.36
54 in.           7.00           2.72            72.0              70.56
 
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 21251-05-2014, § 4, passed 5-20-2014;
Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 7, passed 6-25-2019)
§ 35-93 ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF THE WATER MAIN CAPACITY CHARGE; REFUND TO A
DEVELOPER AND CITY; ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The water department shall be responsible for the collection, refund
and maintenance of the water main capacity charge collected.
   (b)   A water main capacity charge shall be assessed each plat that meets
the definition of "other development." A boundary area shall be determined for
the purpose of assessment review. The boundary shall be used as a guideline,
not as a definitive boundary for service area due to the possibility of varying
lots sizes that may be proposed. If a plat meets the definition of "other
development," then the plat will be assessed the per MDG charge even though the
plat may be located adjacent to, within and/or outside the boundary area.
   (c)   To determine a boundary area, the assumption of one MGD serving 137
acres will be used. This assumption is based upon one acre containing four and
three tenths units of houses. To calculate the boundary area, multiply the pipe
capacity in MGD under § 35-92(c) by 137 acres. To convert the area to square
footage, multiple the area by 43,560. Then, divide the total area in square
footage by the total length of pipe extended in feet to determine the width of
the boundary area in feet. To determine the distance on each side of the pipe,
divide the width by two. Pressure plane boundaries, adjacent city limits, extra
territorial jurisdictions, and CCN boundaries may be utilized to refine the
proposed WMCC boundary area.
   (d)   The payment of the water main capacity charge assessed hereunder shall
be paid prior to the filing of final plat.
   (e)   A four percent (4%) annual cost adjustment shall be added to each
prescribed water main capacity charge. The annual cost adjustment increase
shall be assessed on January 1st of each year.
   (f)   A water main capacity charge will be assessed for a period of 20
years, commencing on the date that the city accepts the water main.
   (g)   Collections and reimbursements of a water main capacity charge will
cease when the developer has been fully reimbursed or the time period for
assessment of the water main capacity charge has lapsed, whichever occurs
first.
   (h)   Reimbursement shall be made solely from the water main capacity charge
collected by the city during the period that the water main capacity charge is
assessed for the water service line connections and point of connections to the
approach water main.
   (i)   Any assignment of the water main capacity charge must be approved by
the water department director prior to the execution of the assignment.
   (j)   Existing community facilities agreements with mains, or other
facilities, eligible for water main capacity charge collections will continue
under the policy that was in effect at the time the agreement was executed.
   (k)   The reimbursement limit, together with the project number, date
construction was completed, permanent record number of the water main, limits
of portion of the water main upon which a water main capacity charge is
collectible, and name of the entity entitled to the refund shall be documented
by the city.
   (l)   Upon written request by the developer during the month of November,
reimbursements will be made annually during the last two months of the calendar
year from which water main capacity charges were paid to the city.
   (m)   It is the responsibility of the developer/landowner requesting the
refund to prove their eligibility to receive the reimbursement due.
   (n)   In the event the developer/single customer property owner fails to
request a reimbursement on a water main capacity charge within six months after
the expiration of the eligibility to receive funds, such un-reimbursed charges
shall become the property of the city.
   (o)   The amount of refund due to the developer each year shall be the
assessed water main capacity charge collected that year multiplied by the
"developer's development cost percentage." The remaining portion of the amount
collected that year shall be retained by the city as an offset against the
development cost incurred by the city.
   (p)   The city will recover the city development cost for city-initiated
approach water main projects or city participation in a developer-initiated
approach water main. The city's collection time will cease when city
development cost has been fully reimbursed.
(Ord. 17623, § 2, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 23708-06-2019, § 8, passed 6-25-2019;
Ord. 26623-12-2023, § 4, passed 12-12-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
DIVISION 5: SEWER CAPACITY CHARGES
§ 35-94 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to allow developers and the city to recover
a portion of the costs incurred that are associated with the construction of
sewer infrastructure that meets the criteria in this division.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-95 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms, when used in this division, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   APPROACH SEWER MAIN. The portion of a newly constructed public sewer main or
force main from where it connects to an existing sewer main to the closest
outer perimeter of a proposed development.
   CITY-INITIATED SEWER INFRASTRUCTURE. Any sewer infrastructure constructed by
the city, regardless of the size or length of the infrastructure constructed.
   CITY PARTICIPATION. The portion of the construction cost that the city pays
for or reimburses to a developer pursuant to the Community Facilities
Agreements Ordinance, including the city's cost for over-sizing developer-
initiated sewer infrastructure.
   DEVELOPMENT COST.
   (a)   The costs incurred by the city related to a city-initiated sewer
infrastructure project, or the city participation costs in a developer-
initiated sewer infrastructure project, which costs are based upon the unit
costs contained in the contracts awarded for the construction of the sewer
infrastructure that are not paid for with impact fee funds, regardless of the
final cost, and may include design and easement acquisition costs, including
any costs and legal fees associated with condemnation of easements; or
   (b)   The cost incurred by a developer related to the construction of a
developer-initiated approach sewer main based solely on the cost of the
contracts awarded for the construction of such sewer main, without regard to
the final cost, and may include design and reasonable easement acquisition
costs, but excludes any legal and real estate agent fees and other condemnation
expenses.
   DEVELOPER-INITIATED SEWER INFRASTRUCTURE. Any approach sewer main
constructed by a developer, with or without cost participation, regardless of
the length and size of the pipe.
   DEVELOPER'S DEVELOPMENT COST PERCENTAGE. The development cost incurred by
the developer divided by the entire cost of the project excluding the
developer's legal, real estate agent fees, and other condemnation expenses,
expressed as a percentage.
   FRONTAGE MAIN. The portion of a public sanitary sewer main or force main
located on land abutting a street, stream, drainage channel, or water body, or
the portion of a public sanitary sewer main or force main located within a
property boundary.
   OTHER DEVELOPMENT. A property that is developing, redeveloping, going
through a change of use, or previously on a septic system or other sewer
system, that connects directly or indirectly to sewer infrastructure for which
a sewer capacity charge has been established.
   PEAK DISCHARGE RATE. The peak discharge rate contained in the sewer study or
loading analysis approved by the city.
   PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT. A property for which sanitary sewer service is being
requested that requires the construction of developer-initiated sewer
infrastructure.
   SEWER CAPACITY CHARGE. A pro rata charge based on one million gallons per
day (MGD) of sewer capacity.
   SEWER INFRASTRUCTURE. An approach sewer main, frontage main, public sewer
main or force main crossing a property boundary, or a public lift station,
constructed by the city, or a developer, that is not included in the city's
most recently adopted water and wastewater impact fee study.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-96 DEVELOPER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   A developer shall provide all necessary information requested by the city to
determine if a sewer capacity charge should be established and to determine the
amount of the sewer capacity charge.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-97 ADOPTION OF AN ORDINANCE.
   The city council shall adopt an ordinance to create each sewer capacity
charge authorized by this division. Nothing contained herein requires the city
council to adopt such an ordinance, such adoption being in the sole discretion
of the city council. Sewer infrastructure that is the subject of a community
facilities agreement that has been fully executed at the time this division is
adopted, or sewer infrastructure for which a sewer per acre charge has been
established, shall not be eligible for a sewer capacity charge.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-98 ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR SEWER PEAK DISCHARGE RATE CALCULATION.
   Assumptions used to calculate sewer peak discharge rate are based on the
wastewater loading criteria and peaking factors in the "Installation Policy and
Design Criteria for Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Infrastructure." If
alternative loading criteria will be used, or the type of use is not listed in
the "Installation Policy and Design Criteria for Water, Wastewater, and
Reclaimed Water Infrastructure," the developer shall provide source information
to the city for approval.
   If the peak discharge rate is not within the "Requested Meter's Flow Range
(gpm)" in the following table, or if there is no sewer study or loading
analysis approved by the city, the peak discharge rate shall be the maximum
limit of the "Requested Meter's Flow Range (gpm)" in the following table:
Sensus Omni Meter Types Meter Size Requested Meter's Flow Range (gpm)
Sensus Omni Meter Types Meter Size  Requested Meter's Flow Range (gpm)
SRII                    5/8" x 3/4" <20
SRII                    1           10-50
C2 Compound             1.5         21 -50
C2 Compound             2           40-200
C2 Compound             3           155 - 500
C2 Compound or F2       4           425 - 1000
C2 Compound or F2       6           900 - 2000
T2 Turbo                1.5         <200
T2 Turbo                2           40 - 250
T2 Turbo                3           155 - 650
T2 Turbo                4           425 - 1250
T2 Turbo                6           900 - 2500
 
SRII = Single Family, Small Commercial
C2 Compound - Commercial, Multi-Commercial, Industrial, and Irrigation
T2 Turbo = Commercial Heavy User, Industrial, Heavy User, and Irrigation
F2= Combined Domestic with Fire Protection
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-99 CALCULATION OF SEWER CAPACITY CHARGE.
   For developer-initiated sewer infrastructure projects or city-initiated
sewer infrastructure projects, the sewer capacity charge shall be calculated as
follows:
   (a)   Development cost shall be determined consistent with the definitions
contained in section
35-95.
   (b)   For a developer-initiated sewer infrastructure project, the developer
must provide the calculated sewer basin boundary, and all information, studies,
and exhibits requested by the city. The city must approve the calculated basin
area. For a city-initiated sewer infrastructure project or a developer-
initiated sewer infrastructure project with city participation, the city will
determine the sewer basin boundary and the developer shall provide all
information, studies, and exhibits requested by the city.
   (c)   The sewer capacity charge is calculated by dividing the development
cost by the sewer infrastructure capacity. The sewer infrastructure capacity is
determined in accordance with the most current version of the city's
"Installation Policy and Design Criteria for Water, Wastewater, and Reclaimed
Water Infrastructure." The sewer infrastructure capacity is dependent on pipe
slope and pipe diameter.
   (d)   A sewer capacity charge shall not be created for a frontage main that
is part of a sewer infrastructure project if the frontage main is eligible to
have an assessment for a front footage charge pursuant to the city code.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 35-100 ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF THE SEWER CAPACITY CHARGE; REIMBURSEMENTS
AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The water department shall be responsible for collecting, maintaining,
and reimbursing sewer capacity charges.
   (b)   A sewer capacity charge shall be assessed on other development located
in the approved basin boundaries of developer-initiated or city-initiated sewer
infrastructure projects. The sewer capacity charge for a property that meets
the definition of other development that is redeveloping or going through a
change of use will be based on the additional peak discharge rate necessary for
the property that is approved by the city.
   (c)   Sewer capacity charges shall be paid to the city when the developer
submits a building permit application to the city.
   (d)   For developer-initiated sewer infrastructure projects, the developer
should make a written request for reimbursement each November following the
city's final acceptance of the developer-initiated sewer infrastructure
project. It is the responsibility of the developer requesting the reimbursement
to prove its eligibility to receive the reimbursement.
   (e)   A four percent (4%) annual cost adjustment shall be added to each
prescribed sewer capacity charge. The annual cost adjustment increase shall be
assessed on January 1st of each year.
   (f)   Reimbursement of a sewer capacity charge to a developer shall cease
when the developer has recovered its share of the development cost or after a
period of 20 years, whichever occurs first.
   (g)   Any assignment of the right to reimbursement of a sewer capacity
charge by a developer must be approved by the water department director, or
their designee, prior to the execution of the assignment.
   (h)   Records reflecting the reimbursement limit, together with the project
number, date construction was completed, permanent record number of the sewer
main, limits of a portion of the sewer main upon which a sewer capacity charge
has been assessed, and name of the entity entitled to the reimbursement shall
be maintained by the city.
   (i)   It is the responsibility of a developer or landowner requesting a
reimbursement to submit documentation satisfactory to the city to prove their
eligibility to receive the reimbursement if the developer or landowner
requesting the reimbursement is not the developer or landowner for which the
sewer capacity charge was established.
   (j)   Upon written request by the developer during the month of November,
reimbursements will be made annually during the last two months of the calendar
year from sewer capacity charges paid to the city.
   (k)   The amount of reimbursement due to the developer each year shall be
the assessed sewer capacity charge collected that year multiplied by the
developer's development cost percentage. The remaining portion of the amount
collected that year shall be retained by the city as reimbursement for the city
participation in the project.
   (l)   The city will recover the city's development cost for a city-initiated
sewer infrastructure project or city participation in developer-initiated sewer
infrastructure project. The city's collection time will cease when city's
development cost has been fully reimbursed.
(Ord. 26324-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 26623-12-2023, § 5, passed 12-
12-2023, eff. 1-1-2024)
ARTICLE IV: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 12274, adopted November 28, 1995, repealed §§ 35-81
through 35-130 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to
regulations governing industrial wastewaters, and derived from §§ I(1) through
(7)(F) of Ord. 10880, adopted July 23, 1991, and §§ 5 and 6 of Ord. 11717,
adopted November 1, 1994.
§§ 35-101—35-130 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 35-131 APPROVAL PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building upon
real property within the city unless the applicant for the building permit
gives the particular agency or department to which application is being made
sufficient proof of the type of approved excreta disposal system to be used for
the structure.
(1964 Code, § 19-407) (Ord. 11146, § 1, passed 8-11-1992)
§ 35-132 PERMITS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS OTHER THAN SANITARY
SEWERS; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO ANOTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.
   (a)   No on-site sewage disposal system, as defined in Tex. Health and
Safety Code Chapter 366, shall be constructed, covered or used until a permit
shall have been issued by the director of the city department of public health
or other governmental entity authorized to do so by the city council. The
director or the authorized entity shall inspect all on-site sewage disposal
systems for compliance with all local and state regulations. No on-site sewage
disposal system shall be covered or used until it has been inspected and
approved by the director of the city department of public health or such other
governmental entity authorized by the city council. All inspection and
permitting authority prescribed herein shall include the enforcement of all
local and state regulations governing on-site sewage disposal systems.
   (b)   The city, upon approval and authorization by the city council, may
enter into an agreement with another local governmental entity authorizing said
other governmental entity to perform all or a portion of the inspection and
permitting functions described in this section in place of the director of the
city department of public health. If the city council does authorize another
governmental entity to assume the said functions, such entity shall retain
those functions exclusively until the city council expressly terminates such
authority and responsibility. Provided, however, that the city shall retain
exclusive responsibility for inspection and permitting of on-site sewage
disposal systems in the Lake Worth watershed area.
(1964 Code, § 19-408) (Ord. 11146, § 1, passed 8-11-1992)
§ 35-133 WITHHOLDING PERMIT UPON DETERMINATION OF ADVERSE HEALTH EFFECT.
   A permit for an on-site sewage disposal system may be withheld if the
director or authorized entity determines that operation or location of the
particular on-site sewage disposal system would adversely affect the public
health.
(1964 Code, § 19-409) (Ord. 11146, § 1, passed 8-11-1992)
§ 35-134 CLEANING BY LICENSED PERSONS ONLY.
   No person shall clean or empty, and no person shall have cleaned or emptied
any chemical toilet, on-site sewage disposal system, or other excreta disposal
system, unless such person doing the cleaning or emptying is licensed to
perform such service in the city.
(1964 Code, § 19-410) (Ord. 11146, § 1, passed 8-11-1992)
§ 35-135 REQUIRED CONNECTIONS WITH SEWERS.
   (a)   All owners of real property situated within the city upon which
improvements are situated, where the outside line of any part of the property
abuts upon an alley or street or through which a public sewer extends or is
within a distance or radius of 100 feet of a public sanitary sewer, shall
provide a water closet with water service on such premises and connect same
with the public sewer, which connection shall be and made by and at the expense
of the owner of the improvements.
   (b)   Where a sanitary sewer is not available, but where water under
pressure is available, such water closet shall be connected to an on-site
sewage disposal system installed in accordance with all local and state
regulations, including requirements found in this article.
   (c)   The requirements of this section shall apply to every lot or part of
lot upon which a dwelling house or business house now exists or upon which same
may be hereafter erected; a separate water closet, with its proper connections,
being mandatory for each dwelling or business house.
(1964 Code, § 19-411) (Ord. 11146, § 1, passed 8-11-1992)
§§ 35-136—35-150 RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION CONSERVATION
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17901, § 1, adopted December 4, 2007, amended Art. VI, in its entirety,
to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VI
pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 35-151 LAWN AND LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Lawns and landscaping may be watered on any day, at any time, by
handheld hose, drip irrigation, a soaker hose or tree bubbler. (The intent of
this measure is to allow for the protection of structural foundations, trees
and other high value landscape materials).
      (2)   Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker
hoses, a person may only irrigate, water or cause or permit the irrigation or
watering of any lawn or landscape, inclusive of structural foundations, trees
and other high value landscape materials, located on premises owned, leased, or
managed by that person:
         a.   On a day designated as an outdoor water use day for the
property’s address as shown below; and
         b.   Between the hours of 12 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
11:59 p.m. on such day.
            1.   Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or
8) may water on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
            2.   Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or
9) may water on Thursdays and Sundays.
            3.   All nonresidential locations (apartment complexes, businesses,
industries, parks, street and/or roadway medians and the like) may water on
Tuesdays and Fridays.
   (b)   Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses,
a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters or causes or
permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises
owned, leased or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:
00 p.m.
   (c)   Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses,
a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters or causes or
permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises
owned, leased, or managed by that person on a day that is not designated as an
outdoor water use for that property address as shown in subsection (a) above.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if a person knowingly or recklessly
irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or
landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a
manner that causes:
      (1)   A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead
of a lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water overflows from the
lawn or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or
      (2)   An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to
operate during any form of precipitation.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased or managed
by that person, a person operates a lawn or landscape irrigation system or
device that:
      (1)   Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or
      (2)   Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the
waste of water.
   (f)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense in
subsection (a) above that at the time such person irrigates, waters or causes
or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, such activity
was for the purpose of:
         a.   Dust control of a sports field; or
         b.   The maintenance, repair or testing of an irrigation system.
      (2)   The activity described in subsection (f)(1)a. and (f)(1)b. above
may only occur within a period of two days no more than once every 30 days. Any
such activity requiring a longer period or greater frequency shall require a
variance as provided by subsection (g) below.
   (g)   Variances.
      (1)   The water department director or official designee may grant
variances to the twice per week watering and irrigation restrictions and
schedule, if one or more of the following conditions are met:
         a.   Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting health, sanitation or fire safety for the public
or the person requesting the variance;
         b.   Compliance with the watering and irrigation restrictions and/or
schedule cannot be accomplished due to technical or other limitations; or
         c.   Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in
water use can be implemented.
      (2)   The water department director or official designee may grant
variances to allow for establishment of hydromulch, grass sod or grass seed for
new lawns.
      (3)   Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the water
department director or official designee. All petitions for variances shall be
in writing and shall include the following:
         a.   Name and address of the petitioner(s);
         b   Purpose of the water use;
         c.   Specific provisions from which relief is requested;
         d.   Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from
which relief is requested;
         e.   Description of the relief requested;
         f.   Period of time for which the variance is sought;
         g.   Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use; and
         h.   Other pertinent information requested.
   (h)   A person who irrigates, waters or causes or permits the irrigation or
watering by use of an alternative water source such as a well, reclaimed or
reused water, or water from the Trinity River is exempt from prosecution if
that person has:
      (1)   Registered such alternative water source with the city;
      (2)   Provided sufficient proof to the water department director that the
alternative water source is from a well, reclaimed or reused water or from the
Trinity River and has allowed inspection by the water department director if
deemed necessary; and
      (3)   Complied with the city’s backflow and cross-connection control
program and city code §§
12.5-525 through 12.5-599.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007; Ord. 21194-04-2014, § 2, passed 4-8-2014,
eff. 4-16-2014)
§ 35-152 RAIN SENSING DEVICES AND FREEZE GAUGES.
   (a)   Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system
installed within the city on or after June 1, 2006 must be equipped with
properly working rain and freeze sensors.
   (b)   Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system
installed before June 1, 2006 may not be operated after June 1, 2007 without
being equipped with properly working rain and freeze sensors.
   (c)   The potable water supply to lawn irrigation system shall be protected
against backflow in accordance with the city’s backflow and cross-connection
control program, city code §§
12.5-525 through 12.5-599. All rain and freeze sensors for commercial customer
class lawn irrigation systems shall under go annual inspection and testing
concurrent with schedules associated with the requirements of §
12.5-532.
   (d)   Any residential customer class irrigation system installed within the
city on or after June 1, 2007 must be equipped with properly working rain and
freeze sensors.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly
install, operate or cause or permit the installation of or the operation of, an
irrigation system in violation of subsections (a) through (d) above on premises
owned, leased or managed by that person.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
§ 35-154 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   The governmental use of water for essential services such as police, fire
and emergency services which are necessary to preserve or protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Fort Worth are exempt from any and all
restrictions or mandates set forth in this article.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
§ 35-155 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   The director or the director’s designee may assess an administrative fee, in
addition to any criminal penalty assessed for a violation of this article as
described below. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation.
   (a)   In-ground irrigation systems violations.
      (1)   The director may install a locking device on a double check valve
to the irrigation system found to be operating in violation of this article and
shall assess an administrative fee as approved by city council.
      (2)   Notice shall be left on the premises to advise the owner/operator
that the double check valve to the irrigation system has been turned off.
      (3)   Notice shall also be sent by United States postal service to the
person recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that person that the
irrigation system has been turned off and locked. The notice shall also state
the amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise the person of
the procedures for payment of the fees and the procedure to request a hearing
to contest the assessment of the administrative remedy.
   (b)   Violations for systems without double-check valves or in-ground
irrigations systems.
      (1)   The director shall leave notice on the premises to advise the
owner/operator that the person was in violation of watering restrictions and
may assess an administrative fee as approved by city council.
      (2)   Notice shall also be sent by United States postal service to the
person recorded as the city’s water customer notifying that person of the
assessment of administrative fees and advising the person of the procedures for
payment of the fees and the procedure to request a hearing to contest the
assessment of the administrative remedy.
   (c)   Locking device. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with,
cause damage to or remove a locking device placed on a check value by the
director or the director’s representative.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
§ 35-156 PROCEDURES FOR PAYING ADMINISTRATIVE FEES OR REQUESTING A HEARING ON
THE FEES.
   (a)   A person assessed an administrative fee who wishes to re-establish
service to the irrigation system is required to make payment of the assessed
fee.
   (b)   A person may request a hearing to protest the assessment of an
administrative fee. To request a hearing, the water customer must make the
request in person to the water department within 15 business days from the date
on the written notice of violation. If a locking device was installed it shall
remain in place until the conclusion of the hearing and payment of any required
fee.
   (c)   The director or his or her designee shall act as the hearing officer.
The director shall evaluate all information offered by the petitioner at the
hearing. The petitioner making the request for a hearing shall bear the burden
of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence, why the administrative fee
should not be assessed. The hearing officer will provide a decision at the time
of the hearing or within three business days following the conclusion of the
hearing.
   (d)   Payment of any fees assessed at the hearing must be made within seven
business days of the decision from the hearing. Any fees not paid within this
time limit shall be added to the customer’s next water bill.
   (e)   A person may elect to pay the administrative fee without requesting a
hearing. Any fees not paid within 15 business days from the date of the written
notice shall be added to the person’s next water bill.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
§ 35-157 RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE TO DOUBLE CHECK VALVES THAT HAVE BEEN
LOCKED OFF.
   The locking device will be removed by the director or his or her designee
within three working days after payment is received from customer.
(Ord. 17901, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
ARTICLE VII: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
§ 35-158 DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   AIR GAP. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel.
   ALTER (ALTERATION). Any modification of an existing irrigation system where
20% or more of the original system is altered; and/or when additional zones are
added to the existing system.
   AUTOMATIC CONTROLLER. A solid state timer capable of operating valve
stations to set the days, time of day and length of time water is applied.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION. The mechanical prevention of the flow in the direction
opposite to the normal flow; or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases
or substances into the public water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An approved assembly to counteract
backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of
approved assemblies issued by the City of Fort Worth water department.
   COMPLETION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEM INSTALLATION. The time when the landscape
irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests
performed and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating
correctly.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is
actually or potentially connected with any non-potable water system, used water
system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage
reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, air conditioning unit, fire
protection system or any other assembly which contains, or may contain,
contaminated water, domestic sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe
quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or
permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are
considered to be CROSS- CONNECTIONS.
   DESIGN. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape
irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as
collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project,
defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices,
locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any
local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site.
Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
   DESIGN PRESSURE. The pressure that is required for an emission device to
operate properly. DESIGN PRESSURE is calculated by adding the operating
pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses
accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE. An assembly that is composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated
shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly
located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   EMISSION DEVICE. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system
and that is used to apply water including, but not limited to, spray and rotary
sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
   EMPLOYED. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any
activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration,
repair or service to irrigation systems.
   IRRIGATION INSPECTOR. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs
other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or
as a contractor as required under Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter
30.
   IRRIGATION PLAN. Scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists
required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made
in the installation of the irrigation system.
   IRRIGATION SERVICES. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering,
repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or
connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM. An assembly of component parts that is permanently
installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate
any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or
control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an
agricultural operation as defined by Tex. Agricultural Code § 251.002.
   IRRIGATION TECHNICIAN. A person who works under the supervision of a
licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise
installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system
in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water
supply as required under Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 30.
   IRRIGATION ZONE. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched
precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs or
trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features
(such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay or combination)
or for hydrological control.
   IRRIGATOR. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding,
installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation
of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private
or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, required to
be licensed under Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 30.
   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. The science of applying the necessary amount of water
to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf.
   LICENSE. An occupational license that is issued by the Texas commission on
environmental quality under Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 30.
   MAINLINE. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the
water source to the individual zone valves.
   MASTER VALVE. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention
device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline.
   MATCHED PRECIPITATION RATE. The condition in which all sprinkler heads
within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate.
   NEW INSTALLATION. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did
not previously exist.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
   RECLAIMED WATER. Reclaimed water that is collected through a publicly owned
treatment works and is under the direct control of the city wastewater
treatment plants or a wastewater treatment plant with which the city contracts,
and that has been treated to a quality that meets or exceeds Chapter 210
requirements of Tex. Administrative Code Title 30.
   SUPERVISION. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator
who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or
employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed
installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning
January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of
a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an
irrigation system.
   ZONE FLOW. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the
actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening
each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has
stabilized. For design purposes, the ZONE FLOW is the total flow of all nozzles
in the zone at a specific pressure.
   ZONE VALVE. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape
irrigation system.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-159 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply
within the city or the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) on or after
January 1, 2009, except as specified below, or alters an irrigation system to
the water supply as defined herein, must hold a valid license.
   (b)   A property owner is not required to possess a license if the property
owner is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or
occupied by that person as the person’s home. A property owner who installs an
irrigation system must comply with the minimum design standards as described in
Tex. Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 344 and §
12.5-878.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if a person connects an irrigation system
to the water supply within the city or the ETJ on or after January 1, 2009 or
alters an irrigation system to the water supply as defined herein without a
valid license pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-160 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Any person installing or altering an irrigation system within the city
or its ETJ, unless otherwise exempted below, shall first obtain a permit from
the city’s planning and development department.
   (b)   A person shall be exempt from obtaining a permit prior to installing
or altering an irrigation system if such irrigation system is:
      (1)   An on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 366.002;
      (2)   Used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Tex.
Agriculture Code § 251.002, as it may be amended; or
      (3)   Connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for
domestic use.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if a person installs or alters an
irrigation system within the city or its ETJ, unless otherwise exempted,
without a permit from the city.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-161 WATER CONSERVATION.
   All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered,
repaired, serviced and operated in a manner that shall prevent the waste of
water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount
of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or
turf, reduce dust and control erosion.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-162 IRRIGATION PLAN AND AS-BUILT DESIGN: MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (a)   An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan as described in
subsection (d) below, for each site prior to installation or alteration of an
irrigation system. An easily available paper or electronic copy of the
irrigation plan must be on site at all times during such installation of the
irrigation system.
   (b)   During the installation or alteration of the irrigation system,
variances from the original plan are allowable if noted in red on the
irrigation plan, and provided that the change(s) does not:
      (1)   Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; nor
      (2)   Violate any requirement of this
Article VII.
   (c)   The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be
irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be
irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
   (d)   All irrigation plans must be drawn to scale. The plan shall include
the following information:
      (1)   The irrigator’s seal, signature and date of signing;
      (2)   All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be
watered;
      (3)   A north arrow;
      (4)   A legend;
      (5)   The zone flow measurement for each zone;
      (6)   Location and type each automatic controller and sensor (such as
rain, moisture, wind, flow or freeze sensors);
      (7)   Location, type and size of each:
         a.   Water source, such as, but not limited to, a water meter and
point(s) of connection;
         b.   Backflow prevention assembly;
         c.   Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray
heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip or micro-sprays;
         d.   Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves
and isolation valves;
         e.   Pressure regulation component; and
         f.   Main line and lateral piping.
      (8)   The scale used; and
      (9)   The design pressure.
   (e)   An irrigator commits an offense if the irrigator fails to provide an
irrigation plan for the irrigation system that person installed or caused to be
installed as required herein.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-163 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person who installs or alters an irrigation system (or who causes such
installation or alteration) shall comply with the following minimum
requirements.
   (a)   Manufacturer’s specifications. A person shall not install nor cause to
be installed, an irrigation system which requires the use of any component,
including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer’s published
performance limitations for the component.
   (b)   Spacing.
      (1)   The maximum spacing between emission devices shall not exceed the
manufacturer’s published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or
spacing shall be determined by the manufacturer’s published specifications for
a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure.
      (2)   a.   New or altered irrigation systems shall not utilize above-
ground spray emission devices in landscapes:
            1.   That are less than 60 inches (which shall not include the
impervious surfaces in either length or width); and
            2.   Which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic
surfaces along two or more perimeters.
         b.   Qualifying areas less than 60 inches may be irrigated utilizing
subsurface or drip irrigation, pressure compensating tubing, or be designed
without irrigation. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a
new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any
adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a
hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete,
asphalt, pavers or stones set with mortar.
      (3)   Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other
small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas
may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped
area.
   (c)   Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the
minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the
manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve
the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control
valves, a pressure regulator or pressure compensating spray heads.
   (d)   Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so
that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per
second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
   (e)   Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based
on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil
conditions and hydrological requirements.
   (f)   Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so
that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same
precipitation rate.
   (g)   Spray. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of
concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious
material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
   (h)   Foundations. If the irrigation plan includes a foundation watering
system, a separate station shall be dedicated for drip irrigation.
   (i)   Master valve. A flow control master valve shall be installed on the
discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly on all new installations.
   (j)   Check valves. Check valves are required where elevation differences
may result in low head drainage. Check valves may be located at the sprinkler
head(s) or on the lateral line.
   (k)   Pop-up heads. Pop-up heads shall be installed at grade level and
operated to extend above all landscape turfgrass.
   (l)   PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed
using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to
applying the PVC cement in accordance with the city’s plumbing code, as it may
be amended.
   (m)   Automatic controllers. All new irrigation systems must include an
automatic controller capable of providing the following features:
      (1)   Multiple irrigation programs with at least three start times per
program;
      (2)   Limiting the irrigation frequency to once every seven days and once
every 14 days; and
      (3)   A water budgeting feature.
   (n)   Operational rain or moisture and freeze shut-off devices or other
technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include
operational sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt
operation of the irrigation system during periods of freezing weather and
moisture or rainfall in accordance with city code §
35-152. Freeze and rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed
according to the manufacturer’s published recommendations. Repairs or
alterations to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement
of an existing controller must include an operational sensor or other
technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system
during periods of freezing weather and moisture or rainfall.
   (o)   Isolation valve. All irrigation systems must include an isolation
valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention assembly.
   (p)   Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be
installed according to the manufacturer’s published specifications for depth
coverage of piping.
      (1)   If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth
coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth
coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the
natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail
to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being
irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be
mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and
discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner’s representative to address
any safety issues.
      (2)   If a utility, human-made structure or roots create an unavoidable
obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the
piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill
between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
      (3)   All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation
system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade.
   (q)   Wiring irrigation systems.
      (1)   Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic
controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed
by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground.
      (2)   Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an
irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.
      (3)   Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be
waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer.
      (4)   Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller
to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a
minimum of six inches of select backfill.
   (r)   No potable use. Water contained within the piping of an irrigation
system shall be deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage,
such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains,
shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib is connected to an
irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area,
the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler
installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses
connected to the bib must be labeled “nonpotable, not safe for drinking.” An
isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose
bib to an irrigation system.
   (s)   Y-strainer. A Y-type strainer must be installed on the inlet side of
the double check valve.
   (t)   Backflow. A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed and used
in compliance with
Chapter 12.5, Article V, Division 3, Cross-Connection Control.
   (u)   Effective January 1, 2010, a licensed irrigator shall:
      (1)   Be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is
being installed; or
      (2)   Ensure that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to
supervise the installation of the irrigation system.
   (v)   Offense. A person commits an offense if a person who installs, allows
or causes to be installed an irrigation system which does not meet the minimum
design requirements described in this section.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-164 REVIEW OF THE IRRIGATION SYSTEM BY OWNER.
   Upon completion of the irrigation system installation or alteration, the
irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site
installation shall complete the following:
   (a)   The irrigator or irrigation technician shall perform a final walk-
through inspection with the irrigation system’s owner or the owner’s
representative. The walk-through shall include a review of the those items on
the maintenance checklist as described in subsection (b) below;
   (b)   The items on the maintenance checklist required in subsection (a)
above shall include:
      (1)   The irrigator’s name, license number, company name, telephone
number;
      (2)   The location of the water meter, isolation valve, backflow
prevention assembly, sprinkler heads, drip or pressure compensating tubing
irrigation, rain or moisture and freeze shut-off device;
      (3)   The irrigation plan;
      (4)   The manufacturer’s manual for the automatic controller;
      (5)   A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based
on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference
evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates,
plant landscape coefficient factors and site factors;
      (6)   A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and
other such components that require maintenance and the recommended frequency
for the service; and
      (7)   The following statement:
         “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all
applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I
have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to
the irrigation plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application
of water at this time.”
   (c)   The irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of
the irrigation system’s owner or owner’s representative on the maintenance
checklist which evidences that a walk-through by the two parties was performed
and included a review of those items in subsection (b) above. If the irrigation
system’s owner or owner’s representative is unwilling or unable to sign the
maintenance checklist, the irrigator or irrigation technician shall note the
time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system’s owner or owner’s
representative’s signature line.
   (d)   The irrigator or the irrigation technician shall provide the
irrigation system owner or owner’s representative the signed original
maintenance checklist and a copy of the irrigation plan.
   (e)   The irrigator or irrigation technician shall permanently affix the
irrigator’s name, license number, company name, telephone number to each
automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. The
information must be waterproof.
   (f)   In the event that the irrigation system owner or owner representative
is a residential home builder, then a copy of the irrigation plan indicating
the actual installation of the system and corresponding maintenance checklist
must be placed within or attached to the automatic controller when such home is
sold. A signed statement from the new owner and the residential home builder,
or builder’s representative, stating they have received and transferred,
respectively, a copy of the irrigation plan and maintenance checklist must be
provided to the city’s water department within 30 days of the transfer to the
new owner.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if that person fails to comply with the
terms of this section.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-165 CITY INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   Upon completion of the irrigation system installation or alteration,
and after review of the irrigation system by the owner as provided for in §§
35-166(a) through (f), the irrigator or irrigation technician, or property
owner shall request an inspection of the irrigation system by the city’s water
department. Such irrigation system shall not be used without the city’s
completed inspection and approval that such irrigation system complies with
Article VII.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if that person uses, allows to be used or
causes to be used an irrigation system which has not passed the city’s
inspection and has not received the city’s approval for its use.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-166 MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, REPAIR OR SERVICE OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   (a)   An irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performs
during the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an
irrigation system.
   (b)   All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration,
repair or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original
grade with compacted select backfill by the irrigator who caused such work to
occur.
   (c)   Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings
used in the maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system
in accordance with the city’s plumbing code, as it may be amended.
   (d)   When maintenance, repair or service of an irrigation system involves
excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention assembly, an
isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if that performs or causes to be performed
any maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system in
violation of the section.
   (f)   The city shall not bear any responsibility to the owner of an
irrigation system to modify or upgrade the irrigation if the city exposes the
mainline during maintenance of the city’s water system.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-167 RECLAIMED WATER; OTHER WATER SUPPLY SOURCES.
   (a)   Reclaimed water may be utilized in the irrigation systems if:
      (1)   There is an written agreement between the city and the owner/
operator of the irrigation system;
      (2)   The user complies with Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter
210, titled “Use of Reclaimed Water;”
      (3)   There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is
pasteurized before consumption;
      (4)   The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines
that do not belong to the irrigation system’s owner;
      (5)   The irrigation system is installed using purple components;
      (6)   The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with Tex.
Administrative Code Title 30, § 290.47(i);
      (7)   A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and
Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that
reads, “RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK” and “AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER;”
and
      (8)   The backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line complies
with the city code requirements and other applicable laws.
   (b)   A person may not use or connect any alternative water supply sources,
such as, but not limited to, gray water or harvested rain water without the
prior written approval of the city’s water director.
   (c)   A person commits and offense if that person uses or causes to be used
reclaimed water or any other source or supply of water in violation of this
section.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-168 ADVERTISEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation,
maintenance, alteration, repair or service must display the irrigator’s license
number in the form of “LI____________” in a contrasting color of block letters
at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
   (b)   All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation
services must display the irrigator’s license number in the form of
“LI____________.” Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and
estimates which displays an entity’s or individual’s name other than that of
the irrigator must also display the name of the irrigator and the licensed
irrigator’s license number.
   (c)   Additionally, the name, mailing address and telephone number of the
TCEQ must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain
view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where
irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if that person uses or causes to be used
any advertisement in violation of this section.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-169 CONTRACTS.
   On all installations of irrigation systems or maintenance, alterations,
repairs or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present
the irrigation system’s owner or owner’s representative a written document that
identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair or
service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator must specify the irrigator’s
name, business address and business telephone number(s), must contain the
signature of the irrigation system’s owner or owner’s representative confirming
receipt of the warranty and must include the statement:
   Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas commission on environmental
quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ’s
website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
§ 35-170 FEES.
   (a)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for reimbursement of
costs of permitting, inspecting and enforcing
Article VII as follows:
      (1)   Fees for issuing irrigation installation permits; and
      (2)   Fees for monitoring and inspection by the city or its agent.
   (b)   Such fees shall relate solely to the matters covered by this
Article VII and are separate from and in addition to all other fees, fines and
penalties assessable by the city.
   (c)   The fee schedule may be amended from time-to-time as the city council
deems reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 18444-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-13-2009)
ARTICLE VIII: RECLAIMED WATER
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35-171 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to define the terms and conditions for which
reclaimed water may be provided to users within the city’s reclaimed water
service area.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-172 DEFINITIONS.
   In this article:
   APPROVED USE. The use of reclaimed water as authorized by law and approved
through a reclaimed water agreement with the city.
   APPROVED USE AREA. A site authorized by law and designated approved in a
reclaimed water agreement to receive reclaimed water for an approved use.
   CHAPTER 210. Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 210, titled “Use of
Reclaimed Water,” as it may be amended from time to time.
   COMMINGLE. The mixing of reclaimed water with one or more liquids in the
same container unit.
   COMMISSION or TCEQ. The Texas commission on environmental quality and its
successor agencies.
   CONTAINER UNIT. Any container that is used to hold reclaimed water during
transport from a wastewater treatment facility to an approved use area.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is
actually or potentially connected with any non-potable water system, used water
system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage
reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, air conditioning unit, fire
protection system or any other assembly which contains, or may contain,
contaminated water, domestic sewage or other liquid of unknown or unsafe
quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water
system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or
permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are
considered to be CROSS- CONNECTIONS.
   DIRECTOR. The director of the water department, or the director’s designee.
   DISTRIBUTION MAIN.
      (1)   A reclaimed water main offsite to a user which is constructed at
the expense of the reclaimed water user and which connects one or more user
with a City of Fort Worth transmission main.
      (2)   DISTRIBUTION MAINS terminate at:
         a.   The point of connection with a user’s reclaimed water meter; and
         b.   The point of connection with the City of Fort Worth’s
transmission mains.
      (3)   All DISTRIBUTION MAINS (including the reclaimed water meter
connecting to a user’s onsite reclaimed water main) accepted by the City of
Fort Worth becomes the property of the City of Fort Worth at the time the
distribution main is accepted.
   DRAWINGS. Plans, working drawings, detail drawings, profiles, typical cross
sections or reproductions that show locations, character, dimensions, or
details of work related to a reclaimed water system and its components.
   OFF-SITE FACILITIES. Any distribution main and/or transmission main as
defined herein.
   ON-SITE FACILITIES. Any reclaimed water transport or distribution lines on
the user’s side of the reclaimed water meter. On-site reclaimed water mains are
built by the user and subject to permitting, the City of Fort Worth’s
regulations and inspection and Chapter 210 minimum standards.
   POINT OF CONNECTION. A location where offsite facilities connect to onsite
facilities and, unless otherwise set forth in the reclaimed water service
agreement, is the point at the downstream end of the water department’s
reclaimed water service.
   RECLAIMED WATER. Wastewater that is collected through a city owned
wastewater treatment plant(s), treated to a quality that meets or exceeds the
TCEQ’s authorization to the city and/or Chapter 210 requirements.
   RECLAIMED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. That system of pipes and related
facilities for the distribution, use and sale of reclaimed water by the city or
the city’s contractor’s.
   RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE. The furnishing of reclaimed water to a user,
through a metered connection, to onsite facilities.
   RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE AGREEMENT. A standard agreement, between a user and
the city that establishes the conditions and terms for delivery and use of
reclaimed water.
   RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE AREA. The territory within the city and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) and as it may later be amended.
   RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION. The transport of reclaimed water by vehicles
to an approved use area.
   STORAGE FACILITY. An impoundment or structural tank that receives and stores
reclaimed water.
   TRANSMISSION MAIN. A reclaimed water main including pumping and monitoring
facilities.
   USER. A private party to a reclaimed water agreement with the city.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The City of Fort Worth water department.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
DIVISION 2: RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE
§ 35-173 PROVISION OF RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE.
   (a)   Upon the director’s recommendation that the provision of reclaimed
water is feasible, the city manager may enter into a standard reclaimed water
agreement for the provision of reclaimed water to properties within the
reclaimed water service area upon application, and in compliance with this
article and all applicable laws and regulations.
   (b)   A person who requests reclaimed water service from the city must meet
all requirements provided in this article and all minimum design, construction
and operation standards for reclaimed water facilities.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-174 REQUEST FOR RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE.
   (a)   To request reclaimed water service, a person must own or manage the
property for which the service is to be provided.
   (b)   A person must submit an application to the director and agree to abide
by all requirements for reclaimed water service as described in this article.
If a person meets the requirements described herein, then that person must
enter into a standard reclaimed water agreement prior to the delivery of
reclaimed water.
   (c)   The director shall review each submitted application and shall make
such investigation, to include site visits, as is reasonably necessary to
determine if such service is feasible.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-175 PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE MINIMUM DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   A person making an application for reclaimed water service shall
submit the following information to the director for his or her approval, prior
to construction or retrofit of an onsite facility that will use or receive
reclaimed water:
      (1)   Design drawings and specifications which must be in compliance with
the city’s policies and regulations;
      (2)   Drawings of the final installed onsite facility and the entire
proposed use area;
      (3)   Proof that the user will be compliant with
Chapter 12.5, Article 5, Division 3 Cross-Connection Control and has the
required backflow prevention assembly on the reclaimed water service line; and
      (4)   Proof, as requested by the director, that the user has sufficient
storage facilities for the reclaimed water and will be in compliance with
Chapter 210.
   (b)   The director may issue written notice to the applicant to proceed with
construction and/or retrofit upon satisfaction that the applicant meets or
shall meet the minimum design and operation standards for reclaimed water
service.
   (c)   After completion of the construction or retrofit of the onsite
facilities for reclaimed water service, the applicant must make a written
request for inspection by the city. The inspection shall include the cross-
connection control and an operational test.
   (d)   The director shall grant the user approval of reclaimed water onsite
facilities if:
      (1)   The director determines that the applicant meets the city’s minimum
design and operation standards; and
      (2)   The system passes the inspection and the operational tests of the
cross-connection control.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-176 CROSS-CONNECTIONS WITH POTABLE WATER MAINS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or to maintain any cross-
connection or to allow any cross-connection to exist at any place under the
control of any person.
   (b)   Any switchover system potentially allowing use of potable water as a
temporary substitute for reclaimed water if reclaimed water is not available
shall be built to ensure that reclaimed water does not back flow into the
potable water system.
   (c)   To ensure the complete separation of a user’s onsite potable water
system from the lines supplying reclaimed water, the city shall inspect or
cause to be inspected by a third party contractor, the user’s onsite potable
water system prior to supplying reclaimed water. Any recommended piping
modifications shall be completed prior to commencement of the reclaimed water
service. A re-inspection shall be conducted every year or as deemed necessary
by the director.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-177 DISTRIBUTION MAINS AND THE POLICY FOR THE INSTALLATION OF COMMUNITY
FACILITIES.
   (a)   Any person who desires the extension of reclaimed water distribution
mains for the provision of reclaimed water service shall bear all costs of
extending the distribution main from the transmission main to the user’s
property line and comply with the city’s policy for the installation of
community facilities as it relates to reclaimed water service. The size of such
distribution mains are to be determined by the city, based on the user’s
expected reclaimed water consumption.
   (b)   Any distribution main construction which includes oversizing of a
distribution main at the request of the city shall be advertised for bids or
using the city’s approved unit prices for water mains in the manner generally
required for city construction and shall also comply with the city’s policy for
the installation of community facilities. All qualified bids submitted shall be
publicly opened and let in the same manner as other city construction contracts
are bid and let. The construction contract shall be between the user and
contractor. Prior to commencement of the work under the contract for
construction of an oversize distribution main, the contractor must have
complied with the city’s policy for the installation of community facilities.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-178 RECLAIMED WATER AGREEMENT.
   (a)   Upon approval of the reclaimed water service onsite facilities, the
applicant must execute a standard reclaimed water service agreement with the
city to receive reclaimed water service.
   (b)   The reclaimed water service agreement shall incorporate the
requirements of this article, Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 210
and other terms and conditions prescribed by the city.
   (c)   Prior to delivery of reclaimed water, the applicant must sign the
reclaimed water agreement acknowledging that the applicant, as the user, is now
responsible for onsite facilities and related activities; that the user shall
comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to
Chapter 210; and shall agree to hold the city harmless from any and all claims
related to the reclaimed water and the operation and maintenance of the onsite
facilities and related activities.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-179 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (a)   The city may discontinue reclaimed water service if the user:
      (1)   Violates the terms of the reclaimed water service agreement or this
article;
      (2)   Fails to pay any and all fees assessed on the user’s water bill;
      (3)   Tampers with any facilities related to the service, including the
meter;
      (4)   Cross-connects the reclaimed water system with a potable water
source;
      (5)   Refuses to permit an authorized city representative to enter his or
her premises to inspect the user’s reclaimed water system; or
      (6)   Performs an act that the director determines may be detrimental to
the water, wastewater and/or reclaimed water system or the health and safety of
the public.
   (b)   A user shall pay for the reclaimed water provided by the city until
the reclaimed water service is properly disconnected.
   (c)   A user may not reconnect a discontinued service without the director’s
approval.
   (d)   If a user reconnects a discontinued service without the director’s
approval, the water department may remove the service and charge an additional
fee.
   (e)   A user may apply for reinstatement of service after paying all fees or
charges assessed.
   (f)   The director shall charge a fee for reinstatement of reclaimed water
service.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-180 CITY’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   The city and its authorized agents, employees or contractors are
responsible for the operation, management and control of the offsite facilities
and the oversight of reclaimed water.
   (b)   The city shall:
      (1)   Obtain necessary commission authorizations for the offsite use of
reclaimed water under Chapter 210;
      (2)   Conduct reclaimed water quality assessments; and
      (3)   Have the right to take any action at such times that it deems
necessary to safeguard the public health and safety.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-181 USER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   A user shall:
   (a)   Be responsible for constructing an onsite service line to an
established point of connection;
   (b)   Provide supervision of onsite facilities to assure compliance with
this article and
Chapter 12.5, Article V, Division 3 (Cross-Connection Control) of the city
code;
   (c)   Provide access to on-site facilities at reasonable times for
inspections by the city;
   (d)   Train all onsite facilities operations personnel consistent with the
worker training and safety plan approved by the commission, pursuant to Tex.
Administrative Code Title 30, § 210.4(a)(4)(F), as it may be amended from time
to time; and
   (e)   Conduct all operations related to reclaimed water service in
compliance with this article.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-182 USE OF RECLAIMED WATER.
   (a)   Reclaimed water may be used only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Turf and general landscape irrigation in compliance with §
35-167;
      (2)   Non-food processing industrial processes;
      (3)   Nonresidential toilet and urinal flushing;
      (4)   Construction activities;
      (5)   Vehicle washing;
      (6)   Air conditioning cooling towers; and
      (7)   Other lawful uses as authorized by the director.
   (b)   A user may use reclaimed water only in locations and for uses as
designated and approved in the user’s executed reclaimed water service
agreement.
   (c)   Each user of reclaimed water or action related to reclaimed water must
comply with Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 210 and these provisions
of this article.
   (d)   Reclaimed water service agreements are non-transferrable to subsequent
property owners and/or users. Each user must enter into a reclaimed water
service agreement for the provision of reclaimed water.
   (e)   Reclaimed water used for cooling or processing must be discharged to a
sanitary sewer, in compliance with all applicable permits and laws governing
such discharges, or obtain written approval from the director for any other
proposed use, disposal or discharge of such water.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-183 ANNUAL INSPECTION; RIGHT OF INSPECTION OF RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM
ONSITE FACILITIES.
   (a)   The user shall conduct an annual inspection of the onsite facilities,
either through the city water department or through the use of a city approved
third party contractor.
   (b)   Additionally, the director may inspect devices installed by the user
to control the flow of reclaimed water and may remove, or secure such devices
if installed in violation of this article or any term of the reclaimed water
service agreement.
   (c)   Director may inspect any offsite or onsite facilities, as well as use
areas and adjoining property belonging to the user and shall be granted access,
without prior notice to the user during normal business hours. If access is
needed by the director during non-business hours, the user shall allow access
at a reasonable time upon a prior request by the director.
   (d)   The user and his or her operators shall cooperate with the city and
its authorized representatives and assist in performing inspections and
operational tests.
   (e)   Any modifications to the user’s onsite facilities must meet all
criteria in this article and is subject to inspection.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-184 IDENTIFICATION OF RECLAIMED WATER ONSITE FACILITIES.
   A user must identify reclaimed water onsite facilities with signs having a
minimum size of eight inches by eight inches posted at all storage areas and on
all hose bibs and faucets, in both English and Spanish, the words “Reclaimed
Water, Do Not Drink” or a similar warning in accordance with Tex.
Administrative Code Title 30, § 210.25.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-185 MAINTENANCE OF RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE PIPES.
   All persons using reclaimed water shall keep their onsite facilities in good
repair, so as to prevent leakage. Maintenance is the owner’s responsibility.
All onsite transportation, holding and distribution facilities for reclaimed
water shall comply with the standards of Tex. Administrative Code Title 30,
Chapter 210.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-186 VIOLATIONS; PROHIBITED USES.
   A person commits an offense if a person:
   (a)   Uses reclaimed water for a purpose not approved by this article and/or
authorized in the reclaimed water agreement;
   (b)   Uses or applies reclaimed water for any purpose, including approved
uses, by direct application or by windblown spray, to an area other than the
approved use area;
   (c)   Uses hose bibs or faucets on a reclaimed water system unless they are
designed and installed to prevent connection to a standard water hose, as
defined in Tex. Administrative Code Chapter 210.25;
   (d)   Allows any obstruction to impede access to meter boxes or other onsite
or offsite facilities;
   (e)   Gives, sells, trades or transfers reclaimed water to another area
without the prior written approval of the director;
   (f)   Discharges airborne or surface reclaimed water from the user’s
property, other than to a wastewater treatment system or wastewater collection
system, without notifying the city of its permit granted by TCEQ and
authorizing the discharge;
   (g)   Interrupts reclaimed water service in a portion of the city’s system
without the prior written approval of the director;
   (h)   Stores or applies reclaimed water in such a way as to cause runoff or
ponding. If such conditions occur, in addition to any other corrective action
taken or required by law, the user shall immediately alter its method of
application to prevent any further runoff or ponding;
   (i)   Tampers with, works on, or in any way alters or damages any part of
the city’s reclaimed water system. Tampering or work shall include, but is not
limited to, opening or closing of valves, or causing of any reclaimed water to
flow from the system;
   (j)   Cuts into or makes any improper connection with the system;
   (k)   Causes or allows their reclaimed water system to have any cross-
connections (between two or more water supplies), any illegal connections or
tie-ins, or any discharge of reclaimed water into the public wastewater system;
   (l)   Takes or uses reclaimed water without payment; or
   (m)   Removes or defaces any warnings, labels or signs pertaining to
reclaimed water use.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-187 OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person violates any provision of
this article.
   (b)   An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c).
   (c)   Each instance of a violation of this article is a separate offense.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-
12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 35-188 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   The rate for all reclaimed water users, effective October 1, 2018,
shall be $1.7364 per 1,000 gallons, with an annual increase of 5% thereafter.
   (b)   The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for reimbursement of
costs of permitting and inspecting this
Article VIII as follows:
      (1)   Application fee;
      (2)   Reclaimed water volume charge;
      (3)   Tap fee;
      (4)   Meter charges;
      (5)   Engineering or other professional services or inspection fees;
      (6)   Reclaimed water front footage charges;
      (7)   Reclaimed water main capacity charge;
      (8)   Reconnection fee; and
      (9)   Service reinstatement fee.
   (c)   The fee schedule may be amended from time-to-time as the city council
deems reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011; Ord. 23377-09-2018, § 4, passed 9-
11-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
§ 35-189 INACCURATE METER READINGS.
   Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of reclaimed water
used by a user since the previous reading, the right shall exist on the part of
the water department to charge for reclaimed water service on the basis of
three month’s average.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-190 BILLING.
   Bills for reclaimed water service shall become due and payable to the city,
at the office of the Water department, city hall, 1000 Throckmorton Street,
within 21 days from the date of the bill. If a customer has not paid the bill
in full within 24 days of the date of the bill, a 5% late fee shall be assessed
against all unpaid current charges on the bill.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-191 NO GRANT OR TRANSFER OF WATER RIGHT OR OWNERSHIP INTEREST.
   The delivery of reclaimed water by the city and the acceptance and use of
the reclaimed water by the user is not a transfer or an acquisition by the user
of a water right or an ownership interest in any of the offsite facilities.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
DIVISION 3: TRANSPORTATION OF RECLAIMED WATER
§ 35-192 RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION.
   (a)   The city may allow for the transport of reclaimed water from its
wastewater treatment facilities by a permitted vehicle to an approved use area.
   (b)   Reclaimed water shall be made available for transport by vehicle only
under the terms and conditions provided herein and only to such persons as are
duly permitted by the city as distributors as provided in this section.
   (c)   The city shall not be obligated to provide such reclaimed water to
distributors and may discontinue such service at any time, or limit the volume
of reclaimed water provided and amend loading procedures and/or locations.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-193 RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   A reclaimed water transportation permit is required to transport
reclaimed water from a city facility to an approved use.
   (b)   No reclaimed water transportation permit shall be issued except upon
application filed with the water department.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-194 RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   A person must make an application for a reclaimed water transportation
permit and shall submit the following with the application:
   (a)   A photocopy of the applicant’s valid driver’s license and photocopies
of valid driver’s license for every proposed driver of the reclaimed water
transportation vehicles. If drivers are later hired or approved by the
applicant/user, the applicant/user must submit photocopies of a valid driver’s
license for each new person hired or approved prior to that person transporting
reclaimed water;
   (b)   Sufficient evidence that vehicles to be permitted, are insured in at
least the minimum amounts as required by state law, or are self-insured as
provided by state law to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising
out of the operation of each vehicle. The insurance shall provide for at least
a 30-day prior cancellation notice to the director. A written statement from an
authorized agent of the applicant’s insurance carrier verifying the issuance of
such insurance shall be filed with the director before a permit is issued;
   (c)   Proof of registration and good standing with the Texas Secretary of
State; and
   (d)   Any additional information requested by the director.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-195 VEHICLES AND CONTAINERS REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Before a permit is issued, each vehicle must satisfactorily pass city
inspection and meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The business name, telephone number and address of applicant shall
be permanently displayed on both sides of the vehicle in letters of a minimum
height of three inches, in a color contrasting to their background. An address
is sufficient if it states city and state. If the applicant’s business is not
within municipality, the name of the county and state will be sufficient;
      (2)   The vehicle shall display current state vehicle registration tags
and inspection certificate; and
      (3)   The vehicle shall be clean and odor free.
   (b)   Each container unit to be used for the transportation of reclaimed
water shall be separately permitted and must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Container units or tanks shall have a minimum capacity of 1,000
gallons, shall be capable of being closed water tight and shall be so closed
during transport of reclaimed water; and shall be maintained in a leak-proof
condition. Special permits may be issued for container units with a capacity of
less than 1,000 gallons upon the determination by the director that all other
container unit specifications herein required have been met and that the
particular container unit does not create an increased risk to the public
health and safety; and
      (2)   Container units shall be identified by labels or signs such as
“CAUTION - RECLAIMED WATER DO NOT DRINK” in English and Spanish. Labels or
signs shall be placed so that they can be seen readily by all operations
personnel using the vehicle and container unit.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-196 RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (a)   The permit holder may request a modification to the permit during the
permit year to register additional vehicles or container units. A request to
register additional vehicles or container units shall be made to the director
and at a minimum the permit holder shall:
      (1)   Ensure that all vehicles or container units meet the requirements
of §
35-194;
      (2)   Provide proof of liability insurance or self insurance for such
additional vehicles in accordance with §
35-194(b); and
      (3)   Pay a permit fee for each additional container unit in an amount
set by the city council.
   (b)   A permit modification may not extend the term of the original permit.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-197 ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT.
   (a)   Upon the issuance of a permit(s), the permit must be attached and
clearly displayed in a secure and prominent place upon each vehicle and/or
container unit for which the permit is issued.
   (b)   A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance,
unless the permit is suspended or revoked as provided for in this article.
   (c)   A permit may not be transferred.
   (d)   The city council shall establish an annual fee for the vehicle and
container unit permits.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-198 GROUNDS FOR RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT DENIAL.
   (a)   The director may deny the issuance of a permit if:
      (1)   The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the
applicant’s business, or applicant’s manager or operator has:
         a.   Within the five years preceding the date of the application been
convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine
exceeding $2,000 and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility of
transporting reclaimed water or liquid waste; and/or
         b.   Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or
responsibility of transporting reclaimed water or liquid waste.
      (2)   The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or
self insurance as required by this article;
      (3)   The applicant had a permit, that was issued under this article,
suspended or revoked within the 12 months preceding the date of the
application;
      (4)   The application contains a false statement;
      (5)   The application or required information is incomplete;
      (6)   The applicant’s vehicles or container units submitted for
inspection do not meet the criteria of §
35-194;
      (7)   The applicant has not registered his or her business with the Texas
Secretary of State or is not in good standing;
      (8)   The applicant has not shown proof that the applicant and the
applicant’s drivers are qualified under this article; or
      (9)   The applicant has violated a provision of this article within the
preceding 12 months.
   (b)   An applicant whose permit is denied will be notified by the director,
in writing, of the denial and the grounds therefore. Such notice will be sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address listed on the
application.
   (c)   An applicant whose permit is denied may request a hearing for
reconsideration in accordance with §
35-203, provided such request is made within 15 calendar days of the issuance
of the written notice of denial.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-199 RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   A person who has been issued a permit by the director shall comply with the
following.
   (a)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director of any
management changes in the business during the time the permit is in effect, and
shall provide the director with a photocopy of the new manager’s or chief
operating officer’s driver’s license;
   (b)   A transporter shall deliver reclaimed water only to users that have
been approved by the director and that have a reclaimed water service agreement
on file with the city;
   (c)   The permit holder shall maintain insurance required by §
35-193 and immediately notify the director of any changes in its insurance
carrier or policy, and insured status or self-insured status;
   (d)   The permit holder shall maintain all vehicles and container units
registered under the permit in compliance with the requirements of §
35-194;
   (e)   The permit holder shall notify the director within three business days
when it sells or otherwise disposes of a vehicle or container unit registered
under the permit;
   (f)   A permit holder shall ensure that all of the permit holder’s employees
collecting and transporting reclaimed water in vehicles and container units
registered under the permit remain sufficiently knowledgeable of such vehicles
and container units, and of the reclaimed water user locations they service, so
that they are able to collect and transport reclaimed water in a safe and
competent manner; and
   (g)   The permit holder shall ensure that none of the vehicles registered
under a permit exceed state weight limits while transporting reclaimed water.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-200 TRANSPORTER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A transporter shall not transport reclaimed water in a manner or in a
container unit or vehicle which would allow for any spillage or leakage of
reclaimed water.
   (b)   A transporter shall not operate for the transportation of reclaimed
water a vehicle or use container units that fail to meet the requirements of §
35-194.
   (c)   A transporter shall deliver reclaimed water only to users that have
been approved by the director through a reclaimed water service agreement.
   (d)   A transporter shall not commingle reclaimed water with any other
liquid or waste, including any other sources of non-potable water.
   (e)   All container units used to transport any other liquid or waste,
including other sources of nonpotable water, shall be cleaned and disinfected
prior to being used to transport reclaimed water. Required cleaning and
disinfection procedures will be provided by the director. Any deviation from
the required procedures must be approved in writing by the director.
   (f)   A transporter shall insure that reclaimed water is delivered to the
approved user immediately but not later than 12 hours following receipt of the
reclaimed water from the city.
   (g)   A transporter shall not discharge reclaimed water into a storm drain
or the storm sewer system, or into any ponds, streams or rivers.
   (h)   Any excess reclaimed water shall be disposed of by discharging to a
wastewater treatment system or wastewater collection system in compliance with
all applicable permits or laws for such treatment or collection systems.
   (i)   A transporter shall allow the director and any authorized peace
officer to inspect vehicles and container units registered under a permit, upon
request.
   (j)   A transporter shall allow the director and any peace officer to obtain
samples of reclaimed water from the transporter’s container units, upon their
request.
   (k)   A transporter operating under a city permit shall use a manifest
system book consisting of four-part trip tickets, purchased from the director
for a fee established by the city council, in the following manner:
      (1)   Each manifest system book shall be used exclusively for a single
vehicle;
      (2)   A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each individual
delivery;
      (3)   The transporter shall sign the original part of a trip ticket and
request the wastewater treatment plant supervisor, or his or her designee, to
do the same at the time of reclaimed water collection. The transporter shall
leave the first copy (yellow) of the trip ticket with the wastewater treatment
plant supervisor;
      (4)   The transporter shall have the user sign the original part of the
trip ticket at the time the reclaimed water is delivered, and shall leave the
second copy (pink) of the trip ticket with the user;
      (5)   The transporter shall retain the third copy (green) of the trip
ticket for the transporter’s own records;
      (6)   The transporter shall deliver to the director all completed
original trip tickets no later than the tenth day of the month following the
month in which they were completed; and
      (7)   The transporter shall retain its copies of all trip tickets for a
period of five years, and shall make such copies available to the director,
upon request, for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-201 TRANSPORTATION OFFENSES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person engages in the
transportation of reclaimed water and fails to comply with any provision of
this division and shall be subject to the same provisions of §
35-186.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle transporting reclaimed water in container units not
permitted to transport reclaimed water.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a vehicle transporting reclaimed water and fails to display to the
director or any peace officer upon demand, a copy of a valid transportation
permit issued pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-202 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION
PERMIT.
   The director may suspend a permit for up to six months or may revoke a
permit if the director determines that:
   (a)   The permit holder, a partner of the permit holder, a principal in the
permit holder’s business, permit holder’s manager or operator, or an officer of
permit holder:
         a.   Has within the five years preceding the date of the hearing been
convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine
exceeding $500, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in
operating a reclaimed water transportation business; or
         b.   Has been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty
or responsibility in operating a reclaimed water transportation business.
   (b)   The permit holder failed to comply with any of the permit conditions
stated in §
35-198;
   (c)   The permit holder or any agent or employee thereof failed to use the
manifest system book in compliance with this article, or to maintain manifests
for five years, or to allow the director to inspect the manifests;
   (d)   The permit holder or any agent or employee thereof improperly disposed
of reclaimed water;
   (e)   The permit holder or any agent or employee thereof commingled
reclaimed water with any other liquid or waste, including other sources of
nonpotable water, in a city-permitted container unit;
   (f)   The permit holder or any agent or employee thereof refused or failed
to allow the director or a peace officer to inspect a reclaimed water
transportation vehicle or container unit or obtain reclaimed water samples from
a container unit; or
   (g)   The permit holder or any agent or employee thereof, within the 12
months preceding the hearing, was convicted of violating this article.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-203 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT;
REQUEST OF A HEARING.
   (a)   The director shall issue written notice to the permit holder of the
grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. Such permit shall be
suspended and or revoked immediately upon receipt of the notice.
   (b)   Subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, a permit holder
may appeal to the director for reconsideration of the suspension or revocation
and request a hearing.
   (c)   The request for appeal shall be in writing and set forth, in detail,
the grounds upon which the hearing is requested.
   (d)   The request for appeal shall be filed with such director within 15
business days of the permit holder receiving the notice from the director. The
notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail
receptacle of the United States postal service.
   (e)   Failure to submit a timely written request for appeal shall be deemed
to be a waiver of any further right to reconsideration.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-204 HEARINGS.
   (a)   Within a reasonable time, the director shall set a date for a hearing
on the suspension or revocation of the permit.
   (b)   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on the petitioner at
least 15 calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in person
or by United States certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   Notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing and shall
be deemed received five calendar days after it is placed in a mail receptacle
of the United States postal service.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, the director shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
   (e)   Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence and the
petitioner shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate that the determination
is not true and valid or should not otherwise be upheld.
   (f)   The director and/or his or her designee shall act as the hearing
officer.
   (g)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make written
findings and shall issue a written decision within five business days.
   (h)   The decision of the director shall be final.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-205 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR USERS OF RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION.
   (a)   A user of reclaimed water delivered by vehicle shall submit a
reclaimed water service application and obtain approval for reclaimed water
service and comply with requirements of this article.
   (b)   A user of reclaimed water shall only accept delivery of reclaimed
water by a permitted vehicle and container units.
   (c)   A user of reclaimed water delivered by vehicle shall sign the original
of a City of Fort Worth trip ticket prepared by a permitted transporter for all
reclaimed water received by the user’s from such transporter.
   (d)   The user shall note any significant discrepancies on each copy of the
trip ticket.
      (1)   Trip ticket discrepancies: differences between the quantity of
reclaimed water on the trip ticket and the quantity of reclaimed water the user
actually received.
      (2)   A significant discrepancy in quantity is any variation greater than
15%, measured in gallons.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 35-206 ADDITIONAL RECLAIMED WATER TRANSPORTATION PERMIT HOLDER
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   A permit holder shall immediately notify the director in writing when
the reclaimed water transportation business is assigned, transferred, sold,
ceases to operate as registered with the Secretary of State, or ceases to
operate for any other reason.
   (b)   In addition to the written notification required in subsection (a),
the permit holder shall immediately deliver to the director:
      (1)   All completed original trip tickets in permit holder’s possession;
      (2)   All unused trip tickets in permit holder’s possession; and
      (3)   Permit holder’s permit(s).
   (c)   A permit holder commits an offense if the permit holder fails to
provide notice to the director as required by this section.
   (d)   A permit for the transportation of reclaimed water shall be invalid
upon the assignment, transfer, sale or cessation of operation as stated above.
(Ord. 19543-02-2011, § 1, passed 2-8-2011)
Schedule 1
Maximum Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule
(Adopted on September 21, 2021)
Meter Size Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
Schedule 1
Maximum Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule
(Adopted on September 21, 2021)
Meter Size        Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
5/8 in. × 5/8 in.1.00               $4,953           $4,492
5/8 in. × 3/4 in.1.00               $4,953           $4,492
3/4 in. × 3/4 in.1.50               $7,430           $6,738
1 in.             2.50               $12,383          $11,230
1-1/2 in.         5.00               $24,765          $22,460
2 in.             8.00               $39,624          $35,936
3 in.             21.75              $107,728         $97,701
4 in.             37.50              $185,738         $168,450
6 in.             80.00              $396,240         $359,360
8 in.             140.00             $693,420         $628,880
10 in.            210.00             $1,040,130       $943,320
Referenced in §§
35-70.3(a),
35-73(a) and
35-78(a)
 
Schedule 2A
Collected Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule - Year 1
(Effective January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022)
Meter Size Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
Schedule 2A
Collected Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule - Year 1
(Effective January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022)
Meter Size        Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
5/8 in. × 5/8 in.1.00               $1,870           $1,420
5/8 in. × 3/4 in.1.00               $1,870           $1,420
3/4 in. × 3/4 in.1.50               $2,805           $2,130
1 in.             2.50               $4,675           $3,550
1½ in.           5.00               $9,350           $7,100
2 in.             8.00               $14,960          $11,360
3 in.             21.75              $40,673          $30,885
4 in.             37.50              $70,125          $53,250
6 in.             80.00              $149,600         $113,600
8 in.             140.00             $261,800         $198,800
10 in.            210.00             $392,700         $298,200
Referenced in §§
35-70(a),
35-73(a), and
35-78(a)
 
Schedule 2B
Collected Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule - Year 2
(Effective January 1, 2023)
Meter Size Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
Schedule 2B
Collected Impact Fee for Water and Wastewater Schedule - Year 2
(Effective January 1, 2023)
Meter Size        Equivalency Factor Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee
5/8 in. × 5/8 in.1.00               $1,981           $1,796
5/8 in. × 3/4 in.1.00               $1,981           $1,796
3/4 in. × 3/4 in.1.50               $2,972           $2,694
1 in.             2.50               $4,953           $4,490
1½ in.           5.00               $9,905           $8,980
2 in.             8.00               $15,848          $14,368
3 in.             21.75              $43,087          $39,063
4 in.             37.50              $74,288          $67,350
6 in.             80.00              $158,480         $143,680
8 in.             140.00             $277,340         $251,440
10 in.            210.00             $416,010         $377,160
Referenced in §§
35-70(a),
35-73(a), and
35-78(a)
 
CHAPTER 36: OPEN SPACE
Section
   
36-1   Jurisdiction
   
36-2   Conditions for use; enforcement
   
36-3   Definitions
   
36-4   Littering
   
36-5   Entering closed areas; hours of operation
   
36-6   Advertising matter
   
36-7   Selling goods or services
   
36-8   Commercial photography
   
36-9   Animals to be on leash
   
36-10   Sanitary standards
   
36-11   Rising, tethering or pasturing animals
   
36-12   Discharging firearms
   
36-13   Fishing, swimming, camping, boating in nondesignated areas
   
36-14   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
36-15   Fireworks prohibited
   
36-16   Vegetation
   
36-17   Fires
   
36-18   Wildlife
   
36-19   Traffic regulations
§ 36-1 JURISDICTION.
   The rules and regulations in this chapter shall be in force in all Open
Space properties regardless of the city department charged with the day-to-day
operations and maintenance of the properties.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-2 CONDITIONS FOR USE; ENFORCEMENT.
   Compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations is a condition
of the use of any Open Space property of the city. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remain in any Open Space property within the city after being advised
by an employee of the city or a peace officer that he or she is interfering
with, disrupting, or preventing the orderly use of Open Space property and
after having been asked to leave.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-3 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   OPEN SPACE. An interest in land that the City of Fort Worth owns or
maintains with the primary intent of meeting one or more of the following
purposes:
      (1)   To preserve or restore natural areas and resources;
      (2)   To maintain or enhance air or water quality;
      (3)   To preserve the property's aesthetic value and its contribution to
the quality of life of the community;
      (4)   To mitigate erosion or enhance flood control efforts; or
      (5)   To prevent encroachment on floodplains or watersheds.
   Incidental or programmatic use of Open Space for other purposes may occur;
however, that use is intended to be secondary to the purposes identified above.
Open Space is not park land and is not owned, held, or claimed as a public
square or park, nor is Open Space acquired or designated as a park, recreation
area, scientific area, wildlife refuge, or historic site.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-4 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit paper, glass, metal, litter,
yard waste, cigarette or cigar butts or trash of any description on any Open
Space property except in receptacles if provided for waste disposal.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-5 ENTERING CLOSED AREAS; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any portion of an
Open Space property which is designated as restricted, or to enter or remain in
any area of Open Space property during the hours of the day when such area is
not open to the public or to enter or remain at any time in any area of Open
Space property closed for the season. Unless otherwise posted, the hours during
which Open Space properties are open to the public are from sunrise to sunset.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-6 ADVERTISING MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display any advertising matter of any
character or to distribute any advertising matter of any character within any
Open Space property without the written permission of the city manager or
designee.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-7 SELLING GOODS OR SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods,
wares, services or merchandise within any Open Space property without the
written permission of the city manager or designee.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-8 COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform commercial photography within
any Open Space property without the written permission of the city manager or
designee.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-9 ANIMALS TO BE ON LEASH.
   Animals must be kept on a leash and under the direct physical control of the
owner or handler while in any Open Space property. Animals are permitted off-
leash only in those portions of Open Space designated by signage as off-leash
areas. Animals must remain under the immediate personal supervision and command
of the owner or handler while in off-leash areas in accordance with Chapter 6
of the City Code.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-10 SANITARY STANDARDS.
   An owner or handler shall promptly remove and sanitarily dispose of any
droppings left on Open Space property by an animal being handled by the person.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-11 RIDING, TETHERING OR PASTURING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the written permission of the
city manager or designee, to ride any cow, horse, or other animal in or upon
any Open Space property not designated by signage for such purpose, or to
tether or pasture, or allow or cause to be tethered or pastured, any cow,
horse, or other animal in or upon any Open Space property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-12 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, j pistol, airgun
or firearm of any kind within or across any Open Space property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-13 FISHING, SWIMMING, CAMPING, BOATING IN NONDESIGNATED AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wade, swim, boat, fish, or camp
within any Open Space property without the written permission of the city
manager or designee, except within areas designated by signage for such
purposes.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully sell, possess
with the intent to sell, or consume any alcoholic beverage in any Open Space
property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-15 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or discharge any fireworks on
any Open Space property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-16 VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant,
or remove any plant or injure the bark or flowers or seed of any tree or plant,
dig in or otherwise substantially disturb grass areas, or in any way injure the
vegetation in any Open Space property unless authorized by the written
permission of the city manager or designee. It shall be unlawful for any person
to plant any seeds or plants on any Open Space property unless authorized by
the written permission of the city manager or designee.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-17 FIRES.
   Excluding prescribed bums conducted by the city, it shall be unlawful for
any person to light, build, or maintain a campfire or ground fire on any Open
Space property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-18 WILDLIFE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or molest, harm, frighten, kill,
trap, pursue, tease, or shoot, at any animal or wildlife on any Open Space
property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
§ 36-19 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any vehicle,
including a bicycle, in, over, or through any Open Space property, except along
and upon public drives, streets, boulevards, or parking lots, or along and upon
other areas or trails designated by signage for driving or riding purposes. It
shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any vehicle, including a
bicycle, in, over, or through any wet or muddy portion of Open Space property,
except along and upon paved trails designated by signage for driving or riding
purposes.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
motorized vehicle or to permit any such motor vehicle to so stop, stand, or
park within any Open Space property, except such as may be necessary or
incidental to Open Space visits or such as may be due to accidental or
temporary mechanical failure of such vehicle or such as may be occasioned by
the order of any peace officer or person charged with supervision of any Open
Space property.
(Ord. 27425-01-2025, § 1, passed 1-28-2025, eff. 2-7-2025)
APPENDIX A: ZONING REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   REVIEW BODIES
      
3.   REVIEW PROCEDURES
      
4.   DISTRICT REGULATIONS
      
5.   SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARD
      
6.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
      
7.   NONCONFORMITIES
      
8.   ENFORCEMENT
      
9.   DEFINITIONS
Cross-reference:
   Airport zoning regulations, see §§
3-191 et seq.
   Buildings, see
Ch. 7
   Electricity, see
Ch. 11
   Fire protection and prevention, see
Ch. 13
   Gas, see
Ch. 15
   Park and recreation, see
Ch. 24
   Plumbing, see
Ch. 26
   Public utilities, see
Ch. 28
   Sign regulations,
Ch. 29
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 30
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 13896, adopted Oct. 12, 1999, effective Aug. 23, 1999, repealed
Appendix A, §§ 1 through 30 and enacted a new Appendix A pertaining to similar
material. Former Appendix A derived from Ord. 2082, adopted October 1, 1940;
Ord. 3011, adopted November 26, 1952 and amendments thereto. Amendatory
provisions adopted subsequent thereto are cited in parentheses following the
amended section, subsection or subparagraph.
   This is a newly formatted and organized zoning ordinance. In the
preparation, extreme care has been taken to assure that the content is
consistent with the previously adopted and published Ord. 3011, as amended.
However, misprints and corrections will occur. These will be published and
corrected as they are found. It is recommended that should there be a question
that you contact the planning and development department at 817-392-8000 for
clarification or interpretation.
   It should be noted that § 9 of Ord. 14337, adopted September 12, 2000,
provides, “Any reference in the zoning ordinance to the “A” one-family district
is hereby deemed to include the “A-43,” “A-21,” “A-10,” “A-7.5” and “A-5” one-
family districts, except where such construction would be clearly inconsistent
with the intent of the ordinance.”
   HOW TO USE THIS ORDINANCE
   If you have property and want to know what rules apply:
   Step 1: Find your zoning district and any overlay districts by looking at
the official zoning map (found in the planning and development department).
   Step 2: Go to
Chapter 4, District Regulations for details on minimum lot size, required yards
and other district standards. You may also be referred to
Chapter 6, Development Standards for general parking, landscaping or sign
regulations.
   Step 3: Go to
Chapter 4, Article 6, Residential District Use Table, or
Chapter 4, Article 8, Nonresidential District Use Table for details on
permitted uses. If the use is listed with an asterisk (*), see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards.
   Step 4: Don’t forget the overlay districts that apply to your site (if any).
See Chapter 4, District Regulations for overlay district details.
   If you want to build or establish a particular use:
   Step 1: Go to Appendix C, Use Index. The alphabetical listing of uses will
tell you how the use is listed in the use tables.
   Step 2: Go to
Chapter 4, Article 6, Residential District Use Table, or
Chapter 4, Article 8, Nonresidential District Use Table, look up your proposed
use to see the districts in which it is permitted. If the use is listed with an
asterisk (*), see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards for that use.
   Step 3: Look up the appropriate districts in
Chapter 4, District Regulations for details on minimum lot size, required yards
and other district standards. You may also be referred to
Chapter 6, Development Standards for general parking, landscaping or sign
regulations.
   Step 4: Don’t forget the overlay districts that apply to your site (if any).
Check the official zoning map in the planning and development department. If an
overlay district applies, see
Chapter 4, District Regulations for overlay district details.
   If you want to change your zoning district: Only the city council can rezone
property, following public notice and public hearings in front of the zoning
commission and the city council itself. See
Chapter 3, Article 5, Text or Map Amendment (Rezoning).
   If you want to vary from the standards that apply: The board of adjustment
is authorized to grant variances from some of the regulations in this ordinance
in cases of special hardship. See
Chapter 3, Article 4, Variances.
   If your property is located in an historic/cultural district: You need to
follow special procedures found in
Chapter 4, Article 5 if your property is located in a preservation overlay
district (“HSE,” “HC” or “DD”).
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1.100   Interpretations, purpose and conflict
   
1.101   Transitional provisions
   
1.102   Effective date
   
1.103   Severability
§ 1.100 INTERPRETATIONS, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of safety, health,
convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intended by this
ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or
other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon
height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or
agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 1.101 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Development exempt from changes to ordinance. The adoption of this
digest and revision of the zoning ordinances of the City of Fort Worth shall
not require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a
building that meets both of the following criteria:
      (1)   A building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of
this ordinance; and
      (2)   Plans for the development are on file with the planning and
development department prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
   (b)   Construction start and completion. Construction must start and be
diligently prosecuted within six months of the date of such permit, and the
entire building shall be completed according to the filed plans, within two
years from the effective date of this ordinance.
   (c)   Development subject to this ordinance. Development that does not meet
the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above shall be subject to the
provisions of this ordinance, including any revisions or amendments hereto,
except as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 1.102 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of this digest and revision of the zoning ordinances of
the City of Fort Worth shall be March 16, 2008.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 1.103 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by the
court to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as
a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
CHAPTER 2: REVIEW BODIES
Section
   
2.100   Zoning commission
   
2.101   Board of adjustment
   
2.102   Urban design commission
   
2.103   Historic and cultural landmarks commission
   
2.104   Downtown design review board
   
2.105   Reserved
§ 2.100 ZONING COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby created a zoning commission
of the city, to be composed of 11 residents of the city. It is the declared
policy that the city council will consider for appointment to the zoning
commission as members only those persons who have demonstrated their civic
interest, general knowledge of the community, intelligent judgment,
understanding of zoning and planning and availability to prepare for and attend
meetings and who, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations,
constitute a commission which is broadly representative of the community. As
nearly as is reasonably possible, the zoning commission members as a whole
shall fairly represent the ethnic makeup of the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   Terms of office. The members of the zoning commission shall be
identified by place numbers one through 11. The odd-numbered places shall
expire October 1 of each odd-numbered year and the even-numbered places shall
expire October 1 of each even-numbered year. Zoning commission members may be
appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms
but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two years. Members
shall serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall serve at the
will and pleasure of the city council. A person is eligible to serve up to
three consecutive two-year terms.
   (c)   Organization. The zoning commission shall hold an organizational
meeting in November of each year and shall elect a chairperson and vice-
chairperson from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of
business. The development services director, or a designated representative,
shall be the secretary of the zoning commission. The zoning commission shall
meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The
zoning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of
its proceedings in accordance with the state statutes, this ordinance and the
City Charter. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular
meeting after their appointment.
   (d)   Meetings and quorum. Six members of the zoning commission shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the zoning
commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the zoning
commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (e)   Decision by zoning commission. A motion to recommend approval of an
amendment to the zoning ordinance shall require six favorable votes of the
members present. Failure to secure six concurring votes to recommend approval
shall constitute a recommendation of denial. A tie vote on a motion for denial
will constitute a recommendation of denial.
   (f)   Staff responsibilities. The development services director and any
designated representatives shall be the regular technical advisors to the
zoning commission. When the zoning commission deems it necessary to obtain
information from other city departments, it shall transmit such request through
the development services director.
   (g)   Attendance reports. Each month a report shall be submitted to the city
council showing the cumulative attendance of each member of the zoning
commission, with notation of members who have been absent from three
consecutive meetings.
   (h)   Powers and duties. The zoning commission is hereby charged with the
duty and invested with the authority to:
      (1)   Advise the city council relating to the creation and amendment of
these zoning regulations and districts as the zoning commission may deem
beneficial and in the best interests of the city;
      (2)   Procure information, hold public hearings and make recommendations
to the city council relating to the creation, amendment and implementation of
zoning regulations and districts as provided in Tex. Local Government Code
Chapter 211, together with all amendments thereto, authorizing cities and
incorporated villages to pass regulations and all powers granted under such act
are specifically adopted and made a part hereof as contemplated by §
31A of Chapter XXVII of the Charter of the city.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 23024-
12-2017, § 1, passed 12-5-2017, eff. 3-17-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22,
passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 26359-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2.101 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (a)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby created a board of
adjustment, consisting of 11 regular members and four alternate members to
serve in the absence of one or more regular members, all of whom shall be
residents of the City of Fort Worth. The city council will consider for
appointment to the board of adjustment only those persons who have demonstrated
their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment,
understanding of zoning and planning, and availability to prepare for and
attend meetings. At least eight of the one regular members and four alternates
must be a practicing or retired professional in of the following fields:
      (1)   Law;
      (2)   Property development;
      (3)   Engineering;
      (4)   Mortgaging and financing;
      (5)   Architecture;
      (6)   Real estate; or
      (7)   Planning, urban design or landscape architecture.
As nearly as is reasonably possible, the board of adjustment members as a whole
shall fairly represent the geographic makeup of the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   Terms of office. Members of the board of adjustment shall be
identified by place numbers one through 11. The odd-numbered places shall
expire on October 1 of each odd-numbered year, and the even-numbered places
shall expire on October 1 of each even numbered year. The terms of alternate
members shall expire on October 1 of odd-numbered years. Board of adjustment
members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two
years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed.
   (c)   Organization. The board of adjustment shall hold an organizational
meeting in November of each year and shall elect a chairperson and vice-
chairperson from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of
business. The zoning administrator, or a designated representative, shall be
the secretary of the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall meet
regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The board of
adjustment shall adopt its own rules of procedure as approved by the city
council and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the state
statutes, this section and the City Charter. Newly appointed members shall be
installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment or at such time
as determined by the city council.
   (d)   Meetings and quorum. Nine members of the board of adjustment shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the board of
adjustment shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings and shall serve
without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (e)   Decision by board of adjustment. The affirmative vote of nine members
of the board of adjustment shall be required to reverse or modify any order,
decision or interpretation of this section by the zoning administrator or to
grant a variance or special exception.
   (f)   Review of zoning needs. The board of adjustment shall keep itself
informed with respect to requests for variances based on practical difficulty
and unnecessary hardship, and shall recommend to the zoning commission when, in
its opinion, requests for variances indicate a need for possible general zoning
changes through the established legislative procedure.
   (g)   Staff responsibility. The zoning administrator and any designated
representatives shall be the regular technical advisors to the board of
adjustment.
   (h)   Attendance reports. Each month a report shall be submitted to the city
secretary showing the cumulative attendance of each member with a notation of
members who have been absent from three consecutive meetings, and a notation of
the non-availability of alternate members to attend meetings for which they are
called. Any regular member with an unexcused absence from more than three
consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have resigned their position from the
board of adjustment. Vacancies shall be temporarily filled by an alternate
member until such time as the city council appoints a suitable person to serve
out the unexpired term of the regular member being replaced.
   (i)   Powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have the powers and
exercise the duties of a board of adjustment in accordance with Tex. Local
Government Code §§ 211. 008 through 211. 011. The board of adjustment's
jurisdiction shall extend to and include the hearing and deciding of the types
of appeals and applications listed below:
      (1)   Appeal of interpretation of the zoning administrator to board of
adjustment. The board of adjustment shall decide an appeal of the
interpretation by the zoning administrator upon a properly submitted request
made by the requestor, any person aggrieved by the interpretation, or any
officer, department, board of the city affected by the interpretation (see
Chapter 3, Article 2).
      (2)   Special exception. To decide upon applications for special
exceptions when the use or development is specifically authorized under the
zoning ordinance subject to the approval of the board of adjustment (see
Chapter 3, Article 3). Special exceptions that may be permitted by the Board of
Adjustment are specified in the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6, 8 and 12 or
Chapter 6.
      (3)   Split-zoned lot. The board of adjustment may approve the extension
of a use to the lot line or for a distance of not more than 100 feet where the
boundary line of a district either divides a lot held in single ownership on
October 1, 1940, or divides a lot held in single ownership as of the date of
subsequent annexation of said lot.
      (4)   Variance. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of the zoning ordinance as will not be contrary to the public
interest (see
Chapter 3, Article 4).
      (5)   Appeals. To hear appeals for any action, other than actions
relating to designation, from the historic and cultural landmarks commission,
the downtown design review board and the urban design commission.
      (6)   Powers strictly construed. Nothing herein shall be construed to
empower the board of adjustment to grant a variance or special exception when
the city council has enacted a development standard to serve as a prohibition
of a structure, material or other regulation.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14437, §§ 1—4, passed 12-12-2000; Ord.
16947, § 1, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 21272-06-
2014, §§ 1, 2, passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 23024-12-2017, § 2, passed 12-5-2017, eff.
3-17-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 26359-08-2023, § 1,
passed 8-8- 2023; Ord. 28121-11-2025, § 1, passed 10-21-2025, eff. 12-5-2025)
§ 2.102 URBAN DESIGN COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby created an Urban Design
Commission (UDC) for the purpose of:
      (1)   Recommending the designation of scenic, cultural, architectural or
historical areas of the city as a conservation district;
      (2)   Recommending the designation of urban design districts;
      (3)   Reviewing and recommending to the city council the approval or
modification of proposed design guidelines for urban design districts and
conservation districts, except those districts where a separate design review
board is established by the city council;
      (4)   Reviewing and approving projects in urban design districts and
conservation districts for compliance with design guidelines, except those
districts where a separate design review board is established by the city
council;
      (5)   Reviewing and approving design standards for other projects as
directed by the city council; and
      (6)   Reviewing and approving appeals from the requirements of Sec.
6.302 Urban Forestry.
   (b)   Members. The UDC shall consist of 11 regular members and four
alternate members, to serve in the absence of one or more regular members, all
of whom shall be residents of the city. The city council will consider for
appointment to the commission as regular members and alternate members only
those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of
the community, independent judgment, and availability to prepare for and attend
meetings. At least six of the 11 regular member appointees must be practicing
professionals from the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, urban
design or planning, real estate, or law. At least one of the 11 regular member
appointees must be a practicing or retired professional in the field of
history, architectural history, or other discipline related to historic
preservation. Appointees should be knowledgeable about fundamental principles
of urban design and at least one member should possess or have knowledge of
urban forestry principles. Appointment of the alternate members shall rotate
from the aforementioned criteria. The members of the commission shall regularly
attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without
compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the
performance of their duties. As nearly as is reasonably possible, the UDC
members as a whole shall fairly represent the ethnic makeup of the City of Fort
Worth.
   (c)   Terms of office. Place numbers one through 11 identify the regular
members of the UDC. The odd-numbered places expire on October 1 of each odd-
numbered year and the even-numbered places expire October 1 of each even-
numbered year. The terms of the alternate members expire on October 1 of odd-
numbered years. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall
be filled for unexpired terms but no regular member or alternate shall be
appointed for a term in excess of two years. Members and alternate members
shall serve until their successors are appointed.
   (d)   Quorum. Six members of the UDC shall constitute a quorum. A motion to
approve any matter before the UDC shall require the affirmative vote of six
members of the commission.
   (e)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   Nomination and designation of design districts.
         a.   The UDC may nominate design districts. Nomination by the UDC
shall be in the form of a resolution requesting that the planning and
development department submit the nomination to the zoning commission for
consideration. The UDC shall not consider a nomination for a design district
until standards and guidelines have been submitted for review.
         b.   Applications and the procedure for designation of a design
district shall follow the procedures outlined in
Chapter 3, Article 5, except that written notice shall be provided as outlined
in subsection (f) below. No design district shall be approved by the city
council as a design district without a recommendation from the UDC on the
proposed guidelines for the district.
         c.   Upon designation of an area as a design district by the city
council, the designation indicating the boundaries of the district shall be
adopted as an exhibit to the zoning ordinance. Design districts are overlay
zoning districts or base districts which the UDC or a district-specific body
appointed by the city council, has design review authority, as described in
subsection (e)(2) below.
      (2)   Design standards and guidelines and certificate of appropriateness.
In order to enhance the character of the districts, encourage economic
development and protect property values, the UDC or the district-specific body
shall:
         a.   Review and recommend to the city council the approval or
modification of proposed design standards and guidelines for designated design;
and
         b.   Review and approve, modify or reject an application for a
certificate of appropriateness for new construction and renovations for
compliance with the adopted design standards and/or guidelines for designated
design districts.
      (3)   Design standards and guidelines directed by city council. In order
to protect and enhance the character of the design districts, encourage
economic development and protect property values, the UDC shall review and
approve, modify or reject design standards for other applications as directed
by the city council.
      (4)   Urban forestry. The UDC shall have the authority to grant waivers
to Sec.
6.302, Urban Forestry.
   (f)   Notice for proposed design districts. Written notice of any
application before the UDC for the nomination of any design district shall be
given to the owner or owners of the property within the proposed design
district, as such ownership appears on the last approved ad valorem tax roll at
least ten days prior to any meeting. Such notice may be served by depositing
the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail.
   (g)   Appeal. Any aggrieved person or entity may appeal any decision of the
UDC, other than nomination of an area as a conservation district or urban
design district, to the board of adjustment. A written notice of appeal must be
filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of
the commission's decision. The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on
such appeal within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon
thereafter as reasonably practicable. The board of adjustment may uphold,
reverse or modify the commission's decision.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15284, § 1, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 16039,
§ 1, passed 7-13-2004; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17844, § 1,
passed 10-16-2007; Ord. 18615-05-2009-B, §§ 2—4, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 18900-
11-2009, § 1, passed 11-3-2009; Ord. 20084-03-2012, § 1, passed 3-6-2012; Ord.
20158-04-2012, § 2, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5, passed 6-3-2014;
Ord. 22109-03-2016, § 1, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 23024-12-2017, § 3, passed 12-5-
2017, eff. 3-17-2018; Ord. 23306-08-2018, § 1, passed 8-7-2018; Ord. 25251-12-
2021, § 1, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 26359-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2.103 HISTORIC AND CULTURAL LANDMARKS COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation and appointment.
      (1)   There is hereby created the historic and cultural landmarks
commission to be composed of 11 regular members and four alternate members, all
of whom are residents of the City of Fort Worth. The alternates shall serve in
the absence of one or more regular members.
      (2)   The city council must appoint as regular members and alternate
members, persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge
of the community, independent judgment and availability to prepare for and
attend meetings. Whenever feasible, six appointees should be practicing
professionals from the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, history,
architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, real estate, law or other
disciplines related to historic preservation. Appointment of alternate members
should rotate from the aforementioned criteria.
      (3)   All historic and cultural landmarks commission members, regardless
of background, must have a known and demonstrated interest, competence, and
knowledge in historic preservation and planning within the City of Fort Worth.
      (4)   As nearly as is reasonably possible, the historic and cultural
landmarks commission members as a whole shall fairly represent the ethnic
makeup of the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   Terms of office. Historic and cultural landmarks commission members
serve for a term of two years. Newly appointed members will be installed at the
first regular meeting after their appointment. Regular members will serve in
places numbered one through 11. Regular members appointed in odd-numbered
places will serve terms that expire October 1 of odd-numbered years. Regular
members appointed to even-numbered places will serve terms that expire on
October 1 of even-numbered years. The terms of the alternate members expire on
October 1 of odd-numbered years. Vacancies will be filled for unexpired terms.
Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves and serve at the
discretion of the city council until a new member is appointed in their place.
   (c)   Organization. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the historic and
cultural landmarks commission will be elected by and from the members of the
historic and cultural landmarks commission. The historic and cultural landmarks
commission must meet at least monthly if business requires. Special meetings
may be called at any time by the chairperson, the historic preservation
officer, or on the written request of any two historic and cultural landmarks
commission members.
   (d)   Meetings and quorum. Six members of the historic and cultural
landmarks commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. Six
affirmative votes shall be required to approve any matterbefore the historic
and cultural landmarks commission. Failure to secure six affirmative votes
shall result in a denial. The members of the historic and cultural landmarks
commission must regularly attend the meetings and public hearings of the
historic and cultural landmarks commission and serve without compensation.
   (e)   Powers and duties. The historic and cultural landmarks commission is
empowered to perform the following duties:
      (1)   Prepare rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business
of the historic and cultural landmarks commission;
      (2)   Create committees from among its membership to advise the historic
and cultural landmarks commission in carrying out the purposes of this zoning
ordinance;
      (3)   Maintain written minutes which record all actions taken by the
historic and cultural landmarks commission and the reasons for such actions;
      (4)   Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural,
architectural, and archeological preservation by developing and participating
in public education programs;
      (5)   Initiate and consider nominations, hold hearings, and recommend to
the city council whether certain buildings, structures and properties should be
designated as landmarks through a "highly significant endangered overlay,"
"historic and cultural landmark overlay" or "demolition delay overlay," or that
an area containing two or more eligible structures should be designated through
a "historic and cultural landmark district overlay," or that such structures or
properties be included in a historic district or that such designations be
amended or removed, in accordance with §
4.401, Historic Preservation Ordinance - Historic Overlays;
      (6)   Enforce and recommend to adopt or amend design standards and
guidelines for structures designated "highly significant endangered" or
"historic and cultural landmark" or located in a historic and cultural landmark
district;
      (7)   Review and after public hearing make a determination on requests
for Certificates of Appropriateness for buildings and structures designated
with an individual historic overlay or located in a historic and cultural
landmark zoning district overlay.
      (8)   Review requests regarding participation in historic preservation
economic incentive programs and forward recommendations concerning such
requests to the city council;
      (9)   Recommend recognition of the owners of structures or property
designated in accordance with the Historic Preservation Ordinance by means of
certificates, plaques, or markers;
      (10)   Recommend to the city council that the city acquire a structure or
property where its preservation is essential to the purposes of the Historic
Preservation Ordinance and private preservation is not feasible;
      (11)   Recommend to the city council that the city accept the donation of
preservation easements and development rights as well as gifts for the purpose
of historic preservation; and
      (12)   Exercise such other and further powers as may be conferred on the
historic and cultural landmarks commission by city codes or ordinances.
   (f)   Preservation plan.
      (1)   The historic and cultural landmarks commission must adopt, in
cooperation with the plan commission, a preservation plan to be incorporated
into the City of Fort Worth comprehensive plan. The preservation plan must
include the following:
         a.   The historic resources survey, as amended and revised;
         b.   Criteria to be used in identifying and prioritizing sites;
         c.   General description of forms and styles found in Fort Worth; and
         d.   Use historic contexts to develop goals and priorities for the
identification, evaluation, registration, and treatment of historic properties.
      (2)   The plan must also include criteria for selecting, preserving, and
rehabilitating structures and property. The plan must also set forth priorities
not only among various historic sites but also between conflicting land use
goals and include specific recommendations on how to resolve conflicts between
competing uses. The plan must recommend the coordination required with other
departments and other public and private groups to implement historic
preservation.
      (3)   The historic and cultural landmarks commission must review the
preservation plan every five years. Revisions may be made to the plan at any
time in accordance with the rules and policies of the city.
   (g)   Propose amendments to §
4.401, Historic Preservation Ordinance-Historic Overlays to the zoning
commission and city council from time to time.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17648, §§ 1, 2, passed 7-10-2007; Ord.
18903-11-2009, § 1, passed 11-3-2009; Ord. 23166-04-2018, § 1, passed 4-3-2018;
Ord. 23306-08-2018, § 2, passed 8-7-2018; Ord. 25251-12-2021, § 2, passed 12-
14-2021; Ord. 26359-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8- 2023)
§ 2.104 DOWNTOWN DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
   (a)   Creation and appointment. There is hereby created a downtown design
review board, to be composed of seven members and one alternate member, all of
whom shall be residents of the City of Fort Worth. The board shall include a
minimum of one regular member from each of the following categories: architect/
design professional, downtown urban design district business owner/manager,
downtown urban design district resident/homeowner and real estate professional.
The alternate member shall serve when regular board members are unable to
attend or participate. Appointment of the alternate shall rotate from each of
the following categories: architect/design professional, downtown urban design
district business owner/manager, downtown urban design district resident/
homeowner and real estate professional. As nearly as is reasonably possible,
the members as a whole shall fairly represent the ethnic makeup of the City of
Fort Worth.
   (b)   Terms of office. The regular members of the downtown design review
board shall be identified by place numbers one through seven. The odd-numbered
places shall expire on October 1 of each odd-numbered year and the even-
numbered places shall expire on October 1 of each even-numbered year. The term
of the alternate member shall expire on October 1 in each odd numbered year.
Members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms but no members shall be appointed for a term in excess of two
years.
   (c)   Meetings and quorum. Five members of the downtown design review board
shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the
downtown design review board shall regularly attend meetings and public
hearings and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (d)   Attendance report. Each month a report shall be submitted to the city
council showing the cumulative attendance of each member of the downtown design
review board, with notation of members who have been absent from three
consecutive meetings.
   (e)   Power and duties. The downtown design review board is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to:
      (1)   Enforce the downtown urban design standards and guidelines for new
construction and renovations by hearing and deciding applications for
certificates of appropriateness in accordance with §
4.1200; and
      (2)   Propose amendments to the downtown urban design standards and
guidelines to the zoning commission and city council from time to time.
   (f)   Decision by downtown design review board. Four affirmative votes by
members of the downtown design review board shall be required to approve a
certificate of appropriateness or to propose amendments to the downtown urban
design district or downtown urban design district standards and guidelines.
(Ord. 14894, § 2, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 14986, § 1, passed 2-19-2002; Ord.
15832, § 1, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 17288, §§ 1—5, passed 11-14-2006; Ord.
18249, §§ 1—3, passed 9-2-2008; Ord. 26359-08-2023, § 1, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 2.105 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 18615-05-2009-B, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009, repealed §
2.105, which pertained to the urban forestry board. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
CHAPTER 3: REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section
Article 1: General
   
3.100   Building permits
   
3.101   Certificate of occupancy
Article 2: Ordinance Interpretation
   
3.200   Request for interpretation
   
3.201   Appeal of interpretation by the zoning administrative official
   
3.202   Board of adjustment action
Article 3: Special Exceptions
   
3.300   Application required
   
3.301   Fee required
   
3.302   Notice
   
3.303   Board of adjustment action
   
3.304   Appeal
   
3.305   Limitation on reapplication
   
3.306   Expiration of special exception
Article 4: Variances
   
3.400   Application required
   
3.401   Fee required
   
3.402   Notice
   
3.403   Board of adjustment action
   
3.404   Expiration of variance
   
3.405   Appeal
   
3.406   Limitation on reapplication
Article 5: Text or Map Amendment (Rezoning)
   
3.500   Application required
   
3.501   Fee required
   
3.502   Notice
   
3.503   Zoning commission public hearing and recommendation
   
3.504   City council hearing and action
   
3.505   Withdrawal and reapplication
   
3.506   Limitation on reapplication
Article 6: Other Review Procedures
   
3.600   Designation of “PD,” “CD,” “HSE,” “HC” and “DD” districts
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL
§ 3.100 BUILDING PERMITS.
   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a drawing or
plat, in duplicate, showing the lot plan, the location of the building on the
lot, accurate dimensions of building and lot and such other information as may
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A record of
the original copy of such applications and plats shall be kept in the planning
and development department and the duplicate copy shall be at the building at
all times during construction.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3.101 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, and
no building hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged shall be
occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
planning and development department in accordance with the building code.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
ARTICLE 2: ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION
§ 3.200 REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   The zoning administrative official. The zoning administrative official
shall be the director of planning and development or a member of his or her
staff as designated by the director. The zoning administrative official shall
be the sole person with responsibility to render written decisions or
determinations concerning the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
   (b)   Filing a request for interpretation. A request for official
interpretation of any section of the city’s zoning ordinance shall be in
writing and filed with the zoning administrative official. Each request shall
list the applicable section(s) in the zoning ordinance, the specific property
address, and a description of the issue on which the requestor is seeking an
interpretation. The requester shall provide additional information upon request
of the zoning administrative official. The requestor shall have ten days to
provide additional information as requested by the Zoning Administrative
Official. If the information is not provided within the ten days, the request
will be deemed withdrawn and no further action will be taken by the zoning
administrative official.
   (c)   Interpretation of the zoning administrative official. The zoning
administrative official shall:
      (1)   Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of the zoning
ordinance, the official zoning map, the comprehensive plan and other relevant
information; and
      (2)   Consult with staff, as necessary, and may request additional
information from city staff before rendering a decision; and
      (3)   Render an interpretation in writing and delivered to the requestor
by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United
States Mail.
   (d)   The decision of the zoning administrative official shall be final
unless timely appealed to the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 21816-08-2015, § 1, passed 8-4-2015, eff.
8-12-2015)
§ 3.201 APPEAL OF INTERPRETATION BY THE ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
   (a)   Appeal to board of adjustment. The requestor, any person aggrieved by
the interpretation, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city
affected by the interpretation of the zoning administrative official may appeal
the interpretation to the board of adjustment. The appeal must be in writing,
be filed with the administrative official and specifically allege the error in
the decision or determination of the zoning administrative official for the
property in question. All such appeals to the board of adjustment must be made
within 30 days from the date of the zoning administrative official’s written
decision. A member of the board of adjustment may not bring an appeal under
this section.
   (b)   Appeal fee required. Every appeal shall be accompanied by the
appropriate filing fee as provided in the schedule of fees contained in Chapter
25 of the city code. No fee shall be charged for requests filed upon
recommendation of the zoning commission, city plan commission, or city council.
A separate fee shall be charged if the appeal contains multiple interpretations
by the zoning administrative official or is for multiple property addresses
unless all the properties are owned by the same person or entity and the
interpretation involves the same provisions in the zoning ordinance. No refund
shall be made under any circumstances except in the event the appeal is
withdrawn prior to the mailing of the required written notification.
   (c)   Complete appeal request. No appeal shall be forwarded to the board of
adjustment until the requirements of subsection (a), above are met and the
filing fee is paid in full.
   (d)   Written notice. Written notice of an appeal of an interpretation by
the zoning administrative official shall be given to the requestor, the subject
property owner(s) and owners of real property lying within 300 feet of the
subject property or properties. Such notice shall be given not less than ten
days before the date set for the board of adjustment hearing to all such owners
who have rendered their property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on
the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the
same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail.
   (e)   Information to the board of adjustment. After an appeal is timely
filed and the appropriate fees are paid in full, the zoning administrative
official shall provide the board of adjustment with a copy of the
interpretation request, the decision or determination, and any documents
regarding the matter that has been appealed.
   (f)   Appeal stays all proceedings. An appeal to the board of adjustment
stays all enforcement proceedings involving the action appealed unless the
building official certifies in writing to the board of adjustment and the
zoning administrative official facts supporting the building official’s opinion
that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
   (g)   The zoning administrative official shall schedule the appeal for a
hearing before the board of adjustment within 60 days of the date of the appeal
application.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 21816-08-2015, § 1, passed 8-4-2015, eff.
8-12-2015)
§ 3.202 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ACTION.
   (a)   Hearing. The board of adjustment shall hear and render a decision on
the appeal within three regularly scheduled hearing dates of the initial
hearing. Public notice of the hearing shall be as set forth in §
3.201(d), above, interpretation procedure. In deciding an appeal regarding an
interpretation of the zoning ordinance, the board of adjustment shall:
      (1)   Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this zoning
ordinance, the official zoning maps, the comprehensive plan and any other
relevant information;
      (2)   Hear testimony from the zoning administrative official regarding
the interpretation;
      (3)   Hear testimony from the appellant and any other interested or
aggrieved parties;
      (4)   Consult with city staff, as necessary; and
      (5)   Render a decision either affirming or reversing an order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrative official
involving the interpretation of the zoning ordinance.
   (b)   Vote required. A concurring vote of 75% of all the members of the
board of adjustment is required to reverse a decision or determination of the
zoning administrative official.
   (c)   Similar appeals. After a final decision is reached by the board of
adjustment, no further request on the same or related issues may be considered
by the board for the subject property for two years from the date of the final
decision.
   (d)   Appeal from decision of board. Any requestor or person aggrieved by
the decision of the board of adjustment or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city affected by the decision of the board of adjustment may
appeal by filing a petition for same in a court of competent jurisdiction,
setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying
the grounds for the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be filed with the
court within ten days from the day the board renders its decisions.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 21816-08-2015, § 1, passed 8-4-2015, eff.
8-12-2015)
ARTICLE 3: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
§ 3.300 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Every proposal for special exception review shall be filed with the board of
adjustment, in accordance with the board of adjustment’s established rules of
procedure. An application may be filed by the owner of property or an
authorized agent, or by the planning and development department upon
recommendation of the zoning commission, plan commission, board of adjustment
or city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3.301 FEE REQUIRED.
   Every application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as
provided in the schedule of fees and charges contained in
Chapter 2 of the city code. No fee shall be charged for special exception
review applications filed upon recommendation of the zoning commission, plan
commission, board of adjustment or city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.302 NOTICE.
   (a)   Written notice. Written notice of all public hearings before the board
of adjustment on proposed special exceptions shall be sent to owners of real
property lying within 300 feet of the subject property. Such notice shall be
given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing to all such owners
who have rendered their property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on
the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the
same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. When
property lying within 300 feet of the subject property is located in territory
which was annexed to the city after the final date for making the renditions
which are included on the last approved city tax roll, at least 15 days’ notice
of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in an official
newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the city.
   (b)   Posted notice.
      (1)   The city manager or a designee shall direct the erection of at
least one sign upon the premises upon which a special exception use has been
requested. Where possible such sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous
place or places upon such property at a point or points nearest any right-of-
way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property.
      (2)   Such sign(s) shall be so erected not less than ten days before the
date set for the public hearing before the board of adjustment. Any such sign
(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the board of adjustment on
the special exception application.
      (3)   Such sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a special exception
use has been requested and shall further set forth that additional information
can be acquired by telephoning the number indicated thereon.
      (4)   The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign
shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing
or to any official action concerning such special exception use.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.303 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ACTION.
   (a)   In taking action on an application for special exception, the board of
adjustment shall grant the application only when the board determines that:
      (1)   The use is specifically permitted under this ordinance;
      (2)   The location of proposed activities and improvements is clearly
defined on the site plan by the applicant; and
      (3)   The exception will be wholly compatible with the existing use and
permitted development of adjacent properties either as filed, or subject to
such requirements as the board finds necessary to protect and maintain the
stability of adjacent properties.
   (b)   The burden of proof regarding all conditions is on the applicant. Any
site or floor plan will become part of the approval of the special exception.
[Image]
   Board of Adjustment Procedure
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.304 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may present
to a court of record a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision
is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of such illegality.
The petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing
of the decision in the planning and development department in accordance with
the procedures in Tex. Local Government Code § 211.011, as amended.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3.305 LIMITATION ON REAPPLICATION.
   When a proposal is denied by the board of adjustment or when the applicant
has withdrawn a proposal after the giving of public notice, no new applications
of like nature shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a hearing by the
board of adjustment within a period of 24 months of the date of denial or
withdrawal unless the proposal is denied without prejudice; provided, however,
on receipt of written request by the original applicant describing
substantially changed conditions in the community since prior consideration of
the proposal so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the mandatory
delay period may be waived and a new application accepted.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.306 EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   (a)   A special exception shall expire and have no further effect 180 days
after the board of adjustment approval, or at such alternative time as
specified in the approval, unless:
      (1)   A building permit has been issued;
      (2)   A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or
      (3)   The development services director grants a one-time extension for a
maximum of 180 days upon written request of the applicant prior to the original
expiration date.
   (b)   Any special exception granted by the board of adjustment shall
terminate automatically when the period of use specified in the board of
adjustment's order has expired, or when the use ceases to be in full compliance
with any condition imposed by the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 23566-02-2019, § 1, passed 2-5-2019, eff. 5-28-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020,
§ 22, passed 2-4-2020)
ARTICLE 4: VARIANCES
§ 3.400 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every application for a variance, other than those addressed in
subsection (b) below, shall be filed with the board of adjustment, in
accordance with the board of adjustment’s established rules of procedure. An
application may be filed by the owner of property or an authorized agent, or by
the planning and development department upon recommendation of the zoning
commission, plan commission, board of adjustment or city council.
   (b)   The director of planning and development, or a designee, may approve
requests to vary from the standards of this zoning ordinance provided the
requests are the lesser of 10% of the applicable specification or one linear
foot/one square foot.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3.401 FEE REQUIRED.
   Every application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as
provided in the schedule of fees and charges contained in
Chapter 2 of the city code. No fee shall be charged for variance applications
filed upon recommendation of the zoning commission, plan commission, board of
adjustment or city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.402 NOTICE.
   Written notice of all public hearings before the board of adjustment on
proposed variances shall be sent to owners of real property lying within 300
feet of the subject property. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days
before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their said
property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax
roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and
postage paid, in the United States mail. See § 5.147 for additional notice
requirements for halfway houses.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 28121-11-2025, § 2, passed 10-21-2025,
eff. 12-5-2025)
§ 3.403 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ACTION.
   (a)    Board of adjustment may grant the application for a variance only
when the board determines that:
      (1)   Literal enforcement of the regulations in this zoning ordinance
will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development
of the affected property;
      (2)   The situation causing the hardship or difficulty is unique to the
affected property;
      (3)   The situation or hardship is not self-imposed;
      (4)   The relief sought will not injure the existing or permitted use of
adjacent conforming property; and
      (5)   The granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and
purposes of this zoning ordinance.
   (b)    The board of adjustment may consider the following as grounds to
determine whether compliance with the ordinance as applied to a structure that
is the subject of the requested variance would result in unnecessary hardship:
      (1)   The financial cost of compliance is greater than 50% of the
appraised value of the structure as shown on the most recent appraisal roll
certified to the assessor for the municipality under Tex. Tax Code § 26.01;
      (2)   Compliance would result in a loss to the lot on which the structure
is located of at least 25% of the area on which development is authorized to
physically occur;
      (3)   Compliance would result in the structure not being in compliance
with a requirement of a municipal ordinance, building code, or other
requirement;
      (4)   Compliance would result in the unreasonable encroachment on an
adjacent property or easement; or
      (5)   The structure is a nonconforming structure.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 28121-11-2025, § 3, passed 10-21-2025,
eff. 12-5-2025)
§ 3.404 EXPIRATION OF VARIANCE.
   (a)   A variance shall expire and have no further effect 180 days after the
board of adjustment approval, or at such alternative time as specified in the
approval, unless:
      (1)   A building permit has been issued;
      (2)   A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or
      (3)   The development services director grants a one-time extension for a
maximum of 180 days upon written request of the applicant prior to the original
expiration date.
   (b)   Any variance granted by the board of adjustment shall terminate
automatically when the period of use specified in the board of adjustment’s
order has expired, or when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any
condition imposed by the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 24030-
02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 3.405 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may present
to a court of record a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision
is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of such illegality.
The petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing
of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment in accordance with the
procedures in Tex. Local Government Code § 211.011, as amended.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.406 LIMITATION ON REAPPLICATION.
   (a)   When a proposal is denied by the board of adjustment or when the
applicant has withdrawn a proposal after the giving of public notice, no new
applications of like nature shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a
hearing by the board of adjustment within a period of 24 months of the date of
denial or withdrawal unless the proposal is denied without prejudice; provided,
however, on receipt of written request by the original applicant describing
substantially changed conditions in the community since prior consideration of
the proposal so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the mandatory
delay period may be waived and a new application accepted. When a decision of
the board of adjustment is appealed to a district or county court, no new
applications of like nature will be accepted by the city or scheduled for a
hearing until the court renders its final decision.
   (b)   When the district or county court affirms the decision of the board of
adjustment to deny a variance proposal, no new applications of like nature
shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a hearing unless there is
substantial change in conditions in the community since the decision of the
board of adjustment so as to justify accepting a new application.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17243, § 1, passed 10-17-2006)
ARTICLE 5: TEXT OR MAP AMENDMENT (REZONING)
§ 3.500 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Every proposal to amend, supplement or change the regulations or
restrictions of this ordinance, or the boundaries of the zoning districts,
shall be filed with the zoning commission, in accordance with the zoning
commission’s established rules of procedure. An application may be filed by the
owner of property or an authorized agent, or by the planning and development
department upon recommendation of the zoning commission, plan commission, board
of adjustment or city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 3.501 FEE REQUIRED.
   Every application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as
provided in the schedule of fees and charges contained in
Chapter 2 of the city code. No fee shall be charged for proposals filed upon
recommendation of the zoning commission, plan commission, board of adjustment
or city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.502 NOTICE.
   (a)   Written notice. Written notice of all public hearings before the
zoning commission on proposed changes in zoning classification shall be sent to
owners of real property lying within 300 feet of the property upon which the
change in classification is proposed, such notice to be given not less than ten
days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their
said property for city taxes, as the ownership appears on the last approved
city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly
addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. When property lying
within 300 feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in territory
which was annexed to the city after the final date for making the renditions
which are included on the last approved city tax roll, at least 15 days’ notice
of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in an official
newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the city. See §
4.305(b) for additional notice requirements for halfway houses and certain
multifamily dwellings.
   (b)   Posted notice.
      (1)   The city manager or a designee shall direct the erection of at
least one sign upon each property proposed to be rezoned. Where possible, such
sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon such
property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or
public thoroughfare adjacent to such property.
      (2)   Such sign(s) shall be so erected not less than ten days before the
date set for public hearing before the zoning commission. Any such sign(s)
shall be removed subsequent to the occurrence of either final action by the
city council or withdrawal of the application for amendment.
      (3)   Such sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a zoning amendment
is proposed and shall further set forth that additional information can be
acquired by telephoning the number indicated thereon.
      (4)   The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign(s)
shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing,
to the recommendation concerning or adoption of any proposed zoning amendment
or to any other official action concerning any such amendment.
   (c)   Published notice. Notice of a public hearing before the city council
shall be given by publication one time in the official newspaper or a paper of
general circulation in the municipality at least 15 days before the hearing.
See §
4.305(b)(1) for additional requirements for halfway houses.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 3.503 ZONING COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION.
   The zoning commission shall hold public hearings on all properly filed,
noticed and meeting agenda posted proposals. After closing of the public
hearing on a proposal, the zoning commission shall transmit to the city council
its recommendation on said proposal. For zoning application withdrawals see §
3.506.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 22465-10-2016, § 1, passed 10-11-2016,
eff. 11-3-2016)
§ 3.504 CITY COUNCIL HEARING AND ACTION.
   (a)   Zoning commission recommendation and council hearing. Every proposal
to amend a zoning boundary which is recommended for approval or denial by the
zoning commission and every proposed amendment to the regulations of this
ordinance shall be forwarded to the city council for a public hearing as
required by state law. No change, however, shall become effective until after
the adoption of an ordinance and its publication as required by law.
   (b)   City council action. Upon receipt of the final report and
recommendation of the zoning commission, the city council may:
      (1)   Approve the application;
      (2)   Deny the application with prejudice;
      (3)   Deny the application without prejudice as to the re-filing upon
showing that unnecessary hardship will otherwise result and that the intent and
spirit of the ordinance will be observed; or
      (4)   Refer the original proposal to the zoning commission for a new
hearing, report and recommendation.
      (5)    Accept a request to withdraw the application.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7195.jpg]
   City Council Hearing and Action Procedure
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 16948, § 1, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 22465-
10-20 16, § 1, passed 10- 11-2016, eff. 11-3-2016)
§ 3.505 WITHDRAWAL AND REAPPLICATION.
   (a)    The applicant shall submit in writing the withdrawal request to the
zoning administrator.
   (b)   The action on the withdrawal request shall be based on the timing of
the request as follows:
      (1)   An applicant may withdraw an application prior to written notice of
the zoning commission public hearing. The city shall not take further action on
the application.
      (2)   A request to withdraw an application after written notice or after
the application is posted on a zoning commission public hearing agenda shall be
deemed accepted and no further action is required. A request to withdraw an
application during the zoning commission meeting must be approved by the zoning
commission. The city shall not take further action on the application.
      (3)   After the zoning commission public hearing, an applicant may
withdraw an application prior to it being posted on the city council's agenda.
The city shall not take further action on the application.
      (4)   A request to withdraw an application after it is placed on a posted
agenda or during the city council public hearing is at the city council's
discretion. The city council may take any action described in §
3.504(b). The decision of the city council is final.
   (c)   Subject to the limitations in §
3.506, to re-initiate review, the applicant shall submit a new application and
fee.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 16948, § 2, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 22465-
10-2016, § 1, passed 10-11-2016, eff. 11-3-2016; Ord. 23024-12-2017, § 4,
passed 12-5-2017, eff. 3-17-2018)
§ 3.506 LIMITATION ON REAPPLICATION.
   When a proposal is denied with prejudice by the city council or when the
applicant has withdrawn after a recommendation of denial with prejudice of the
proposal by the zoning commission no new applications of like nature shall be
accepted by the city or scheduled for a hearing by the zoning commission within
a period of 12 months of the date of denial or withdrawal; provided, however,
on receipt of written request by the original applicant describing
substantially changed conditions in the community since prior consideration of
the proposal so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the city
council may waive the mandatory delay period and authorize the acceptance of a
new application.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 16948, § 2, passed 5-16-2006; Ord. 22465-
10-2016, § 1, passed 10-11-2016, eff. 11-3-2016; Ord. 24278-06-2020, § 1,
passed 6-23-2020, eff. 7-2-2020)
ARTICLE 6: OTHER REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 3.600 DESIGNATION OF “PD,” “CD,” “HSE,” “HC” AND “DD” DISTRICTS.
   (a)   For designation of planned development (“PD”) districts, see
Chapter 4, Article 3.
   (b)   For designation of conservation (“CD”) overlay districts, see
Chapter 4, Article 4.
   (c)   For designation of historic preservation overlay districts (“HSE,”
“HC,” “DD”), see
Chapter 4, Article 4.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
CHAPTER 4: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 20159, adopted April 3, 2012, amended this chapter in its
entirety. Subsequent amendments are as shown in the history notes following
each section. See also the Code Comparative Table for detailed analysis.
Section
Article 1: General
   
4.100   Districts established
   
4.101   District hierarchy
   
4.102   District maps
   
4.103   Compliance with district standards
Article 2: Special Purpose Districts
   
4.200   Agricultural district (“AG”)
   
4.201   Community facilities (“CF”) district
   
4.202   Manufactured housing (“MH”) district
   
4.203   Floodplain (“O-1”) district
   
4.204   Floodplain (“O-2”) district
Article 3: Planned Development (“PD”) District
   
4.300   Purpose and intent
   
4.301   Designation of “PD” district
   
4.302   Procedure for site plan approval in “PD” district
   
4.303   Site plan revisions
   
4.304   Considerations for site plan approval
   
4.305   Uses
   
4.306   Property development standards
Article 4: Overlay Districts
   
4.400   Conservation (“CD”) overlay district
   
4.401   Historic preservation ordinance - historic overlays
      
(a)   Purpose and intent.
      
(b)   City historic preservation officer.
      
(c)   Identification and designation of cultural resources.
      
(d)   Certificates of appropriateness (changes to historic properties).
      
(e)   Unreasonable economic hardship.
      
(f)   Historic site tax exemption.
      
(g)   Appeals.
      
(h)   Penalties.
   
4.402   Urban design district-downtown
   
4.403   Panther island peripheral zone (“PIP”) overlay district
   
4.404   I-35W corridor (“I-35W”) design overlay district
   
4.405   Airport/airfield (“AO”) overlay district
   
4.406   TCU residential (“TCU”) overlay district
   
4.407   Conditional use permit (“CUP”) overlay district
   
4.408   Stop Six (“SS”) overlay district
Article 5: Reserved
Article 6: Residential District Use Table
   
4.600   Allowed uses
   
4.601   Key to table designations
   
4.602   Unlisted uses
   
4.603   Residential district use table
Article 7: Residential Districts
   
4.700   One-family (“A-2.5A”) district
   
4.701   One-family (“A-43”) district
   
4.702   One-family (“A-21”) district
   
4.703   One-family (“A-10”) district
   
4.704   One-family (“A-7.5”) district
   
4.705   One-family (“A-5”) district
   
4.706   One-family Restricted (“AR”) district
   
4.707   Two-family (“B”) district
   
4.708   Zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) district
   
4.709   Townhouse/cluster (“R2”) district
   
4.710   Low density multifamily (“CR”) district
   
4.711   Medium density multifamily (“C”) district
   
4.712   High density multifamily (“D”) district
   
4.713   Urban residential (“UR”) district
Article 8: Nonresidential District Use Table
   
4.800   Allowed uses
   
4.801   Key to table designations
   
4.802   Unlisted uses
   
4.803   Nonresidential district use table
Article 9: Commercial Districts
   
4.900   Neighborhood commercial restricted (“ER”) district
   
4.901   Neighborhood commercial (“E”) district
   
4.902   General commercial restricted (“FR”) district
   
4.903   General commercial (“F”) district
   
4.904   Intensive commercial (“G”) district
   
4.905   Central business (“H”) district
Article 10: Industrial Districts
   
4.1000   Light industrial (“I”) district
   4.1001, 4.1002    Reserved
   
4.1003   Medium industrial (“J”) district
   
4.1004   Heavy industrial (“K”) district
Article 11: Inactive Districts
   
4.1100   Multifamily highrise (“D-HR1”) district
   
4.1101   Multifamily highrise (“D-HR2”) district
   
4.1102   Office midrise (“O-M”) district
   
4.1103   Planned commercial (“E-P”) district
   
4.1104   Industrial park (“IP”) district
Article 12: Form-Based Code District Use Table
   
4.1200   Allowed uses
   
4.1201   Key to table designations
   
4.1202   Unlisted uses
   
4.1203   District use table
Article 13: Form-Based Districts
   
4.1300   Low intensity mixed-use (“MU-1”) district
   
4.1301   Reserved
   
4.1302   High intensity mixed-use (“MU-2”) district
   
4.1303   Reserved
   
4.1304   Panther Island (“PI”) district
   
4.1305   Near southside (“NS”) district
   
4.1306   Camp Bowie (“CB”) district
   
4.1307   Trinity Lakes (“TL”) district
   
4.1308   Berry/University (“BU”) district
   
4.1309   Stockyards (“SY”) district
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL
§ 4.100 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and
the location of buildings erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged for
specified uses, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, to protect and preserve
places and areas of historical and cultural importance and significance, to
regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces and to regulate
and limit the density of population, the City of Fort Worth is hereby divided
into districts that are grouped in classes for convenience of reference as
follows.
   (a)   Special purpose districts.
      (1)   Agricultural (“AG”) district;
      (2)   Community facilities (“CF”) district;
      (3)   Manufactured housing (“MH”) district;
      (4)   Floodplain (“O-1”) district; and
      (5)   Floodplain (“O-2”) district.
   (b)   Planned development district. Planned development (“PD”) district.
   (c)   Overlay districts.
      (1)   Conservation (“CD”) overlay district;
      (2)   Historic preservation (“HSE,” “HC,” “DD”) overlay district;
      (3)   Urban design (“DUDD”) overlay district-downtown;
      (4)   Panther island peripheral zone (“PIP”) overlay district;
      (5)   I-35W north corridor (“I-35W”) overlay district;
      (6)   Airport/airfield overlay district; and
      (7)   Conditional use permit.
   (d)   Residential districts.
      (1)   One-family (“A-2.5A”) district;
      (2)   One-family (“A-43”) district;
      (3)   One-family (“A-21”) district;
      (4)   One-family (“A-10”) district;
      (5)   One-family (“A-7.5”) district;
      (6)   One-family (“A-5”) district;
      (7)   One-family restricted (“AR”) district;
      (8)   Two-family (“B”) district;
      (9)   Zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) district;
      (10)   Townhouse/cluster (“R-2”) district;
      (11)   Low density multifamily (“CR”) district;
      (12)   Medium density multifamily (“C”) district;
      (13)   High density multifamily (“D”) district; and
      (14)   Urban residential (“UR”) district.
   (e)   Commercial districts.
      (1)   Neighborhood commercial restricted (“ER”) district;
      (2)   Neighborhood commercial (“E”) district;
      (3)   General commercial restricted (“FR”) district;
      (4)   General commercial (“F”) district;
      (5)   Intensive commercial (“G”) district; and
      (6)   Central business (“H”) district.
   (f)   Industrial districts.
      (1)   Light industrial (“I”) district;
      (2)   Medium industrial (“J”) district; and
      (3)   Heavy industrial (“K”) district.
   (g)   Inactive districts.
      (1)   Multifamily highrise (“DHR1”) district;
      (2)   Multifamily highrise (“DHR2”) district;
      (3)   Planned commercial (“EP”) district;
      (4)   Office midrise (“OM”) district; and
      (5)   Industrial park (“IP”) district.
   (h)   Form-based districts.
      (1)   Low intensity mixed-use (“MU-1”) district;
      (2)   High intensity mixed-use (“MU-2”) district;
      (3)   Panther Island (“PI”) district;
      (4)   Near southside (“NS”) district;
      (5)   Camp Bowie (“CB”) district;
      (6)   Trinity Lakes (“TL”) district;
      (7)   Berry/University (“BU”) district; and
      (8)   Stockyards (“SY”) district.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22336-08-2016, § 1,
passed 8-2- 2016; Ord. 22703-05-2017, § 5, passed 5-2-2017; Ord. 22810-08-2017,
§ 2, passed 8-1-2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 4, passed 3-19-2019;
Ord. 23886-10-2019, § 1, passed 10-15-2019, eff. 11-7-2019)
§ 4.101 DISTRICT HIERARCHY.
   References in this zoning ordinance to more or less restrictive zoning
districts refer to the base zoning districts established above and represent a
progression from the “A” district as the most restrictive base zoning district
to the “K” district as the least restrictive base zoning district. Special
purpose and inactive districts are not included in the zoning district
hierarchy.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.102 DISTRICT MAPS.
   (a)   Maps incorporated. The districts described above and the boundaries of
such districts are shown upon the maps attached hereto and made a part of this
zoning ordinance, being designated as the “district maps” and said maps and all
the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much
a part of this ordinance as if the matters and information set forth by said
map were all fully described herein. The district maps are available in the
planning and development department.
   (b)   Boundaries of districts. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts, as shown on the map accompanying and made
a part of this ordinance, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless
otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and
made a part of this ordinance are bounded approximately by the street or alley
lines, the centerline of said street or alley shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district.
      (2)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines, and where the districts
designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance are
bounded approximately by lot lines, said lot line shall be construed to be the
boundary of such districts unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on
the map.
      (3)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map
accompanying and made a part of this ordinance shall be determined by use of
the scale contained on such map, unless dimensions are shown.
   (c)   Omitted land. If, because of error or omission in the district maps,
any property in the City of Fort Worth is not shown as being in a zoning
district, or if for any other reason the zoning cannot be properly determined
on any property in the City of Fort Worth, such property shall be classified as
“AG” agricultural until changed by amendment.
   (d)   Initial zoning. In the case of property annexed to the city without a
specific action designating zoning districts for the property, the property
shall be classified as “AG” agricultural until changed by amendment.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.103 COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT STANDARDS.
   Except as specifically authorized to the contrary in this ordinance the
following regulations apply in all districts.
   (a)   No building permit, certificate of occupancy or other permit shall be
issued, nor shall any use be made of land or any building or structure within
the City of Fort Worth unless such land is located in a district.
   (b)   No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged nor shall any building or structure or land be used for any purpose
other than is permitted hereafter in the district in which such building,
structure or land is located, and no building, structure or land shall be used
and no certificate of occupancy or building permit shall be issued for any use
or purpose prohibited by ordinance or by the Constitution and laws of the
United States of America or of the State of Texas.
   (c)   No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged to exceed the height or bulk limit established for the district in
which such building is located.
   (d)   No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other
open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the
density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the
area regulations herein established.
   (e)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure
unless such building or structure is located on a platted lot or lots which
have been described by an instrument recorded in the county deed records in
accordance with Tex. Local Government Code Chapter 212, and the lot or lots
front upon a legally established street or private access easement.
   (f)   In addition, no building permit shall be issued for any building on
land composed of a fractional part of any lot, or a lot and a fractional part
of any adjacent lot, or the fractional parts of two adjacent lots.
   (g)   Every dwelling hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged
shall be located on a lot of record unless:
      (1)   The dwelling is an integral part of a multifamily development;
      (2)   The lot is described by metes and bounds by an instrument recorded
in the county deed records before October 1, 1940, or the date of annexation,
whichever is later; or
      (3)   The lot qualifies for a dwelling permit by other provisions of this
ordinance.
   (h)   No yard or other open space provided about any building or structure
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or
structure; provided further that no yard or open space on an adjacent property
shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a
building is to be erected.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 7,
passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
ARTICLE 2: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
§ 4.200 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (“AG”).
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the agricultural district is to
provide for continued use of land for agricultural purposes, including farms,
ranches, orchards, truck farms and nurseries, until such time as it is
appropriate and desirable to develop the property (at which time a rezoning to
a district appropriate for the proposed development is required). One-family
dwellings are permitted, provided they are clearly accessory to an agricultural
operation.
   (b)   Uses. In the agricultural (“AG”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
      (1)   One-family dwellings. One-family dwellings clearly incidental to
the operation of a farm, ranch, orchard, truck garden or nursery (including
dwellings on the same farm or ranch used exclusively for the housing of
employees living on the premises) are permitted in the “AG” district, provided
that tracts that contain less than ten acres in separate ownership shall be
limited to one principal dwelling.
      (2)   Feeding pens. In the “AG” district, farms, ranches and similar
agrarian activities involving the growing of plants and the raising and
pasturing of livestock may include accessory feeding pens, provided that no
operation shall be conducted that will be obnoxious or offensive. Commercial
feeding pens shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Accessory buildings. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301 Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots.
   (c)   Property development standards. In the agricultural (“AG”) district,
the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings shall be as
shown in the accompanying table.
Agricultural (“AG”) District
Agricultural (“AG”) District
Front yard                           25 feet minimum
Rear yard                            25% of lot depth minimum, not to exceed 25
                                     feet
Side yard
   Interior lot, up to 50 feet widEach side 10% of lot width minimum, but
                                     not less than 3 feet
                                     Each side 5 feet minimum, sum of both
   Interior lot over 50 feet widthsides equal to minimum 20% of lot width
                                     (not to exceed 20 feet)
Corner lot*                          Same as interior lot
                                     3-1/2 stories or 45 feet maximum,
                                     provided, however, stealth
                                     telecommunication towers are permitted to
                                     a height of 75 feet as a special exception
Height                               approved by the board of adjustment. The
                                     scenic preservation and design review
                                     commission must approve the design of all
                                     stealth telecommunication towers.
                                     Telecommunication towers are not
                                     permitted.
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard setback (see §§
6.101(f) and subsection (d)(4) below)
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the agricultural (“AG”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards included
in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   On-premises signs. On-premises signs are permitted in the “AG”
district subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than 25 feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Off-street parking. One space per dwelling unit. For nonresidential
uses see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6 Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (4)   Projected front yard setback.
         a.   On corner lots, the side yard regulations shall be the same as
for interior lots except in the case of reversed frontage where the corner lot
abuts on the side of a lot facing the other intersecting street, in which case
there shall be a side yard on the corner lot of not less than 50% of the front
yard required on the lot abutting the rear of the corner lot or separated only
by an alley.
         b.   This regulation shall not be interpreted so as to reduce the
buildable width, after providing the required minimum side yard, of a corner
lot of record and in separate ownership as of May 16, 1966, to less than 28
feet.
         c.   No accessory buildings (§
5.301) on a reverse frontage corner lot shall project beyond the front yard of
the lots in the rear, nor shall a building be erected, reconstructed, altered
or enlarged closer than five feet to the rear.
      (5)   Accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings and
structures clearly incidental to a farm, ranch, orchard, truck garden or
nursery (including, but not limited to, barns, stables, equipment sheds,
poultry houses, swine pens, granaries, pump houses, water tanks and silos) are
permitted in the “AG” district provided that accessory building and structures
on tracts that contain less than four acres shall be limited to 50% of the area
of the principal dwelling, provided further that such allowable area shall not
be less than 1,500 square feet.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20454-10-2012, § 6,
passed 10-9-2012)
§ 4.201 COMMUNITY FACILITIES (“CF”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the community facilities (“CF”)
district is to accommodate those institutional and related uses that are
established in response to the health, safety, educational and welfare needs of
a neighborhood, community or major sector of the city.
   (b)   Uses. In the community facilities (“CF”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. In the community facilities (“CF”)
district, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
“CF” District
“CF” District
Lot width                                                             50 feet minimum
Front yard*
   Across street from front yard in “A” or “B” district    20 feet minimum
   Across street from front yard in “AR” or “R1” through �10 feet minimum
                                                                      5 feet minimum
                                                                      reduced to 0 feet
Rear yard                                                             where adjacent to
                                                                      an alley at least
                                                                      10 feet wide
Side yard**
   Adjacent to residential district                                5 feet minimum
   Across street from a side yard in a residential district        10 feet minimum
                                                                      Based on most
                                                                      restrictive
                                                                      adjacent
                                                                      district. Stealth
                                                                      telecommunication
                                                                      towers are
                                                                      permitted to a
                                                                      height of 15 feet
                                                                      above the
                                                                      allowable height
                                                                      of the most
                                                                      restrictive
                                                                      adjacent district
                                                                      as a special
                                                                      exception
                                                                      approved by the
                                                                      board of
                                                                      adjustment. The
                                                                      scenic
Height                                                                preservation and
                                                                      design review
                                                                      commission must
                                                                      approve the
                                                                      design of all
                                                                      stealth
                                                                      telecommunication
                                                                      towers.
                                                                      Telecommunication
                                                                      towers are
                                                                      permitted to the
                                                                      allowable height
                                                                      of the most
                                                                      restrictive
                                                                      adjacent district
                                                                      as a special
                                                                      exception
                                                                      approved by the
                                                                      board of
                                                                      adjustment.
Notes:
*   May be subject to setback averaging (§
6.101(f))
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(d))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the community facilities
(“CF”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards
included in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Parking. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200. When adjacent to or across the street from a one- or two-family
district, parking is prohibited in the front yard. Access to parking may be
through the front yard.
      (2)   Signs. Identification signs shall be permitted subject to the
following provisions.
         a.   Signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the
property on which displayed.
         b.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure along each dedicated street frontage of not more than one
square foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said
street; provided, however, a minimum of at least one sign shall be allowed
having an area of 12 square feet.
         c.   Not more than 50% of the total allowable sign area may be located
in the required yard space along a dedicated street. However, no individual
sign in such required yard space shall exceed 20 square feet in sign area.
         d.   Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building
structure and symbols and signs which are not visible or readable from the
public street shall not be limited by the above regulations.
         e.   Signs located across the street from a one- or two-family
district shall not be illuminated. The source of light for illuminated signs
shall not be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing. Revolving signs
shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (4)   Development adjacent to a one- or two-family district.
         a.   When adjacent to or across the street from a one- or two-family
district, parking is prohibited in the front yard. Access to parking may be
through the front yard.
         b.   Except for country clubs, elementary and secondary schools,
public parks, playgrounds, community centers, places of worship, day care
facilities and kindergartens, all uses in the “CF” district shall be located at
least 100 feet from any one- or two-family district. Such distance shall be
measured from the facility to the district boundary line.
         c.   A bufferyard in accordance with the requirements of §
6.300 shall be required when a “CF” district is located adjacent to any one- or
two-family district.
   (e)   Special definition of site. The site for any use permitted in the “CF”
district may be composed of one or more lots of record whether the same are
adjacent or separated by a dedicated right-of-way.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.202 MANUFACTURED HOUSING (“MH”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the manufactured housing
(“MH”) district to provide a specific area for manufactured home parks and
manufactured home subdivisions only, thus providing a location for the use and
enjoyment of manufactured housing along with those uses customarily accessory
thereto.
   (b)   Uses. In the manufactured housing (“MH”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the Supplemental Use Standards of
Chapter 5.
      (1)   Manufactured home subdivisions. Manufactured home subdivisions are
permitted in the “MH” district.
      (2)   Manufactured home parks. Manufactured home parks are permitted in
the “MH” district. Manufactured home parks shall be constructed and developed
in accordance with this section.
      (3)   Manufactured homes not in a subdivision or park. No manufactured
home shall be located within the City of Fort Worth except in a manufactured
home park or a manufactured home subdivision, except as permitted by the board
of adjustment as a special exception use as a place of residence for documented
security purposes. (See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.404 Residence for Security Purposes, Temporary.)
      (4)   Manufactured home sales lot. No manufactured home sales lot shall
be permitted in the “MH district.”
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied
as permanent living quarters in any zoning district.
   (c)   Manufactured home subdivisions.
      (1)   Property development standards. In manufactured home subdivisions
in the manufactured
housing (“MH”) district, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height
of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying table, and the following
standards:
         a.   No more than one dwelling unit shall be located on any one
subdivision lot;
         b.   Skirting shall be required on all manufactured homes; and
         c.   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to a permanent
foundation.
“MH” District: Manufactured Home Subdivision
“MH” District: Manufactured Home Subdivision
Land area       4 acre minimum
Lot area        4,000 square feet minimum per unit
Lot width       40 feet minimum
Lot coverage    50% maximum
Front yard      20 feet minimum
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
Side yard
   Interior l5 feet minimum
   Corner lot10 feet minimum
Height          35 feet maximum (see §
                6.100)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
      (2)   Other development standards. Development in the manufactured
housing (“MH”) district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions related to manufactured home
subdivision.
         a.   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
            1.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
            2.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
         b.   Parking. One space per dwelling unit in a manufactured housing
subdivision and two spaces per dwelling unit in a manufactured home park. See
also
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
         c.   Landscaping and buffers. Non residential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
   (d)   Manufactured home parks. All manufactured home parks and manufactured
homes shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with this subsection
(d), the Minimum Building Standards Code and all other applicable provisions of
the city code. Any requirements of this subsection (d) that make reference to
“mobile home” or “manufactured home” shall apply to both.
      (1)   Development approval requirements. A manufactured home park shall
not be constructed, altered or enlarged without a development plan approved by
the planning and development department in accordance with the provisions in
subsection (e) below.
      (2)   Property development standards.
         a.   In manufactured home parks, the minimum dimension of lots, yards
and the height of buildings shall be shown in the accompanying table.
         b.   Manufactured home parks shall conform to the following standards:
            1.   Noncombustible skirting shall be anchored to a permanent
foundation, including any vents, screens and/or openings necessary for utility
and mechanical system hookups; and
            2.   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to a permanent
foundation.
         c.   Limited use of recreational vehicles is permitted in a
manufactured home park as specified in this section. Recreational vehicles
shall not be occupied as permanent living quarters in any zoning district.
“MH” District: Manufactured Home Park
“MH” District: Manufactured Home Park
Land area       Minimum of 30 manufactured home lots
Lot area        3,500 square feet minimum per unit
Lot dimensions  40 feet minimum on the narrow dimension and 80 feet minimum on
                the long dimension
                10 feet minimum from the nearest corner of the manufactured
Lot front yard* home, or the manufactured home accessory structure, to the
                nearest boundary line of the internal street.
                10 feet minimum from any property line; when adjoining a public
Other setbacks  street, 25 foot minimum 10 feet minimum distance between
                manufactured homes, at any point
                35 feet maximum for any structure intended for occupancy. The
Height          average height of the manufactured home frame above the ground
                elevations, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not
                exceed 3 feet
Private streets Hard-surfaced; 36 feet minimum width; minimum cul-de-sac
                diameter 100 feet; maximum block length 500 feet
Parking         1 off-street space per lot
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
      (3)   Recreational areas.
         a.   A minimum of 5% of the gross site area of the park shall be
devoted to recreational facilities, and located in a central location. (In
large manufactured home parks, recreation areas may be decentralized.)
Community buildings and community use facilities, including adult recreation
and child play areas, swimming pools and drying yards, may be included in
computing the area of recreational facilities. However, vehicle parking areas
shall not be used in such computation.
         b.   When playground space for children is provided, it shall be
protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. It shall be maintained
in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards.
         c.   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
manufactured home park and knowingly fails to build, operate or maintain the
park in compliance with this section.
      (4)   Other structures.
         a.   Permanent residential structures.
            1.   At each manufactured home park, no more than one existing
residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure
constructed for occupancy by the owner or operator of the park.
            2.   An existing residential structure located on a manufactured
home park may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building
for use by the residents of the manufactured home park. A structure so
converted shall meet all applicable codes for public occupancy applicable to
the proposed use.
         b.   Storage facilities.
            1.   Unless provided in current manufactured home models, storage
facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per lot may be provided on
the lot or in compounds located within 100 feet of each lot.
            2.   Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a
manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be faced with
masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel steel or other material equal in
fire resistance, durability and appearance.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles in manufactured home parks.
         a.   A maximum of 5% of the gross area of a manufactured home park may
be dedicated to overnight or short term use by recreational vehicles.
         b.   Such portion of the manufactured home park shall be clearly
delineated and shall comply with all requirements of §
5.129 and other applicable provisions of the city code for recreational vehicle
parks with the exception of the requirement of a minimum number of spaces.
         c.   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly occupies a
recreational vehicle in a manufactured home park in excess of a total of 14
days within any six-month period.
         d.   A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a
manufactured home park and knowingly allows or suffers a violation of this
section by another person.
      (6)   Other development standards.
         a.   Signs. An identifying sign shall be permitted at each major
entrance to the manufactured home park except that no more than three signs
shall be permitted for one park, and such signs shall be subject to the
following provisions.
            1.   Each sign shall contain only the identifying name of the park
and its street address.
            2.   Signs may be illuminated but the source of light shall not be
visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing; revolving signs shall not be
permitted. Signs shall not be lighted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
            3.   Signs may be freestanding but shall have not more than two
supports and the top of the sign shall be no more than eight feet above grade.
            4.   Each sign shall be single-faced and shall be limited to a
maximum area of 12 square feet.
            5.   All signs shall conform with the requirements concerning
setbacks from public streets that are applicable to structures, except that
such signs may be attached flat against a wall or fence surrounding the
manufactured home park, no portion of which shall extend into the public right-
of-way.
         b.   Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit in a manufactured home
park. See also
Chapter 6, Article 2.
         c.   Landscaping. For manufactured home parks, generally 4% of net
site area or 30-foot deep landscaped area adjacent to public rights-of-way. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3.
         d.   Ground surface and drainage.
            1.   Exposed ground surfaces shall be paved, covered with stone
screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetated growth that is
capable of preventing soil erosion and elimination of dust.
            2.   All ground surfaces shall be graded and equipped to drain all
surface water in a safe and efficient manner.
            3.   The area of each lot shall provide adequate support and
drainage for placement of a manufactured home.
   (e)   Approval requirements and appeal.
      (1)   Development plan and application.
         a.   A manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park shall not
be constructed, altered or enlarged without a valid approved development plan
issued by the planning and development department. Before any new, altered or
enlargement action can occur, a development plan must be submitted for review.
Such plan must be approved before any action may proceed. The development plan
shall also be used when applying for appropriate permits as regulated by other
codes.
         b.   Applications for development plan approval shall contain at a
minimum the following:
            1.   Name and address of applicant;
            2.   Location and legal description of the manufactured home or
recreational vehicle park; and
            3.   i.   Two copies of a development plan in conformance with the
requirements of this section and drawn at a minimum scale of:
                  A.   One inch equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres; or
                  B.   One inch equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more.
               ii.   The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee;
               iii.   A development plan shall show the following:
                  A.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land,
identifying its location and boundaries;
                  B.   The number, location and size of all manufactured home
and recreational vehicle lots;
                  C.   The location, width and specifications of driveways,
private internal streets, parking and walkways;
                  D.   The location and details of lighting, public telephones
and electrical and gas systems;
                  E.   The location and specification of water and sewer lines
and sewer service riser pipes;
                  F.   The location and specifications of all buildings
constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured home or recreational
vehicle park;
                  G.   Existing and proposed topography of the manufactured or
recreational vehicle park;
                  H.   The location of fire mains, including the size of the
main, fire hydrants and fire extinguishment equipment and available fire flow;
and
                  I.   Such other information as may be reasonably required by
the departments reviewing the development plan.
      (2)   Appeal and modifications.
         a.   If the development plan is denied, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the board of adjustment.
         b.   The board of adjustment may approve the development plan; approve
with modifications or may uphold the denial of the development plan.
         c.   The board of adjustment shall consider the following when
modifying a development plan:
            1.   The minimum number of manufactured home lots in a manufactured
home park;
            2.   The minimum square footage and minimum dimensions of
manufactured home spaces;
            3.   The minimum number of recreational vehicle spaces in a
recreational vehicle park;
            4.   The minimum square footage of recreational vehicle spaces;
            5.   The minimum per acre density of recreational vehicle spaces;
and
            6.   The number of permanent residential structures in the
manufactured home or recreational vehicle park.
(Ord. 18434, eff. 1-14-2009; Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.203 FLOODPLAIN (“O-1”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section that district “O-1” shall
include, and shall be limited to lands subject to the 50-year flood. The
boundaries or limits or lands subject to the 50-year flood shall be determined
by the City of Fort Worth public works department and shall be shown on the
official map of the City of Fort Worth. The zoning commission shall recommend
to the city council whether or not all or any part of the lands subject to the
50-year flood shall be classified district “O-1.”
   (b)   Use regulations. In district “O-1,” no building or land shall be used,
and no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered
or enlarged, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued, unless otherwise
provided in this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Agricultural uses, including farming, grazing and livestock raising
and pasturing, including ancillary feeding pens (but not commercial feeding
pens), truck gardens, orchards and nurseries for the growing of plants and
shrubs, provided that no obnoxious fertilizer is stored on the premises and no
obnoxious soil or fertilizer processing is conducted thereon;
      (2)   Structures, installations and facilities installed, operated and
maintained by public agencies for flood control purposes;
      (3)   Public service structures, including railway and highway bridges,
provided that the location thereof shall first be approved by the plan
commission upon report and recommendation of the appropriate City of Fort Worth
departments;
      (4)   Mining of soil, sand, gravel and minerals, provided that such use
shall first be approved by the board of adjustment after report by the City of
Fort Worth, health, planning and public works departments and after public
notice and hearing;
      (5)   Irrigation intakes and pumps;
      (6)   Industrial condenser water intake and outlet works;
      (7)   Public or private utility installations, other than permanent
buildings;
      (8)   Sumps;
      (9)   Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum;
      (10)   Public or private reserve space;
      (11)   Hunting or fishing preserve;
      (12)   Boat rental, boat sales;
      (13)   Bridle trail, bicycle trail, nature trail;
      (14)   Country club; sports or recreation center, excluding principal
buildings;
      (15)   Golf course, driving range, archery range;
      (16)   Christmas tree sales;
      (17)   Taxicab stands;
      (18)   Roads, driveways;
      (19)   Temporary buildings and structures accessory to the above uses,
such buildings and structures to be used for limited periods of time as
designated by the planning and development department;
      (20)   Parks, playgrounds or recreational areas owned and operated by the
City of Fort Worth; and
      (21)   Dish satellite antennas shall be considered an accessory use. When
the dish exceeds two meters in diameter it shall not be located in the front or
side yards and shall not exceed 12 feet in height above ground level.
   (c)   Responsibility. The fact that land or property is or is not classified
as being within the “O-1” floodplain district shall not constitute assurance
that said land or property is not subject to local flooding and the designation
of the “O-1” floodplain district in this ordinance shall not be so interpreted.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.204 FLOODPLAIN (“O-2”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section that district “O-2” shall
include those lands subject to the intermediate regional flood, but shall not
include land in district “O-1.” The boundaries or limits of lands subject to
the intermediate regional flood shall be designated by the City of Fort Worth
public works department and shown on the official map of the City of Fort
Worth. The zoning commission shall recommend to the city council whether or not
all or any portion of the lands designated as subject to intermediate regional
flood shall be classified district “O-2.”
   (b)   Use regulations.
      (1)   In district “O-2,” no building or land shall be used and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, and no certificate of occupancy issued unless said building or
structure is designed and employed for other than habitation; and, is so
designed, constructed and sited so as to not constitute an encroachment hazard
or obstacle to the movement of flood waters; and, of a type not appreciably
damaged by flood waters; and, firmly anchored to prevent dislodgment by flood
waters; and approved by the director of the department of public works
following city staff and utility, county and state agency recommendations, as
required; provided that where in the opinion of the director of the department
of public works, topographic data, engineering and other studies are needed to
determine the effects of flooding on a proposed building or structure and/or
the effect of the building or structure on the flow of water, the director of
the department of public works may require submittal of said data or other
studies prepared by licensed engineers or other technicians.
      (2)   In district “O-2,” no building or land shall be used and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued, unless otherwise
provided in this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses:
         a.   Any use permitted in the “O-1” floodplain district; and
         b.   Public or private utilities.
   (c)   Special exception requirements. Special exception uses shall be
permitted only after approval of the board of adjustment after report by the
City of Fort Worth health, planning and development and transportation and
public works departments, after public notice and hearing, and provided that
said uses are not proposed to be located within or upon levee sites,
channelized floodways, sumps, dams or other flood control structures or
facilities, existent or proposed, at the time of application; and provided that
upon application for any of the following uses that the following information
is satisfactorily submitted:
      (1)   The relative dangers to life and property occasioned by the
proposed uses;
      (2)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program of Fort Worth;
      (3)   The relationship and/or effects of the proposed use to the
floodwater transportation and storage capacities of the channel and floodplain.
The determination of said relationship and/or effects shall be based on the
assumption that any resultant permitted increase in floodplain encroachment
will extend for a significant reach of the watercourse together with an
encroachment equal in degree on the opposite side of the watercourse. For any
fill which would result in a change greater than one foot in the water surface
elevation of the intermediate regional flood, the existing channel must be
improved such that said change in water surface elevation does not exceed one
foot; and provided that the written conditional approval or written approval of
the department of public works is obtained; and
      (4)   The following, submitted in ten copies at the time of application:
         a.   Plans drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet with one-foot
contour intervals as per city data, showing the nature, locations, dimensions
and elevation of the site or sites in issue and environs within 500 feet
thereof; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-
proofing measures and the relationship of same to the existing and proposed
locations of the “O-1” district and “O-2” district;
         b.   An area map showing the relationship of the area in issue to
surrounding territory;
         c.   Technical information evaluating any change of anticipated flood
heights and velocities, adequacy of protection and the seriousness of possible
flood damage to existing and proposed uses. Flood damages shall include, but
are not limited to, harmful inundation; water erosion of soil, stream banks and
beds; mud slides; stream channel shifting and changes; harmful deposition by
water of eroded and shifting soil and debris upon property or in the beds of
streams or other bodies of water; damage by high water to public roads,
highways, bridges, utilities and to works built for protection against floods
or inundation; the interruption by floods of travel, communication and
commerce; and all other high water influence and results which injuriously
affect the public health and the safety of property;
         d.   Any additional information substantiating the wisdom of the
proposed use; and
         e.   Additional detailed technical information which the board of
adjustment may request, including, but not limited to:
            1.   A typical floodplain cross-section showing the channel of the
watercourse, elevation of land areas adjacent to each side of the channel,
cross-sectional area of present and projected uses, high-water information;
            2.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground, channel alignment or realignment; all levees, sumps, diversions,
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial
arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site or sites in
issue; location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities;
photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and downstream;
soil types; and other pertinent information; and
            3.   Profile showing the slope of the bed of the channel or flow
line of the watercourse.
   (d)   Special exception uses.
      (1)   On-premises advertising signs or structures;
      (2)   Aircraft landing area;
      (3)   Outdoor commercial amusement enterprises;
      (4)   Carnival or circus (temporary);
      (5)   Revival (temporary);
      (6)   Private membership club;
      (7)   Day camp operated by non-profit organization;
      (8)   Racing strip or drag strip;
      (9)   Sanitary landfill (municipal);
      (10)   Principal buildings of country clubs, sports or recreation
centers;
      (11)   Greenhouse and plant nursery;
      (12)   Motor vehicle parking area as a principal use. Auxiliary parking;
      (13)   Private park or recreational area;
      (14)   Rodeo (temporary);
      (15)   Swimming pool (private or commercial);
      (16)   Drive-in theater;
      (17)   Amusement park;
      (18)   Towers, as defined in §
5.136
      (19)   Riding stable, horse track;
      (20)   Game farm, fish hatchery;
      (21)   Loading, unloading area;
      (22)   Non-covered storage yard for equipment and material;
      (23)   Shooting range;
      (24)   Nursery yards or buildings for retail nursery sales;
      (25)   Recreational vehicle parks, provided they are constructed and
developed in conformance with
Chapter 13 of the city code, Fire Prevention and Protection,
Article I, §
13-2(b), Article VIII, Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Parks;
      (26)   Restaurants, in accordance with the comprehensive plan (site plan
approved by plan commission);
      (27)   Riverine port facilities, publicly owned;
      (28)   Produce market (retail);
      (29)   Offices (site plan approved by plan commission); and
      (30)   Temporary, open retail sales booths and ancillary facilities (site
plan approved by plan commission).
   (e)   Height and area regulations. In the “O-2” floodplain district, the
height of buildings and structures and the minimum dimensions of lots and yards
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Height. Same as district “AG;”
      (2)   Front yard. Same as district “AG;”
      (3)   Rear yard. Same as district “AG;” and
      (4)   Side yard. Same as district “AG.”
   (f)   General requirements.
      (1)   Hospitals, boarding schools, nursing and care homes, homes for the
aged or infirm, sanitariums, detention facilities, refugee centers and
orphanages are specifically prohibited.
      (2)   No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building
or structure shall be extended or moved unless the main floor of said building
or structure is flood-proofed to the elevation subject to flood.
      (3)   No basement floor or other floor shall be constructed below or at a
lower elevation than the main floor unless flood-proofed.
      (4)   Foundations of all structures shall be designed to withstand flood
conditions at the site.
      (5)   Land may be filled provided such fill extends 25 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon and provided that the requirements of
subsection (c) above are met.
   (g)   Responsibility for flooding. The fact that land or property is or is
not classified as being within the “O-2” floodplain district shall not
constitute assurance that said land or property is not subject to local
flooding, and the designation of the “O-2” floodplain district in this
ordinance shall not be so interpreted.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE 3: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (“PD”) DISTRICT
§ 4.300 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   The purpose of a planned development ("PD") district is to encourage
the unified design of residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
uses, including combinations of uses that are not otherwise attainable under
conventional base zoning districts. A planned development district may be
created in any base zoning district for the purposes of:
      (1)   Allowing for different types of residential uses in residential
districts where the use is not allowed;
      (2)   Providing for two or more uses or mix of residential uses not
otherwise allowed or conditional in the zoning district in which the property
is located, subject to certain development regulations and a site plan;
      (3)   Where required in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8 and
12; or
      (4)   Where restricting a minority of uses in a base zoning district.
   (b)   A planned development district is not intended to circumvent decisions
of the Board of Adjustment and an application for a planned development
district shall not be accepted within two years of a decision by the Board of
Adjustment where the development standard proposed for the planned development
district is substantially similar to the request made where there was a final
decision by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 5,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 4.301 DESIGNATION OF “PD” DISTRICT.
   (a)   Site plan approval required. No building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued and no use of land, buildings or structures shall be
made in the “PD” district until the same has been approved by the city council
as part of a site plan in compliance with the procedures, terms and conditions
of this article of the ordinance; provided, however, the requirement for a site
plan may be waived by the city council where deemed appropriate by the city
council in its sole discretion.
   (b)   Site plan requirements. The site plan submitted in support of a
request for site plan approval shall contain sufficient information delineating
the characteristics of the site, changes in those characteristics as may be
proposed by the development, how the development will relate to public services
and facilities, and what protection features are included to ensure that the
development will be compatible with existing and allowable development on
adjacent property. The site plan shall show at least the following items of
information:
      (1)   The land area included within the site, the zoning classification
of all adjacent sites, and all public and private rights-of-way and easements
bounding and intersecting the site and adjacent sites which are proposed to be
continued, created, relocated and/or abandoned;
      (2)   The proposed finished grade of the site and its relation to
elevations of adjacent sites if pertinent;
      (3)   A description of the proposed site and the boundaries thereof;
      (4)   The location of each existing and each proposed structure on the
site, the specific category of use or uses to be contained therein, the number
of stories, gross floor area, type of exterior construction material and the
location of entrances and exits to buildings;
      (5)   The location and width of all curb cuts and driving lanes;
      (6)   The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas,
and the character and location of illumination facilities for same;
      (7)   All pedestrian walks, malls and open areas for use by tenants or
the public;
      (8)   The location and height of all walls, fences and screen planting
and landscaping;
      (9)   The location, size, height, foot-candle level and orientation of
all lighting and signs;
      (10)   The types of surfacing such as paving, turf or gravel to be used
at the various locations;
      (11)   The location of fire hydrants;
      (12)   Location and screening of garbage containers, air conditioners and
outside storage or display;
      (13)   A schedule of the phasing of all improvements shown in the plan;
      (14)   Building height, building separation and open space; and
      (15)   Density per acre of any residential dwellings.
   (c)   Application. An application for site plan approval shall be filed with
the planning and development department on a form prepared by that department
and accompanied by a site plan. No site plan shall be accepted for filing until
the appropriate filing fee has been paid. An application for a planned
development district may not be amended to a conditional use permit overlay
during the public hearing process but rather shall require a new application
and public hearing.
   (d)   Procedure for zoning change to “PD” district. The procedures for
hearing a request for a zoning change to the “PD” district shall be the same as
for a requested change to any other district, as set forth in
Chapter 3, Article 5.
   (e)   “PD” district as amendment to ordinance. Every planned development
district approved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as
an amendment to the ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In
approving the planned development district, the city council may impose
conditions relative to the standard of development, and such conditions shall
be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the
land or any structure which is part of the planned development district; and
such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval
of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the
granting of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 6,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 4.302 PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL IN “PD” DISTRICT.
   (a)   Public hearing required. The zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing on all applications for site plan approval. The procedures for hearing
a request for approval of a site plan shall be in accordance with this section.
   (b)   Written notice. Written notice of the public hearing before the zoning
commission shall be sent to the owners of real property within 300 feet of the
property upon which a site plan has been submitted, such notice to be given not
less than ten days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have
rendered their said property for city taxes, as their ownership appears on the
last approved ad valorem tax roll. Such notice shall be served by depositing
same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. When
property lying within 300 feet of the proposed site plan is located within
territory which was annexed to the city after the final date for making the
renditions which are included on the last approved tax roll, at least 15 days’
notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the city.
   (c)   Zoning commission recommendation. All recommendations by the zoning
commission on-site plan approval shall be forwarded to the city council for
setting and holding of a public hearing thereon.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.303 SITE PLAN REVISIONS.
   (a)   Review and evaluation. Any revisions to the site plan after the public
hearing before the city council, except as permitted under subsection (b)
below, shall be submitted to the planning and development department for
distribution, review and written evaluation by city staff prior to resubmission
to and approval by the zoning commission and city council.
   (b)   Minor changes.
      (1)   Minor changes to an approved site plan, which will not cause any of
the following circumstances to occur, may be authorized by the development
services director or a designee:
         a.   For all zoning districts other than mixed-use, form-based or
urban residential:
            1.   A change in the character of the development;
            2.   A 5% or greater increase in the gross floor areas of
structures;
            3.   Any substantial and material changes in such external effects
on adjacent property as noise, heat, light, glare and vibration;
            4.   A substantial and material reduction in the originally
approved separations between buildings;
            5.   Any adverse changes in traffic circulation, safety, drainage
or utilities;
            6.   A 5% or greater increase in the height of structures;
            7.   A 10% or greater reduction in the originally approved setbacks
from property lines;
            8.   A 5% or greater increase in ground coverage by structures;
            9.   A 5% or greater reduction in the ratio of off-street parking
and loading space (provided that the minimum requirements of Chapter 6, Article
2 are met); and
            10.   A change in the size, height, lighting or orientation of
originally approved signs.
         b.   For all mixed-use, form-based or urban residential districts:
            1.   A change in the character of the development;
            2.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in the gross floor areas
of structures;
            3.   Any substantial and material changes in such external effects
on adjacent property as noise, heat, light, glare and vibration;
            4.   A substantial and material increase in the originally approved
separations between buildings;
            5.   Any adverse changes in traffic circulation, safety, drainage
or utilities;
            6.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in the height of
structures;
            7.   A 10% or greater increase in the originally approved front
yard setbacks from property lines;
            8.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in ground coverage by
structures;
            9.   A 5% or greater increase in the ratio of off-street parking
and loading space unless provided in structured parking (provided that the
minimum requirements of Chapter 6, Article 2 are met); and
            10.   A change in the size, height, lighting or orientation of
originally approved signs.
      (2)   The decision of the development services director as to whether
requested changes are minor shall be final and non-appealable. Any change
deemed not to be a minor change, as indicated above, shall be processed as a
new application to the zoning commission in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22490-11-2016, § 1,
passed 11-1-2016, eff. 12-1-2016; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.304 CONSIDERATIONS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (a)   Criteria. During the site plan review and evaluation process, the
following criteria shall be considered:
      (1)   The nature and character of the development and adequacy of the
buffer between proposed improvements on the site and adjacent property;
      (2)   The adequacy of utilities, access roads, drainage and other
necessary supporting facilities that have been or will be provided;
      (3)   The adequacy of the design, location and arrangement of all
driveways and parking spaces so as to provide for the safe and convenient
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the
general public or adjacent developments;
      (4)   The adequacy of any nuisance prevention measures that have been or
will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and
vibration;
      (5)   The effect directional lighting will have on neighboring
properties; and
      (6)   The impact of the proposed development on adjacent property values
and on the ability of the adjacent property to be developed.
   (b)   Additional requirements. In approving a site plan, the zoning
commission or city council may impose additional reasonable requirements
necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community.
   (c)   Violation of conditions. The violation of any condition or requirement
on an approved site plan or any construction or use that is not in compliance
with an approved site plan shall be deemed to be a violation of the ordinance
which granted the “PD” district zoning change subject to site plan approval.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.305 USES.
   (a)   Map designations. The permitted use or uses of property located in the
“PD” district shall be determined at the time the district is approved by using
the suffixes described below.
      (1)   The suffix “SU” (specific use) may be selected and added as a
suffix to the “PD” district to note that the city council has approved a
specific use or uses or a class of generic uses such as offices, retail,
personal services, educational facilities or warehousing. In the event certain
uses are deemed inappropriate, the use of the property may be further
restricted by eliminating certain uses from the category of uses.
      (2)   Any commercial or industrial district (
Chapter 4, Articles 9,
10 and
13) may be selected and added as a suffix to a “PD” district, which permits the
property to be used for any use or uses included in the list of permitted uses
for the indicated district.
      (3)   Approval of a “PD” district in combination with a suffix of another
zoning district, or approval of a “PD” district in combination with an “SU”
suffix shall be deemed approval of a more restrictive district than approval of
such zoning without a “PD” designation, provided that the approved use was
permitted in the district indicated in the public hearing notice. Uses
permitted in a “PD” district through addition of the suffix for another zoning
district, may be refined through exclusion of specified uses otherwise
permitted in the district.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Specific industrial uses permitted in “PD” district only. The
following uses are permitted only through approval of a planned development in
accordance with the procedures in this article:
      (1)   Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture;
      (2)   Coke ovens;
      (3)   Creosote treatment or manufacture;
      (4)   Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
facility:
         a.   Facilities handling, processing and loading of municipal solid
waste and recyclable materials for transportation at transfer stations;
storage, processing, bailing or reclamation of paper, glass, wood, metals,
plastics, rags, junk, concrete, asphalt and other materials at materials
recovery facilities and recycling centers; disposal, dumping or reducing of
offal or dead animals; composting for yard and wood wastes, municipal solid
waste and/or sludge at composting facilities; collection and storage of
household hazardous wastes; and processing and storage of scrap tires at waste
tire facilities, subject to the requirements set out below. For purposes of
this subsection (d), such facilities are further defined by Tex. Administrative
Code Title 30, Chapter 330, Municipal Solid Waste, § 330.3, and Tex.
Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 335, Industrial Solid Waste and Municipal
Hazardous Waste, § 335.1. The operator shall comply with the following
requirements:
            1.   Submit a site development plan for review that provides
detailed information about the design and development of the facility and that
addresses:
               i.   Zoning and land use within one-quarter mile of the site;
               ii.   Proximity to residences, businesses and other uses;
               iii.   Availability and characteristics of access roads
including current traffic volumes and impact of proposed facility on roads and
traffic;
               iv.   Locations of all existing and proposed buildings,
equipment and machinery;
               v.   Fire prevention and control;
               vi.   Groundwater, drinking water and surface water protection
including wash areas, stream or water course diversions, holding ponds and
tanks;
               vii.   Screening fences, berms, buffers and landscaping;
               viii.   Provisions for all activities including loading,
unloading, handling, processing of materials and maintenance and storage of
containers, vehicles and other equipment and machinery to be done within the
confines of the facility and behind required screening fences; and
               ix.   Erection and maintenance of signage at the entrance to the
facility that is clearly visible to the public and identifies the owner,
operator, business address, telephone number and hours of operation of the
facility.
            2.   Obtain, maintain and have available on-site all required
permits and comply with all federal, state and local regulations that relate to
the collection, transportation, handling, processing and disposal of all
materials for which the facility is approved.
            3.   Submit and maintain on-site an operations plan that addresses:
               i.   Provisions for preventing unauthorized wastes and materials
from being brought to the facility;
               ii.   Procedures for identifying, handling, removing,
transporting and disposing of unauthorized wastes and materials that may have
been brought to the facility;
               iii.   Procedures for controlling water runoff, erosion, dust,
odors, vectors and rodents;
               iv.   Procedures and employee training for fire prevention and
control;
               v.   Litter control and cleanup; and
               vi.   Procedures for reporting and handling fuel and chemical
spills.
            4.   Provide proof of financial security by submitting documents
showing compliance with federal and/or state financial assurance requirements
or by submission of performance bond sufficient to ensure that maximum amount
of materials stored or accumulated on-site at any one time can be properly
recovered and disposed of in the event that the owner/operator is unable to do
so.
         b.   City council may appoint an oversight committee of city staff,
public representatives and others, as required, to provide assurance of
compliance with all federal, state and local regulations, codes and ordinances.
The operator and/or owner shall provide in writing for access to the property
by said members subject to all safety and operational restrictions required by
law to protect on-site public welfare and safety.
         c.   The planning and development department may not issue a
certificate of occupancy until the operator of such facility submits proof that
the operation of the facility has been approved by all applicable federal and
state regulatory agencies as required by law.
      (5)   Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals
(including acid, ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture, and
explosives manufacture and storage);
      (6)   Manufacture of heavy rubber products;
      (7)   Metal smelting, reclamation or ore reduction of tin, copper, lead,
zinc or iron ores;
      (8)   Mining, quarrying, dredging or excavation of dirt, gravel, sand or
stone, for the purpose of removing, screening, crushing, washing or storage of
ore, clay, stone, gravel or similar materials, subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   Provision of a site plan of all existing conditions, including
topography at five-foot intervals, streams, lakes and other bodies of water,
roadways, utility lines, structures and major vegetation, including canopy
cover;
         b.   Identification of any known protected species of plant, fish or
animal life, or the presence of areas of historic, cultural or archeological
significance. Such property that is found to be protected or of significant
public interest shall not be included in any area approved for mining;
         c.   Delineation of all permits and licenses (including NPDES and
Texas air control board) required for the operation of such a facility, name of
contact person, agency address and telephone number of all permitting agencies
and verification of approval of same prior to operation;
         d.   Submission of a plan of operation, including scheduling of
activities, phasing, traffic generation, employees and use of explosives or
other hazardous or caustic materials or chemicals;
         e.   Analysis of potential impacts to adjacent properties (especially
residential) due to dust, noise, water runoff and diversion, ground water
alteration, silting, sedimentation, erosion, traffic and mitigation measures to
control such impacts. Submittal of drainage study if deemed necessary by the
department of transportation and public works. When deemed appropriate, as a
mitigation measure of the site perimeter, city council may require appropriate
buffering, berming, screening and landscaping greater than that required under
this zoning ordinance, which shall be maintained in a proper manner at the
expense of the property owner. All mitigation measures must be installed and
completed prior to any physical mining of the site;
         f.   Submission of plan for protection of adjacent rights-of-way and
streets if mining operations are planned within 50 feet of such rights-of-way
and streets, and approval of plans required from the transportation and public
works director;
         g.   Approvals from all utility service providers, transmission,
electric and pipeline companies for work around, near or across such utility
facility, including approvals for relocation of such utility facility if
required;
         h.   Site plan identifying all proposed structures, operating
facilities, loading and wash areas, roadways, stream or water course
diversions, holding ponds/tanks, temporary power lines and other site
improvements;
         i.   A reclamation plan, including final topography contours, at five-
foot intervals, relocated stream beds, lakes, ponds and other physical
features, type and depth of surface material, seeding and replanting plan for
restoration of the original canopy cover of the site, including any required
cross-section and engineering/construction plans as approved by the city
forester or a soil conservation scientist. It is recommended that plant
materials native to the site be used;
         j.   Submission of a performance bond or cash payment for each phase
as required under the standard contract for community facilities agreement of
the city to ensure that all restoration costs in accordance with the
reclamation plan of the site are met;
         k.   Provision of a clearly visible sign at the entrance to the mining
operation identifying the name, business address and phone number of the
facility owner and operator in compliance with the requirements for on-premises
signs; and
         l.   City council may appoint an oversight committee of city staff,
public representatives and others, as required, to provide assurance of
compliance with all federal, state and city regulations, codes and ordinances.
The operator and/or owner of a mining operation shall provide in writing for
the limited access to the property by said members subject to all safety and
operational restrictions required by law to protect on-site public welfare and
safety. Such access approval shall be a prerequisite and part of the conditions
of approval of the “PD” district.
      (9)   Packing plants, including slaughtering of animals and processing of
by-products;
      (10)   Oil drilling and production;
      (11)   Paper and pulp manufacture;
      (12)   Petroleum refining or wholesale storage;
      (13)   Rock, cement crushers and stone quarries;
      (14)   Rolling mills; and
      (15)   Line compressors.
         a.   Line compressors shall also be permitted in “I” light industrial,
“J" medium industrial and “K” heavy industrial districts.
         b.   A site plan is required and shall not be waived.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20999, § 1, passed 10-
15-2013; Ord. 21499-10-2014, § 1, passed 10-14-2014, eff. 10-23-2014; Ord.
23609-03-2019, §7, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 27381-12-2024, § 1, passed 12-10-
2024, eff. 12-20-2024)
§ 4.306 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   In addition to any other specific regulations, the following standards shall
apply in any “PD” district.
   (a)   The city council, in approving any “PD” district, may designate the
maximum height, floor area and/or other restrictions on the development of such
uses.
   (b)   The height and yard regulations of the most restrictive district in
which the approved use or uses are allowed shall constitute the minimum
development requirements; provided, however, that the city council or zoning
commission may impose more restrictive requirements in order to minimize
incompatibilities.
   (c)   Unless indicated on the approved site plan, the sign regulations in
the most restrictive district in which the approved use or uses are allowed
shall be followed.
   (d)   The parking requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2 shall apply to all commercial and industrial uses in the
“PD” district. Parking requirements for apartments and multifamily dwellings in
the “PD” district shall be determined in accordance with the development
provisions in §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 8,
passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
ARTICLE 4: OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 4.400 CONSERVATION (“CD”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The City of Fort Worth has many unique and distinctive residential
neighborhoods and commercial areas which contribute significantly to the
overall character and identity of the city but may lack sufficient historical,
architectural or cultural significance at the present time to be designated as
a historic district. The city council recognizes the need to preserve, protect
and enhance the value of these areas and wished to provide a means of
conserving the distinctive atmosphere or character of areas by protecting or
enhancing their significant architectural or cultural attributes through the
establishment of conservation districts.
      (2)   Tex. Local Government Code § 211.003 authorizes the City of Fort
Worth to regulate and restrict the construction, alteration, reconstruction or
razing and of buildings and other structures in “designated places and areas of
historic, cultural or architectural importance and significance.” The
conservation district provides for the establishment of regulations concerning
the conservation of existing buildings and new construction and their settings
in designated places of architectural or cultural importance and significance.
It is recognized that there are areas in the city where the application of
conservation district zoning could assist in the conservation of architectural
and cultural attributes and thereby contribute to the stability or
stabilization of these areas:
      (3)   The provisions of this article are intended:
         a.   To protect and strengthen desirable and unique physical features
and design characteristics;
         b.   To promote and provide for economic revitalization;
         c.   To protect and enhance the livability of the city;
         d.   To reduce conflict and prevent blighting caused by incompatible
and insensitive development, and to promote new compatible development;
         e.   To stabilize or enhance property values;
         f.   To provide residents and property owners with a planning tool for
future development;
         g.   To encourage and strengthen civic pride; and
         h.   To ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and
redevelopment of the city.
   (b)   Zoning classification and authority.
      (1)   Designation is a means for property owners to initiate and
implement programs for the conservation or revitalization of neighborhoods and
commercial areas. The conservation overlay district and its regulations shall
be applicable to each property within the district in addition to the
regulations of the base underlying zoning classification where the property is
located.
      (2)   Separate ordinances are required to designate each conservation
district. Ordinances designating each district shall identify the designated
boundaries, applicable designation criteria and design standards for that
district.
      (3)   Any zoning district may be followed by the suffix “CD,” indicating
that such zoning district is subject to the use and development regulations of
both the designated district and the conservation district design standards.
The zoning designation for property located within a conservation district
shall consist of the base zone symbol and the overlay district symbol “/CD” as
a suffix.
      (4)   Designation of an area by the city council as a conservation
district (“CD”) is intended as a zoning overlay which supplements the primary
underlying zoning district classification. The permitted uses of the property
shall be determined and controlled by the use regulations set forth for the
primary zoning district classification for the property. Property designated as
a conservation district may have additional overlay designations.
      (5)   The height of structures and minimum dimensions of lots and yards
shall be determined by the regulations set forth for the underlying, primary
zoning district classification except where height and area regulations are
specified in conservation district design standards adopted by the city
council. No conservation district can restrict height to less than two stories
over the entire footprint of the original structure.
      (6)   If there are any conflicts between the adopted design standards of
the conservation district and any provision of the zoning ordinance, the
provisions of the adopted design standards of the conservation district shall
apply.
      (7)   If there are any conflicts between the provisions of this article
and any other provision of the zoning ordinance, the most restrictive
regulation shall apply in the absence of a specific directive to the contrary.
   (c)   Procedures for establishing a conservation district.
      (1)   Following a request for designation of a conservation district, the
planning and development department shall develop a conservation plan for the
proposed district that includes:
         a.   Statement of purpose and intent;
         b.   Maps indicating boundaries, age of structures and existing land
use within the proposed district;
         c.   Maps and other graphic and written materials identifying and
describing the distinctive neighborhood and building characteristics and goals
of the proposed district;
         d.   A list of all property owners (with legal addresses),
neighborhood associations and/or other organizations representing the interests
of property owners in the proposed district; and
         e.   Design standards.
      (2)   All property owners within the proposed district shall be afforded
the opportunity to participate in drafting the conservation plan, which will be
approved as part of the zoning ordinance creating a conservation district.
      (3)   Authority to initiate. A zoning application for designation as a
conservation district must be filed with the planning and development
department. An application shall be initiated either:
         a.   By petition (form provided by the planning and development
department) signed by the owners who collectively own more than 50% or more of
the individual tracts, parcels or platted lots, to be located within the
boundaries of the proposed district, and the request of the owners who
collectively own 50% or more of the land area, excluding streets and alleys, to
be located within the boundaries of the proposed district. Two or more platted
lots developed together shall be counted as one lot. Each vacant platted lot of
sufficient size to be developed under the current zoning designation for the
property shall be counted as one lot; or
         b.   By the city council.
   (d)   Designation criteria. To be designated as a conservation district, the
area must meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Contain a minimum one block length (both sides of the street); an
exception for one block face (one side of the street) may be allowed when
different land uses or development patterns exist on the opposite side of the
street;
      (2)   At least 50% of the land area in the proposed district is presently
improved, unless created to preserve a special or natural streetscape
characteristic; and
      (3)   Possess two or more of the following distinctive features that
create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association:
         a.   Scale, size or type of construction;
         b.   Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks;
         c.   Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek
beds, parks, greenbelts, gardens or street landscaping; or
         d.   Abuts or links designated historic landmarks and/or districts.
   (e)   Design standards.
      (1)   The conservation plan approved as part of the zoning ordinance
creating a conservation district shall include objective design standards for
new construction of any building or structure, or the relocation or
rehabilitation to the street facade of an existing building or structure. The
design standards shall be applied administratively by city staff.
      (2)   The conservation plan and requisite design standards shall not
apply to those activities which constitute in-kind replacement or repair,
ordinary repair and maintenance that is using the same or similar material and
design.
      (3)   The design standards for the conservation district shall include,
at a minimum, the following elements governing the physical characteristics and
features of all property (public or private) within the proposed district:
         a.   Building height, number of stories (may not restrict to less than
two stories over the entire footprint of the original structure);
         b.   Lot coverage;
         c.   Lot size;
         d.   Front and side yard setbacks; and
         e.   Driveways, hardscape covering.
      (4)   In addition, the design standards may include, but shall not be
limited to, the following elements:
         a.   Building orientation;
         b.   General site planning (primary, ancillary structures);
         c.   Garage entrance location;
         d.   Street trees;
         e.   Height of fences and walls;
         f.   Right-of-way (exceeding public works standards);
         g.   Principal elevation features; and
         h.   Building form.
      (5)   The proposed standards shall be submitted with the application to
the zoning commission and the city council. No conservation district may be
established in the city unless the city council first approves the design
standards for the district in accordance with this article.
      (6)   Copies of the approved standards shall be on file in the planning
and development department and in the deed records of the county in which the
property is located.
      (7)   Any modification of adopted design standards must be approved by
the city council following the same procedure used for promulgation of the
original standards. Invalidation of any of the standards shall not affect the
validity of any other portion.
   (f)   Public hearing.
      (1)   At least ten days prior to the zoning commission public hearing,
notices of the time and place of the meeting shall be mailed to all addresses
of property owners and residents shown on the application, to any additional
addresses of properties in the proposed district as shown on the last approved
city tax roll, and to any registered neighborhood associations located within
the proposed district. Notice may be served by depositing the same, properly
addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail.
      (2)   No area shall be designated as a conservation district without the
recommendation of the zoning commission. The zoning commission shall conduct a
public hearing on the proposed designation within 45 days after receipt of the
application for designation and the proposed conservation plan by the planning
and development department, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
The hearing shall be in the same manner and according to the same procedures
for amending the zoning map as set forth in
Chapter 3, Article 5.
      (3)   City council hearing. The city council shall give notice and
conduct its hearing on the zoning commission’s recommendation concerning the
proposed conservation plan within 45 days of receipt of the recommendation of
the zoning commission, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable. The
city council shall review the conservation plan and shall approve the same,
with or without modifications, at the public hearing on the proposed
designation. The city council shall give notice, follow the publication
procedure, hold the hearing and make its determination in the same manner and
according to the same procedures for amending the zoning map as set forth in
Chapter 3, Article 5.
      (4)   If the owners of at least 20% of an area nominated for designation
or located within 200 feet of a proposed conservation district protest such
designation by submitting a written, signed protest, the affirmative vote of at
least three-quarters of all members of the city council is required in order
for the designation to take effect.
   (g)   Recording of designations on zoning map. Upon designation of an area
as a conservation district, the city council shall direct that the designation
to be recorded on the official zoning maps of the city.
   (h)   Filing of designation and guidelines in property records. Record of
designation of an area as a conservation district and the corresponding
district guidelines shall be recorded in the official property records of the
county in which the property is located by the planning and development
department.
   (i)   Administration/enforcement. No building permit shall be issued for new
construction or any alteration or addition to the street facade of an existing
building or structure within a designated conservation district without the
submission and approval of design plans and the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness by the director of planning and development or his or her
designee. All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness shall
conform to any requirements included herein. It shall be the duty of the
planning and development and code compliance department to assure compliance.
If work is performed that is not in accordance with the certificate of
appropriateness and verification by the building official, the building
official shall issue a stop-work order and all work shall immediately cease. No
further work shall be undertaken on a project while a stop-work order is in
effect. Properties located in a conservation district that are designated “HC”
historic and cultural landmark or “HSE” highly significant endangered shall
comply with the most restrictive regulation.
   (j)   Appeal; penalties.
      (1)   Any owner dissatisfied with the decision of the director planning
and development or his or her designee to deny a certificate of appropriateness
shall have the right to appeal the decision to the board of adjustment. The
request for appeal must be made within ten calendar days after receipt of
notification of such action, by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
secretary and the planning and development department. The board of adjustment
may authorize a variance from the design standards of a conservation district
if it is determined that the variance will not be contrary to the public
interest (refer to Review Procedures, §
3.400 Variances). The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such
appeal within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon
thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be
fined not more than $2,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to other
enforcement procedures or penalties, which are available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 18900, eff. 11-10-2009; Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-
2012)
§ 4.401 HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE - HISTORIC OVERLAYS.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. As a matter of public policy, the identification,
protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks or districts of
historical, cultural, architectural, or archeological significance are
necessary to safeguard and promote the economic, cultural, educational, and
general welfare of the public. It is recognized that Fort Worth represents the
unique confluence of time and place that has shaped the identity of generations
of citizens, collectively and individually, and has produced significant
historical, cultural, architectural, and archeological resources that exist as
the visual and tangible evidence of cultural identity. This §
4.401 may be referred to as the Historic Preservation Ordinance. The provisions
of the Historic Preservation Ordinance are intended to:
      (1)   Encourage the identification, documentation, evaluation, and
recording of resources that may have significance and integrity that reflect
the cultural heritage of Fort Worth;
      (2)   Protect, preserve, and perpetuate the cultural heritage of Fort
Worth, including its landmarks and districts of historical, cultural,
architectural, or archeological importance;
      (3)   Facilitate education and awareness opportunities for the benefit of
elected officials, appointed bodies, city departments, and the public at large
regarding the cultural heritage of Fort Worth and the benefits of utilizing
historic preservation to achieve the goals and vision of Fort Worth;
      (4)   Foster civic pride by recognizing accomplishments of the past;
      (5)   Promote the cultural heritage of Fort Worth, celebrate the economic
prosperity and welfare of the community through the preservation of Fort
Worth's cultural heritage, and recognize the support and stimulus to the
economy provided by residents and visitors alike; and
      (6)   Safeguard the significance of Fort Worth's cultural heritage by
ensuring managed change that is appropriate to its historic context.
   (b)   City historic preservation officer.
      (1)   Appointment. The City of Fort Worth, through a departmental
director designated by the city manager, must appoint a historic preservation
officer ("HPO"), who has expertise in archaeology, history, architecture,
historic architecture, historic preservation, or a closely-related field and
meets the relevant Secretary of the Interior's Professional Qualifications
Standards.
      (2)   Powers, duties, and responsibilities. The HPO has the following
powers, duties, and responsibilities:
         a.   Administer the city's Certified Local Government Program in
cooperation with the National Park Service and the Texas Historical Commission
and coordinate the city's historic preservation activities with those of state
and federal agencies;
         b.   Act as staff liaison to the historic and cultural landmarks
commission ("HCLC") and advise city departments, commissions, and city council
on matters relating to the city's cultural heritage;
         c.   Manage and maintain the historic resource survey in consultation
with the HCLC and in accordance with this Historic Preservation Ordinance;
         d.   Administer the city's historic site tax exemption program;
         e.   Except as specifically set forth otherwise in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance, review all applications required under this Historic
Preservation Ordinance for completeness and appropriateness;
         f.   Coordinate with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation
organizations and advise property owners, architects, designers, realtors,
contractors, and other decision-makers on matters relating to the city's
cultural heritage; and
         g.   Exercise such other and further powers as may be conferred on the
HPO by this Historic Preservation Ordinance or any other city codes and
ordinance.
   (c)   Identification and designation of cultural resources.
      (1)   Establishment of historic overlay categories. There are three
categories of protection for historically, culturally, architecturally, or
archeologically significant properties in Fort Worth, as follows:
         a.   Highly significant endangered ("HSE");
         b.   Historic and cultural landmark, if an individual structure or
site ("HC"), or historic and cultural landmarks district, if more than one
structure or site ("HC District"); and
         c.   Demolition delay ("DD").
      (2)   Criteria for designation. The following criteria, as well as the
criteria applied to evaluate districts for inclusion in the National Register
of Historic Places, must be used to establish the significance and integrity of
property or neighborhoods and their features and to evaluate the eligibility of
a property as a historic property or HC District:
         a.   Significance.
            1.   Is distinctive in character, interest, or value and
exemplifies the cultural, economic, social, ethnic, or historical heritage of
the City of Fort Worth, State of Texas, or the United States.
            2.   Is an important example of a particular architectural type or
specimen or embodies elements of architectural design, detail, material, or
craftsmanship that represent a significant architectural innovation in Fort
Worth.
            3.   Has been identified as the work of an important architect or
master builder whose individual work has contributed to the development of Fort
Worth.
            4.   Has been identified with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the City of Fort Worth, State of
Texas, or the United States.
            5.   Bears a significant relationship to other distinctive
buildings, structures, sites, objects, or areas, either as an important
collection of properties of architectural style or craftsmanship with few
intrusions, or by contributing to the overall character of the area according
to a plan based on architectural, historic, or cultural motif.
            6.   Possesses significant archeological value, which has produced
or is likely to produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric
interest.
            7.   Is the site of a significant historic event.
            8.   Is designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, State
Archeological Landmark, or an American Civil Engineering Landmark or is listed
on the National Register of Historic Places.
         b.   Integrity. A property's ability to convey its significance,
taking into consideration the following seven factors: location, design,
setting, material, workmanship, feeling, and association, as set forth in
National Register of Historic Places' Seven Aspects of Integrity.
      (3)   Eligibility for designation.
         a.   Eligibility for HSE designation. An individual property may be
designated HSE if it meets the following qualifications:
            1.   Three or more of the criteria for significance;
            2.   The necessary criteria for assessing integrity; and
            3.   Threatened by deterioration, damage or irretrievable,
irreplaceable loss due to neglect, disuse, disrepair, instability, lack of
financial resources, development pressures, or demolition.
         b.   Eligibility for HC and HC District designations.
            1.   Individual property. An individual property may be designated
as HC if it meets the following qualifications:
               i.   Two or more of the criteria for significance; and
               ii.   The necessary criteria for assessing integrity.
            2.   District.
               i.   An area, which includes two or more properties that
possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings,
sites, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or
physical development, may be designated as a HC District if it meets the
following qualifications:
                  A.    Three or more of the criteria for significance; and
                  B.    The necessary criteria for assessing integrity; and
                  C.    Where a proposed HC District is composed of a single
geographic area of contiguous properties, then at least 51% or more of the
historic properties in the district must be contributing; or
                  D.    Where a proposed HC District is composed of two or more
definable significant areas separated by nonsignificant areas, then the
historic properties must be spatially discrete.
               ii.   An existing HC District may be amended or otherwise
altered to include additional properties or settings provided that such
properties and settings (1) meet the criteria for HC District designation and
(2) have a similar historic context and character that reasonably relates to
the existing HC District, either by architectural, historical, or cultural
motif.
         c.   Eligibility for DD designation. A property may be designated DD
if it meets the following qualifications:
            1.   One or more of the criteria for significance; and
            2.   The necessary criteria for assessing integrity.
      (4)   Criteria and special considerations for removal or change of
historic designation.
         a.   Criteria.
            1.   Subject to any special considerations, the HSE, HC, HC
District (either in whole or in part), or DD designation may be removed for the
following reasons:
               i.   The individual property or HC District, either in whole or
in part, no longer conforms to the criteria for significance and integrity
under this Historic Preservation Ordinance; or
               ii.   Such designation creates an unreasonable economic hardship
in accordance with the provisions of this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
            2.   The DD designation may be removed if it no longer conforms to
the criteria for significance and integrity or changed to HC or HSE if it
satisfies the applicable criteria for significance and integrity. The DD
designation must be removed if the property is demolished in accordance with
this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
            3.   Any historic property designated as HC may be changed to HSE
if the property meets the designation criteria for HSE, even if the property is
part of a HC District.
         b.   Burden of proof. The party seeking removal of a designation has
the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the subject
property no longer satisfies the criteria for designation.
         c.   Special considerations.
            1.   HC District designation removal. The HC District designation
may be removed only from a district as a whole and not from individual sites or
structures located within a HC District, except when the boundary of an
existing HC District has been reduced in accordance with this Historic
Preservation Ordinance and then, removal of such designation will only apply to
those properties that have been excluded from the reduced boundary.
            2.   HSE designation removal. The party seeking removal of a HSE
designation on the basis that such property is no longer endangered must
simultaneously nominate such property for designation as HC. The requests for
removal of the HSE designation and designation of such property as HC must be
considered and decided concurrently; provided, however, the city council is not
required to designate such historic property as HC upon removal of a HSE
designation.
            3.   DD change to HC District. If a historic property designated as
DD is subsequently nominated as, or becomes, part of a HC District, then such
property will be subject to all applicable interim controls and elevated to HC
District designation upon approval by the city council.
            4.   HSE in HC District. Any historic property designated as HSE
will retain such HSE designation if it is subsequently nominated as, or
becomes, part of a HC District, except as otherwise set forth in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance. Any historic property designated as HSE within a HC
District must comply with the standards and guidelines applicable to the HC
District within which it is located.
      (5)   Procedures for designation and designation removal.
         a.   Step 1: nomination for designation and designation removal.
            1.   City council.
               i.   The city council may nominate an individual property or HC
District for historic designation or designation removal by adopting a
resolution to nominate such and directing the HPO to submit the same to the
HCLC for consideration. Nominations by the city council will not require the
submission of an application for designation; however, the HCLC may not
consider a nomination until such time as the HPO acquires the information
necessary to report on the eligibility and criteria applicable to the
nomination.
               ii.   The nomination of an individual property or HC District
for historic designation or designation removal by the city council will be
deemed to have been nominated on the effective date of the adopted resolution.
            2.   HCLC. The HCLC may initiate the nomination process for
historic designation or designation removal of an individual property or HC
District by adopting a resolution directing the HPO to submit a complete
application for designation or designation removal to the HCLC for
consideration. The HCLC may not consider such application until its next
regularly or special-called meeting.
            3.   City manager. The Fort Worth city manager or that person's
authorized designee may initiate the nomination process for historic
designation or designation removal of an individual property or HC District by
directing the HPO to prepare and submit a complete application for designation
to the HCLC for consideration.
            4.   Property owners.  Property owner(s) of an individual property
or a property within a proposed HC District may initiate the nomination process
for historic designation or designation removal by submitting a completed and
signed application to the HPO.
            5.   i.    Application. The application for historic designation
and designation removal will be promulgated by the HPO; provided; however, that
the application must, at a minimum, require a detailed summary explaining how
the subject property or HC District meets the criteria necessary for historic
designation or designation removal, as applicable.
               ii.   HC District. In addition to the application requirements
set forth above, an application for HC District designation, including any
related historic district expansion, or designation removal, including any
district reduction, must contain the following:
                  A.    A windshield survey that consists of a completed survey
form and photograph of every property, their settings, streetscapes, and unique
characteristics of the HC District.
                  B.    Draft standards and guidelines or a copy of the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
for a proposed HC District. HC District design standards and guidelines must,
at a minimum, meet the requirements of the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
                  C.    A list of contributing and non-contributing resources
for the HC District.
                  D.    Research that establishes the significance of the
property in the proposed HC District, which includes a statement of
significance.
                  E.    Signatures of property owners in support of the
application who collectively own:
                     (i)   Fifty percent or more of the land and the individual
tracts, parcels, or platted lots located within the following boundaries:
                        (A)   For HC District designation removal, the existing
HC District;
                        (B)   For HC District designation, the proposed HC
District; or
                        (C)   For HC District expansion, both the proposed
expanded HC District and existing HC District.
                     (ii)   Two or more platted lots developed together will be
counted as one lot.
                     (iii)   Each vacant platted lot of sufficient size to be
developed under the current zoning designation for the property will be counted
as one lot.
            6.   Effective date of nomination. An individual property or HC
District for which an application for historic designation or designation
removal has been submitted by the HCLC, city manager, or property owner(s) will
be deemed to have been nominated for such on the date that the HPO determines
an application for designation or designation removal, as applicable, to be
complete.
         b.   Step 2: notice of nomination for designation or designation
removal and interim controls.
            1.   Notice of nomination for designation or designation removal.
               i.    Upon being nominated, the HPO must mail a notice of
nomination for historic designation or designation removal, as applicable, to
all affected property owner(s) at least ten calendar days before the scheduled
HCLC hearing.
               ii.   For individually- nominated properties, the affected
property owner is the owner or owners of the property that is the subject of
the application.
               iii.   For nominations of HC District designation or designation
removal, the affected property owners are each individual property owner within
the HC District; provided, however, that HC District expansion nominations must
also include each individual property owner within the proposed expansion area.
               iv.   The most recently approved county tax roll showing the
name and address of the owner(s) must be used for notice purposes.
            2.   Interim controls. The city council finds that immediate,
temporary controls are necessary to protect properties for which a notice of
nomination for historic designation as a historic property has been mailed.
Therefore, any property for which a notice of nomination as such has been
mailed will be subject to the Certificate of Appropriateness ("COA")
requirements contained in this Historic Preservation Ordinance, effective
beginning on the date that the HPO mails a notice of nomination and expiring
180 days thereafter or until the proposed historic designation is denied,
whichever is sooner. In the event that the proposed historic designation is
approved, the property will be subject to all COA requirements applicable to
such historic designation. Permits issued by the city prior to the effective
date of the interim controls will not be subject to interim controls or the COA
requirements. Interim controls do not apply to historic designation removals.
            3.   Relief from interim controls.
               i.   It is the intent of the city council to preserve historic
property whenever possible, in recognition of the fact that historic properties
have been needlessly demolished, resulting in vacant lots.
               ii.   The owner(s) of the property for which the interim
controls apply may seek relief from the interim controls by doing the
following:
                  A.    Requesting a COA in accordance with this Historic
Preservation Ordinance; or
                  B.    Filing a written request with the HPO within ten
calendar days after receipt of the notice of nomination, detailing any unusual
and compelling circumstances justifying such relief.
                     (i)   HCLC hearing. The HCLC must conduct a hearing on the
matter within 15 calendar days after the request for relief is filed. The HCLC
may consider factors such as the existence of a written, bona fide sales
contract for the property; plans for relocation or demolition of the property;
plans for development of the property; the effect of the interim controls on
such plans; and other unusual and compelling circumstances justifying relief
from the interim controls.
                     (ii)   HCLC decision.  In the event that the HCLC finds
unusual and compelling circumstances justifying relief from the interim
controls, then the HCLC may, for properties nominated by application, approve
the request and order any of the following:
                        (A)   Expedite review of the nomination;
                        (B)   Reduce the term of the interim controls;
                        (C)   Release the owner from such controls; or
                        (D)   Take such other action as the HCLC deems to be
appropriate.
                     (iii)   City council. For property that is nominated by
the city council, any approval and order of the HCLC will be a recommendation
for consideration by the city council.
         c.   Step 3: consideration by the HCLC.
            1.   The HPO must schedule a hearing before the HCLC for
consideration of the historic designation or designation removal within 45
calendar days after the effective date of a nomination, or as soon thereafter
as is reasonably practicable.
            2.   After conducting a hearing on the matter, the HCLC must
recommend approval or denial to the city council or continue the designation or
designation removal to a certain date.
         d.   Step 4: consideration by the zoning commission.
            1.   The matter must be submitted to the zoning commission for its
review and recommendation within 45 calendar days after the HCLC makes it
recommendation, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
            2.   The zoning commission must give notice and conduct its public
hearing on the matter in accordance Chapter 3 of the city's Zoning Ordinance.
         e.   Step 5: city council hearing and action.
            1.   After both the HCLC and Zoning Commission make their
recommendations, the matter must be submitted to the city council for its
review and consideration.
            2.   The city council must give notice and conduct a hearing on the
matter in accordance with Chapter 3 of the city's Zoning Ordinance.
         f.   Step 6: post designation and designation removal requirements.
            1.   Recording of designations on zoning map. Upon designation as a
historic property, the city's zoning administrator will cause the appropriate
designation to be recorded on the official zoning maps of the City of Fort
Worth. All zoning maps must indicate the appropriate overlay abbreviation and
the marks indicating the primary underlying zoning district classification. HC
District may be recorded as either HC District or HC.
            2.   Filing of designations in property records. Property owners
that file an application for designation must record the applicable designation
in the official property records of the county in which the property is located
within ten calendar days of designation by the city council and provide proof
of such filing to the HPO. Proof of recordation by the property owner must be
provided to the HPO prior to the receipt of any subsequent historic site tax
exemption from the City of Fort Worth. For city-initiated designations, the
zoning administrator is responsible for filing such designation in the official
property records of the county in which the property is located.
            3.    Post-designation removal requirements. Within ten business
days after the city council approves the removal of the applicable historic
designation, the zoning administrator must remove such historic designation
from the official zoning maps of the City of Fort Worth and record such
designation removal in the official property records of the county in which
such property is located.
      (6)   Relationship to base zoning districts.
         a.   Except as otherwise set forth in the city's Zoning Ordinance,
designation of a property by the city council as HSE, HC, HC District, or DD is
a zoning overlay to the primary zoning district classification. The permitted
uses of the property will be determined and controlled by the use regulations
set forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property.
         b.   Historic properties, including those in a HC District, are
subject to the regulations of the base zoning district classification. However,
where the adopted design standards and guidelines of a HC District or the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,
whichever is more restrictive, require a more historically appropriate yard
setback, building height, lot dimension, or site configuration than the base
zoning district allows, then the design standard and guidelines or the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,
as appropriate, will prevail. However, in no instance will this relieve the
requirement for a variance from the board of adjustment in compliance with the
provisions set out in this or any other city ordinance.
         c.   For all instances where this Historic Preservation Ordinance will
be applied, the prevailing precedence will be as follows:
            1.   Chapter 4, Article 4 of the city's Zoning Ordinance for all
matters of process, procedure, and regulation.
            2.   The adopted standards and guidelines for a HC District and
Secretary of the Interior's Standard for the Treatment of Historic Properties
for all matters of rehabilitation, restoration, or preservation.
            3.   All other City of Fort Worth ordinances, regulations, or
policies as they may apply to any action described within this Historic
Preservation Ordinance.
         d.   In no instance will the provisions of this Historic Preservation
Ordinance be construed to exempt any issue of life safety or to provide relief
from the provisions of the adopted building code without the written consent of
the chief building official.
         e.   If there is any conflict between the adopted design standards and
guidelines and any provision of this Historic Preservation Ordinance, the most
restrictive will apply.
         f.   If there is any conflict between the provisions of this Historic
Preservation Ordinance and any other provision of the city's Zoning Ordinance,
the most restrictive regulation will apply in the absence of a specific
directive to the contrary.
         g.   The board of adjustment does not have jurisdiction to grant a
variance from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties or any design standards and guidelines applicable to
historic properties that have been adopted by the city council.
      (7)   Design standards and guidelines. The following are the procedures
for creating, amending, or updating design standards and guidelines and lists
of contributing historic properties.
         a.   Creating or amending design standards and guidelines.
            1.   Property owners that submit an application to nominate a
property as HSE, HC, or HC District, must submit, with the application, a set
of proposed design standards and guidelines following the principles set forth
in the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties. The standards and guidelines must be prepared by the applicant with
the assistance of the HPO. The applicable design standards and guidelines must
be adopted concurrently with the designation of the property.
            2.   The HPO must review design standards and guidelines on a
periodic basis to determine if updates or amendments are necessary.
            3.   Any amendments or updates to an individual property or HC
District's design standards and guidelines, or the creation thereof if none
were adopted at the time of historic designation, must, at a minimum, meet the
requirements of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for The Treatment of
Historic Properties.
         b.   Process for creating and amending standards and guidelines.
            1.   Step 1: request to create or amend standards and guidelines.
               i.   City council or HCLC. The city council or HCLC may request
amendments to any adopted design standards and guidelines, or the creation of
standards and guidelines if none were adopted at the time of historic
designation, by adopting a resolution directing the HPO to submit
recommendations to the HCLC for consideration.
               ii.    HPO. The HPO may initiate the process for amending any
adopted design standards and guidelines, or creating standards and guidelines
if none were adopted at the time of historic designation.
               iii.   City manager. The city manager or that person's
authorized designee may request amendments to any adopted design standards and
guidelines, or the creation of standards and guidelines if none were adopted at
the time of historic designation, by directing the HPO to initiate the process
for such.
               iv.    Property owners. The property owner(s) of a historic
property or those within a HC District may request amendments to their adopted
design standards and guidelines, or the creation thereof if none were adopted
at the time of designation, by submitting a petition in support of the request
to the HPO. For HC Districts, the petition must be signed by property owners
that own 50% or more of the land and the individual tracts, parcels, or platted
lots located in the HC District.
            2.   Step 2: notice and community outreach.
               i.   The HPO must notify the affected property owners that the
design standards and guidelines are under review for amendments or that the
creation of design standards and guidelines is being considered if none were
adopted at the time of historic designation. For purposes of this process, the
affected property owners will be the same as those set forth in the notice of
nomination for historic designation section of this Historic Preservation
Ordinance.
               ii.   The HPO must meet with property owners in the affected HC
District to discuss the proposed design standards and guidelines prior to
scheduling a review by the HCLC.
            3.   Step 3: consideration by the HCLC.
               i.    Once the HPO has sent notice and conducted community
outreach, and the proposed design standards and guidelines have been prepared,
the HPO must schedule a hearing before the HCLC for consideration and send
notice of such hearing to all affected property owners.
               ii.    After conducting a hearing on the request to amend or
create design standards and guidelines, the HCLC must recommend approval, with
or without revisions, or denial to the city council or continue the request to
a certain date.
            4.   Step 4: consideration by the zoning commission.
               i.    After the HCLC makes its recommendation on the request to
amend or create design standards and guidelines, the request must be submitted
to the zoning commission for its review and recommendation.
               ii.   The zoning commission must give notice and conduct its
public hearing on the request in accordance with Chapter 3 of the city's Zoning
Ordinance.
            5.   Step 5: city council hearing and action.
               i.    After the HCLC and the zoning commission make their
respective recommendations on the request to amend or create design standards
and guidelines, then the request must be submitted to the Fort Worth city
council for its review and consideration.
               ii.   The Fort Worth city council must give notice and conduct a
hearing on the request in accordance with Chapter 3 of the city's Zoning
Ordinance.
         c.   Adopted standards and guidelines. The adopted standards and
guidelines must be used by the city staff in implementing the intent and
purpose of this Historic Preservation Ordinance. Invalidation of any portion of
the design standards and guidelines will not affect the validity of any other
provisions. Any then existing design standards and guidelines will remain in
effect until the city council approves any amendments or revisions to the same.
      (8)   Creating or amending a contributing historic properties list. The
list of contributing historic properties for a HC District may be created or
amended, as needed, in accordance with the criteria and procedures set forth
herein.
         a.   Creating or amending a contributing historic properties list.
            1.   Property owners that submit an application to nominate
properties as HC District, must submit a list of contributing and non-
contributing historic properties within the proposed HC District with the
application. The list must be prepared by the applicant with the assistance of
the HPO. The owners of properties nominated for designation as HC District by
the HCLC, City council, or city manager will cooperate with the HPO in the
preparation of said list. When submitted with an application for historic
designation, the list of contributing and non-contributing historic properties
should be adopted concurrently with the designation of the HC District. In the
event that the list is not adopted at the same time as the designation of the
HC District, the procedure below for creating a new contributing and non-
contributing historic properties list will apply.
            2.   The HPO will review the lists of contributing and non-
contributing historic properties for each HC District on a periodic basis to
determine if updates or amendments are necessary.
         b.   Initiation of the process.
            1.   City council or HCLC. The city council or HCLC may adopt a
resolution directing the HPO to conduct an evaluation of the contributing
status of historic properties within an existing HC District.
            2.   HPO. The HPO may initiate the process for, and conduct the
evaluation of, the contributing status of historic properties within an
existing HC District.
            3.   Property owners. A property owner may submit an application a
written request and designation application to the HPO requesting an evaluation
of the contributing status of a property. The HPO must evaluate the application
in relation to the contributing status of the owner's historic property within
an existing HC District. Should the application be deemed incomplete, the HPO
may request additional information of the applicant in order to determine the
contributing status of the historic property.
         c.   Consideration by the HPO.
            1.   The HPO must perform an evaluation and make a determination of
the contributing status of the subject historic property once the HPO has
deemed an application to be complete.
            2.   Once the HPO makes a determination of the contributing status
of a historic property, then the HPO must provide notice of its determination
to the property owner(s) and the requesting party within 30 calendar days, or a
reasonable time thereafter.
            3.   Should the HPO find that the subject property meets the
definition of a contributing or non-contributing historic property, then the
HPO will have authority to amend the status, unless the prior status of the
historic property was approved by city council in which case the city council
will have such authority.
            4.   A property owner may appeal the HPO's determination to the
HCLC pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Historic Preservation
Ordinance under §
4.401(g) below.
   (d)   Certificates of appropriateness (changes to historic properties).
      (1)   Review required.
         a.   HC and HSE. Except as may otherwise be permitted in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance, any historic property designated or pending designation
as HC or HSE requires the submission of an application for a COA, review for
appropriateness, and issuance of a COA in accordance with the provisions of
this Historic Preservation Ordinance prior to the commencement of any exterior
work on such historic property, including, but not limited to, construction,
alteration, demolition, relocation, and repair.
         b.   DD. Except as may otherwise be permitted in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance, any historic property designated or pending designation
as DD requires the submission of an application for a COA, review for
appropriateness, and issuance of a COA only for demolition or relocation in
accordance with the provision of this Historic Preservation Ordinance prior to
the commencement of any such demolition or relocation work.
         c.   Emergency securing of property. The city department charged with
emergency securing of property, in cooperation with the HPO, may perform
emergency measures to secure any historic property that is in imminent danger
of collapse and a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare without the
necessity of a COA application, review for appropriateness, or COA; provided,
however, that the HPO must receive written notice of such emergency securing
measures and the date and time that the same will occur. The city will use its
best efforts to minimize damage to the historical and architectural elements of
the historic property.
      (2)   Level of review. Once the HPO deems an application for a COA to be
complete, the HPO will determine whether the application will be evaluated for
appropriateness by the HPO or the HCLC as set forth in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance.
         a.   HPO review. Except where such jurisdiction conflicts with the
powers and duties conferred upon the HCLC pursuant to this Historic
Preservation Ordinance or Appendix A, §
2.103 of the city code, the HPO has original jurisdiction to evaluate
applications for appropriateness and issue COAs; provided, however, the HPO may
refer any application, or any portion thereof, to the HCLC for review and
consideration.
         b.   HCLC review. The HCLC has original jurisdiction to evaluate
applications for appropriateness, or any portion thereof, and issue COAs for
the following:
            1.   New construction of a primary structure;
            2.   All waivers from applicable design standards and guidelines;
            3.   Demolition and relocation of individually designated historic
properties and contributing historic properties in HC Districts, except those
for emergency demolitions;
            4.   Requests for determination of whether individually designated
historic properties and contributing historic properties in HC Districts can be
reasonably rehabilitated pursuant to the city's Minimum Building Standards
Code, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 7, Article 4, §
7-109 of the city code;
            5.   Historic properties owned by a governmental entity, including,
without limitation, the City of Fort Worth, Independent School Districts, and
Counties; and
            6.   Referrals from the HPO.
      (3)   Criteria for evaluation of an application for appropriateness.
         a.   1.   Criteria for evaluation of work other than demolition or
relocation. In determining the appropriateness of a COA application, the
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
must be applied in conjunction with any applicable city codes and design
standards and guidelines adopted by the city council.
            2.   Waivers from design Standards and guidelines. An applicant has
the right to request a waiver from the applicable design standards and
guidelines if a COA has been denied for failure to meet the applicable
criteria, unless the requested item is specifically prohibited by such
standards and guidelines in which case a waiver will not be considered.
               i.    Burden of proof. To receive a waiver from the applicable
design standards and guidelines, the applicant must prove one of the following
by a preponderance of the evidence:
                  A.    That no reasonable opportunity exists to recover the
cost of the work that is required by the design standards and guidelines. In
determining whether to grant such a waiver, the HCLC should consider the
totality of the circumstances and weigh the following factors:
                     (i)   The cost to perform the work in compliance with the
applicable design standards and guidelines;
                     (ii)   The value of the property;
                     (iii)   The extent to which a waiver is necessary to allow
the owner a reasonable opportunity to recover the cost of the work;
                     (iv)   Whether granting the waiver will harm an existing
or proposed historic designation;
                     (v)   Whether the applicant has applied for any tax
incentives from the city, including, without limitation, the historic site tax
exemption; and
                     (vi)   Whether the proposed work is in harmony with the
spirit and purpose of this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
                  B.    (i)   That no reasonable opportunity exists to
technically execute the work that is required by the applicable design
standards and guidelines.
                     (ii)   In determining whether there is a reasonable
opportunity to technically execute the work, the HCLC should evaluate the
feasibility of physically performing the rehabilitation work on the property.
               ii.    Alternatives. The HCLC and the HPO, in consultation with
the property owner, must explore alternatives to the proposed work that will
preserve the historic property to the greatest extent feasible.
         b.   Criteria for evaluation of demolition and relocation.
            1.   Demolition or relocation request by an applicant other than
the City of Fort Worth.
               i.   HSE and HC Designations.
                  A.    Demolition. Where an applicant requests a COA for
demolition of a historic property, then the HCLC or HPO, as appropriate, may
approve such COA if it finds that the applicant has established at least one of
the following by a preponderance of the evidence:
                     (i)   Loss of Significance. The applicant must prove that
the subject historic property has lost its historical significance, as evidence
by the following:
                        (A)   The property has undergone significant and
irreversible changes or new information reveals that the property is no longer
eligible for historic designation or contributing status;
                        (B)   Such significant and irreversible changes were
not caused either directly or indirectly by the owner, and were not due to
intentional or negligent destruction or a lack of maintenance rising to the
level of a demolition by neglect; and
                        (C)   Such irreversible changes are impractical and
unlikely to be reversed.
                     (ii)   Unreasonable economic hardship. The owner of the
historic property must prove an unreasonable economic hardship in accordance
with this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
                     (iii)   Non-contributing status. Because non-contributing
historic properties do not contribute to the historic, cultural, or
architectural significance of a HC District, the applicant must prove that the
subject property is located in a HC District and classified as non-contributing
and would not be eligible to be a contributing historic property if re-
evaluated by the HPO or HCLC.
                  B.    Relocation. In considering whether to approve or deny
an application for a COA for relocation of a historic property, the HCLC or
HPO, as appropriate, must consider the totality of the circumstances and weigh
the following considerations: alternatives, rarity, structural integrity,
nature of threat, streetscape integrity, setting of the existing and recipient
sites, and interim and long-term protection.
               ii.   DD designations. Where an applicant, other than the City
of Fort Worth, requests a COA for demolition or relocation of a historic
property designated or pending designation as DD, then the HCLC may not deny
approval of the COA. However, the HCLC may delay the issuance of a demolition
or relocation permit for up to 180 calendar days from the date of the HCLC's
original hearing on the application for a COA to allow the HCLC, local
preservation groups, and other interested parties to explore alternatives to
demolition or relocation.
                  A.    In determining the length of any delay for demolition,
the HCLC must consider the effectiveness of any proposed alternatives and
matters that may cause a hardship to the applicant, including, without
limitation, financial and development issues.
                  B.    In determining the length of any delay for relocation,
the HCLC must be guided by the relevant considerations applicable to
relocation.
                  C.    Should the HCLC fail to approve a specific delay period
by an affirmative vote, the maximum delay of 180 calendar days will be
required.
            2.   Demolition request by the City of Fort Worth.
               i.    Minimum building standards.
                  A.    Owners, or other persons or entities, having legal
custody and control of a historic property have an ongoing obligation to
maintain such historic property in accordance with the city's Minimum Building
Standards Code.
                  B.    In determining whether a historic property should be
demolished as a result of neglect, the city must follow the processes and
procedures set forth in the city's Minimum Buildings Standard Code, including,
but not limited to,
Chapter 7, Article 4, §
7-109 of the City Code concerning the preservation of historic properties.
               ii.    Emergency demolition. The HPO may approve a demolition
permit for an emergency demolition for a historic property if the city's
building code official or development inspection supervisor (or a similar
position within the city) determines that such historic property is in imminent
danger of collapse and a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare. Prior
to doing so, the city's building code official or development inspection
supervisor (or a similar position within the city) must inspect the property
and document, in writing, the findings and reasons requiring an emergency
demolition, a copy of which must be forwarded immediately to the HPO. Such
process will not require the submission of an application for a COA or review
for appropriateness.
      (4)   Review process.
         a.   Step 1: submission of an application for a COA.
            1.   An applicant must file an application for a COA with the HPO,
which will be in a form promulgated and approved by the HPO. Once the HPO
determines the application for appropriateness to be complete, the HPO will
determine the appropriate level of review. The application must, at the very
least, require the following items from all applicants:
               i.    Rationale for how the proposed change is compatible with
designation as HSE or HC;
               ii.    Rationale and evidence supporting loss of significance or
proof of unreasonable economic hardship, where applicable;
               iii.   A condition assessment of the historic property for
demolition requests;
               iv.    Rationale and evidence supporting the criteria for
relocation, including, without limitation, any contextual plans that show the
relationship between the existing historic property to be relocated and its
recipient site, which may include, without limitation, elevations and site and
building sections;
               v.    Signature of the applicant verifying that the application
is complete and correct; and
               vi.   Any other information that the HCLC or HPO may determine
to be reasonably necessary.
            2.   Demolition by way of minimum building standards.
               i.   To demolish a historic property, the city must follow the
processes and procedures set forth in the city's Minimum Buildings Standard
Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 7, Article 4, § 7-109 of the city
code concerning the preservation of historic properties.
               ii.   The HPO or HCLC may also file a written request with the
city department charged with enforcing the city's Minimum Building Standards
Code, requesting that the city pursue a case against a historic property.
         b.   Step 2a: review and action by the HPO.
            1.   In considering an application for a COA, the HPO must, after
taking into consideration the criteria for evaluating appropriateness, either
approve, deny, or refer the application to the HCLC within 30 calendar days
after determining that the application is complete, or as soon thereafter as is
reasonably practicable.
            2.   The HPO may approve the application for appropriateness with
or without conditions.
            3.   The HPO is not required to provide notice to the public of
applications for appropriateness for which the HPO has jurisdictional review
authority, unless the HPO refers such an application to the HCLC for review.
         c.   Step 2b: review and action by the HCLC.
            1.   Public hearing required.
               i.   All applications requiring review and a COA by the HCLC
must be considered by the HCLC at its next available public hearing after the
application has been determined to be complete by the HPO, or as soon
thereafter as is reasonably practicable.
               ii.   If an applicant is appealing a decision of the HPO, then
such review by the HCLC must be considered by the HCLC at its next available
public hearing after the Fort Worth city secretary and the HPO receive the
applicant's notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably
practicable.
            2.   Consultation meeting.  For COA applications involving
demolition or relocation where the city is not the applicant, the HPO will
coordinate a consultation meeting at the historic property that is the subject
of the demolition or relocation, or another location agreed upon by the meeting
attendees. The meeting must include the applicant, property owner(s), city
staff, and interested parties. The purpose of the meeting is to consult, in
good faith, in a diligent effort to seek alternatives to demolition or
relocation. This requirement is not considered a prerequisite to the demolition
or relocation of a particular historic property if the HPO has diligently
pursued such meeting to no avail.
            3.   Notice of public hearing.  The HPO must mail a notice of
public hearing to the property owner(s) located within 200 feet of the property
listed on the application for a COA at least ten calendar days prior to the
HCLC hearing for which it will appear.
            4.   Decision of the HCLC. The HCLC must conduct a public hearing
on the applicant's request for a COA, taking into consideration the applicable
criteria for evaluation.
               i.   For properties designated or pending designation as HSE or
HC, the HCLC must approve the case, with or without conditions, deny the case,
with or without prejudice, or continue the case to a date certain.
               ii.   For properties designated or pending designation as DD,
the HCLC must approve the COA, subject to any delay or conditions imposed.
         d.   Step 3. written decision for a COA. All decisions of the HPO and
the HCLC concerning a COA must be in writing and state the decision and any
findings necessary to support such decision. The HPO must mail a written copy
of any decision to the applicant within 30 calendar days after such decision
has been rendered.
      (5)   Conditions for issuance of a COA for demolition and relocation.
         a.   HSE and HC. As a condition for the issuance of a COA for
demolition or relocation of a historic property designated or pending
designation as HSE or HC, the HCLC or HPO, as appropriate, may require any of
the following:
            1.   Preparation of a salvage plan;
            2.    Documentation of the historic property;
               i.    Photographs of the historic property or features to be
demolished;
               ii.    Written documentation of the significance of the historic
property; and
               iii.    Documentation that the site has been rezoned, replatted,
variances granted, or that other development requirements have been met.
            3.   Scaled drawings of the floor plan and exterior elevations;
            4.   Scaled plan indicating the dimensions of the site and exact
location of each structure, property, and landscape feature on the site;
            5.   Preservation of trees, shrubs, and other landscaping of
substantial significance; and
            6.   Any other information that the HCLC or HPO, as appropriate,
may deem reasonably necessary to record the proposed demolition or relocation,
such as documentation in accordance with the Historic American Building Survey
or Historic American Engineering Record.
         b.   DD. Owners of historic property designated as DD who have
received a permit to demolish or relocate such property must document such
historic property in accordance with the Historic American Buildings Survey
Documentation Standards prior to the demolition or relocation. The owner must
coordinate with the HPO in documenting such property. Such owners must grant
access to the property to city staff during reasonable business hours to
facilitate such documentation.
      (6)   Additional requirements for demolitions and relocations.
         a.   Upon verification by the HPO that the approved demolition or
relocation has occurred, the HPO will prepare the following applications (where
applicable):
            1.   For demolitions, an application to remove the historic
designation from the property.
            2.   For relocations, an application to remove the historic
designation from the vacant lot and designate the new lot where the historic
structure has been moved, which designation must be equal to or better than the
existing designation on the historic property.
         b.   For relocations, a permit may not be issued for the development
of the vacated lot until the rehabilitation of the relocated historic structure
has occurred.
         c.   The owner of a relocated historic property must stabilize and
substantially rehabilitate the historic property within nine months from the
date of approval. If the owner fails to meet the nine-month term, then the HPO
may extend the deadline an additional six months. If a property owner fails to
meet the applicable deadline, the city may pursue any and all available
remedies, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the penalties
section of this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
      (7)   Effect of a denial for COA.
         a.   When an application for a COA has been denied with prejudice and
all appeals have been exhausted, or when an applicant has withdrawn an
application for appropriateness after such application has been scheduled for
hearing before the HCLC, no new application of like nature will be accepted by
the HPO or scheduled for a hearing before the HCLC for a period of 12 months
following the final date of denial or withdrawal, unless the application is
denied without prejudice. Any denial by the HCLC will constitute a denial with
prejudice unless the HCLC specifically states on the record that the denial is
without prejudice.
         b.   Exception. If an applicant submits an application for a COA for
the same Historic Property that sets forth substantially different changes to
that property than those changes that were denied with prejudice or withdrawn
in the original application, then the HPO may waive the mandatory delay period
and authorize the acceptance as a new application to be considered anew in
accordance with the process set forth in this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
      (8)   Expiration of a COA. If, within two years from the date of the
issuance of a COA, the historic property owner has not begun construction as
evidenced by issuance of a building permit or a written contractual obligation
to undertake a program of on-site construction, then such COA will expire. If
the work for which a COA is approved is not completed within 3 years from the
date that the COA is issued, then the COA will expire. The HCLC may grant
extensions to allow the applicant to complete the work if it finds by a
preponderance of the evidence unusual and compelling circumstances justifying
relief from the completion deadline.
      (9)   Other permits required. Any COA required by this Historic
Preservation Ordinance will be in addition to any other permits, variances, or
approvals required by local, state, or federal law, and must be obtained prior
to the approval of any building, demolition, relocation or other permit that is
required by any code or ordinance of the City of Fort Worth.
      (10)   Enforcement.
         a.   All work performed pursuant to any approvals granted in this
Historic Preservation Ordinance, including, but not limited to, a COA, must
conform to the requirements set forth in this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
         b.   The HPO must periodically inspect any such work to ensure
compliance. The building official must issue a stop-work order for any work
that is not in compliance with this Historic Preservation Ordinance and all
such work must immediately cease. No further work can be undertaken on a
project while a stop-work order is in effect, except at the discretion of the
HPO where work is deemed to not require a COA or other review as provided by
this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
         c.   Within ten business days after receiving a stop-work order, a
property owner must submit an application for all necessary approvals. Where a
property owner fails to submit such application within the required time
period, the City may pursue any and all available remedies, including, but not
limited to, those set forth in the penalties section of this Historic
Preservation Ordinance.
   (e)   Unreasonable economic hardship.
      (1)   Declaration of unreasonable economic hardship. The HCLC may declare
that an unreasonable economic hardship exists as a basis for:
         a.   Recommending removal of a designation for historic property; or
         b.   Issuing a COA approving the demolition of historic property
designated or pending designation as HSE or HC.
      (2)   Burden of proof. When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is
asserted, the historic property owner must prove the following by a
preponderance of evidence:
         a.   The historic property is incapable of earning a reasonable rate
of return in its current or rehabilitated state, regardless of whether that
return represents the most profitable return possible, unless the HSE, HC, or
DD designation, as applicable, is removed or the proposed demolition is
allowed;
         b.   The historic property cannot be reasonably adapted for any other
feasible use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would
result in a reasonable rate of return; and
         c.   The historic property owner has demonstrated reasonable, good
faith efforts to find a purchaser or tenant interested in acquiring or leasing
the historic property.
      (3)   Proof of hardship.
         a.   The information to be considered as evidence of an unreasonable
economic hardship must include, at a minimum, the following items, all of which
must be submitted to the HPO as part of an application asserting an
unreasonable economic hardship.
            1.   For all structures and property:
               i.   The original purchase price of the structures and property;
               ii.   The name and legal status (e.g., partnership, corporation)
of the owner(s);
               iii.   For proposed demolitions, a signed building assessment
report from a licensed engineer or contractor, with experience in
rehabilitation, as to the structural soundness of any structures on the
historic property and their suitability for rehabilitation and including a cost
estimate for repairs;
               iv.   A cost estimate for demolition;
               v.   The past and current use of the historic property;
               vi.   The assessed value of the historic property according to
the two most recent tax assessments;
               vii.   The amount of real estate taxes on the property for the
previous two years;
               viii.   The date of purchase or other acquisition of the
historic property;
               ix.    Principal balance and interest rate on the current
mortgage and the annual debt service on the historic property, if any, for the
previous two years;
               x.   All appraisals obtained by the owner or applicant within
the previous two years in connection with the owner's purchase, financing or
ownership of the historic property;
               xi.   Any listing of the historic property for sale or rent,
asking price, and offers received;
               xii.   Any consideration given by the owner to profitable
adaptive uses for the historic property;
               xiii.   Any replacement construction plans for proposed
improvements on the historic property;
               xiv.    Financial proof of the owner's ability to complete any
replacement project on the historic property, which may include, without
limitation, a performance bond, a letter of credit, a trust for completion of
improvements, or a letter of commitment from a financial institution; and
               xv.    Proof that the owner's affirmative obligations to
maintain the historic property make it impossible for the owner to realize a
reasonable rate of return on the historic property.
            2.   Additional requirements for an income producing historic
property:
               i.    Annual gross income from the property from the previous
two years;
               ii.    Itemized operating and maintenance expenses from the
previous two years; and
               iii.    Annual cash flow, if any, from the previous two years.
            3.   The HCLC or HPO may require that an applicant furnish
additional information relevant to a determination of unreasonable economic
hardship.
         b.   Claims of unreasonable economic hardship by the historic property
owner must not be based on conditions resulting from the following:
            1.   Evidence of demolition by neglect or other willful and
negligent acts by the owner;
            2.   Purchasing the property for substantially more than market
value at the time of purchase;
            3.   Failure to take into account historic properties in the
planning and design stage of development or proposed development;
            4.   Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs;
            5.   Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; or
            6.   Failure to provide normal tenant improvements.
      (4)   Unreasonable economic hardship for HC Districts.
         a.   Where an individual historic property in a HC District is
demolished pursuant to a COA issued as a result of an unreasonable economic
hardship, then the historic property that was the subject of the COA for
demolition must retain its designation as a historic property within the HC
District and will be subject to all requirements for historically designated
property that are set forth in this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
         b.   HC District designation can only be removed from the entire HC
District in accordance with the process for removal of historic designations
set forth in this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
   (f)    Historic site tax exemption.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to set out the
parameters that encourage the appropriate treatment of historic properties
through the use of tax exemptions. With the exception of historic site tax
exemptions of the entire assessed value of a particular structure, the intent
of the historic site tax exemption is and has always been for the property
receiving the tax exemption to be in the same position vis-à-vis City of Fort
Worth taxes for the entire term of the exemption, assuming that market values
are generally increasing.
      (2)   Authority. The tax exemption described in this section is adopted
pursuant to the authority provided in Article 8, Section 1-f of the Texas
Constitution and Tex. Tax Code § 11.24. In accordance with Tex. Tax Code §
11.24, a structure that is individually designated as HSE or HC or located in a
HC District, and the land necessary for access to and use of the structure, is
deemed to be a historically significant site in need of tax relief to encourage
its preservation.
      (3)   Pre-existing historic site tax exemptions.
         a.   Any application for a historic site tax exemption submitted on or
after May 1, 2018 will be governed by the provisions of this §
4.401(f) of the Historic Preservation Ordinance. An application for a historic
site tax exemption that was submitted prior to May 1, 2018 will receive
consideration under the ordinance then in effect; provided, however, that any
application for a historic site tax exemption that was received by the HPO on
or before December 31, 2015, and that does not receive approval and
verification of a tax exemption that commences on January 1, 2019, will
automatically expire without further notice to the applicant.
         b.   A historic site tax exemption lawfully granted by the city
council prior to May 1, 2018 under the ordinance then in effect remains valid
until expiration or termination.
      (4)   Eligibility.
         a.    Subject to the provisions of this §
4.401(f), a structure that is individually designated as HSE or HC or a
contributing historic structure located in a HC District, and the land
necessary for access to and use of the structure, that is substantially treated
in accordance with this Historic Preservation Ordinance will be eligible to
receive a historic site tax exemption. For purposes of this §
4.401(f), any use of the term "Structure and Land" is intended to refer to the
eligible structures (which includes improvements) and land set forth
immediately above.
         b.   An application for a historic site tax exemption must be received
and approved by the HPO prior to the commencement of treatment to be eligible
to receive the historic site tax exemption. Failure to meet this requirement
will bar eligibility for a historic site tax exemption.
         c.   The Structure and Land will be eligible to receive a historic
site tax exemption once every 20 years, provided that the requirements set
forth in this section have been met and the Structure and Land are not in
violation of the Zoning Ordinance, including this Historic Preservation
Ordinance. The 20 year period begins in the year that the corresponding
historic site tax exemption commences.
         d.   Eligible costs for substantially treating a structure includes
those costs incurred for, and that reasonably relate to, treatment.
            1.   Costs incurred for treatment of the following non-exclusive
list of items are deemed eligible costs:
               i.    Structural walls;
               ii.    Structural subfloors;
               iii.    Structural ceilings;
               iv.    Exterior doors;
               v.    Exterior paint;
               vi.    Windows;
               vii.    Exterior brick veneers or treatments;
               viii.   Roof and gutter where necessary for structural
integrity;
               ix.    Facade items;
               x.    Foundation;
               xi.    Termite damage and treatment;
               xii.    Mechanical, electrical wiring, and plumbing systems;
               xiii.    Architectural and engineering services if directly
related to the eligible costs described above;
               xiv.    Elevators; and
               xv.    Demolition and cleanup if directly related to the
eligible costs described above.
            2.   Costs incurred for treatment of the following non-exclusive
list of items are deemed ineligible costs:
               i.    Plumbing and electrical fixtures, except those fixtures
that are a documented replacement of historic fixtures;
               ii.    Security and fire protection systems;
               iii.    Overhead;
               iv.    Taxes;
               v.    Supervisor payroll;
               vi.    Repairs of construction equipment;
               vii.   New additions;
               viii.    Purchase or rental of tools and equipment; and
               ix.   Any other items not directly related to the exterior
appearance or the structural integrity or viability of the structure.
         e.   All work must be performed in accordance with the provisions of
this Historic Preservation Ordinance and all applicable federal, state, and
city laws, rules, and regulations.
         f.    The owner of the Structure and Land must ensure that the HPO is
permitted to investigate the same prior to commencing any treatment work to
assess eligibility for the historic site tax exemption.
         g.   The Structure and Land will not be eligible for a historic site
tax exemption nor will any property owner receive any form of refund for city
ad valorem taxes paid on the Structure or Land for any years prior to
verification and approval of a historic site tax exemption by the Fort Worth
City Council.
         h.   Multi-family residential facilities that are eligible for a
historic site tax exemption under § 32-41 of the City Code will not be eligible
to receive a tax exemption under this section of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance after May 1, 2018.
         i.   Properties receiving a tax abatement within a City of Fort Worth
Neighborhood Empowerment Zone are not eligible to apply for or receive a
historic site tax exemption until after expiration of the abatement.
         j.   1.   The property tax exemption provided under this Historic
Preservation Ordinance is intended to be of limited duration only and is not
intended to limit property values or tax assessments for a longer or permanent
duration such as those associated with an ad valorem tax limitation.
            2.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Historic
Preservation Ordinance, if an individual qualifies a property (i) to receive a
special valuation under Tex. Tax Code, Chapter 23, Subchapters B through H
except for a homestead special valuation under Tex. Tax Code § 23.23 or (ii) to
receive an ad valorem tax limitation, then the applicable historic site tax
exemption ends, effective on the date on which the special valuation or ad
valorem tax limitation becomes effective, such that the historic site tax
exemption will not be included in calculating any such tax limitation.
      (5)   Description of historic site tax exemption.
         a.   During the term of the historic site tax exemption, the Structure
and Land will receive an exemption in an amount equal to the difference between
the following:
            1.   The City of Fort Worth current-year taxable value after
application of any other applicable exemptions, including, without limitation,
the homestead exemption; and
            2.   The City of Fort Worth base-year taxable value after
application of any other applicable exemptions, including, but not limited to,
the homestead exemption.
         b.   Below are examples of the intended application of the tax
exemption as applied to a property receiving the city's homestead exemption of
20% on the appraised value and no other exemptions (other than the historic
site tax exemption).
            1.   Base year: assume appraised value of $100,000.
         Base year appraised value    $100,000
         - Homestead exemption    - $20,000
         Base year taxable value     $80,000
            2.   Year 3: assume appraised value increases to $120,000.
         Appraised value $120,000
         - Homestead exemption    - $24,000
         Current year taxable value     $96,000
         - Base year taxable value    - $80,000
         Historic site tax exemption $16,000
            3.   Year 5: assume appraised value increases to $140,000.
         Appraised value $140,000
         - Homestead - $28,000
         Current year taxable value     $112,000
         - Base year taxable value    - $80,000
         Historic site tax exemption $32,000
            4.   Year 6: assume appraised value decreases to $80,000.
         Appraised value $80,000
         - Homestead - $16,000
         Current year taxable value     $64,000
         - Base year taxable value     - $80,000
         Historic Site Tax Exemption $0
            5.   Year 10: assume appraised value increases to $110,000.
         Appraised value $110,000
         - Homestead - $22,000
         Current year taxable value     $88,000
         - Base year taxable value    - $80,000
         Historic Site Tax Exemption $8,000
         c.   As reflected in the examples above, a historic site tax exemption
only applies in those years during the exemption's term in which the property's
taxable value (after application of other applicable exemptions) is greater
than the property's base-year taxable value.
         d.   As shown in Example 4 above, if in any year a property's taxable
value (after application of other applicable exemptions) is less than the
property's base-year taxable value, no historic site tax exemption will apply.
The term of a historic site tax exemption will not be extended on the basis
that the property's taxable value was less than the property's base-year
taxable value in one or more years.
         e.   As reflected in Example 5 above, if a property's taxable value
subsequently exceeds the base-year taxable value, the historic property tax
exemption will again apply to the extent the property's taxable value (after
application of all other applicable exemptions) is greater than the property's
base-year taxable value.
      (6)   Term.
         a.   Base term.  The base term for the tax exemption is ten years,
commencing on January 1 of the tax year immediately following verification and
approval of the tax exemption by the Fort Worth city council.
         b.   Extended term. To encourage early treatment of structures and
land, if substantial treatment is completed and the Fort Worth city council
verifies and approves the historic site tax exemption within two years after
being designated as HSE, then the Structure and Land are eligible for an
extended term of five years following expiration of the base term, resulting in
a total duration of 15 years. Otherwise, the Structure and Land will only be
eligible for the ten year base term.
      (7)   Application process.
         a.   Step 1: submission and review of application for tax exemption.
            1.   An applicant may initiate the application process for a
historic site tax exemption by submitting a fully completed and signed
application to the HPO, which will be in a form promulgated and approved by the
HPO. The application for a historic site tax exemption must be submitted prior
to commencing treatment.
            2.   An application for a historic site tax exemption may be
processed concurrently with an application for any COA for the same structure.
            3.   Once an application for a historic site tax exemption is
deemed complete by the HPO, the HPO will send the property owner a letter that
sets forth the date that the HPO determined the application to be complete, the
base-year taxable value, the projected term of the historic site tax exemption,
and the deadline for completion of substantial treatment.
         b.   Step 2: deadline to complete substantial treatment. The deadline
to complete substantial treatment will run concurrently with the deadline
associated with a COA for the same treatment project in § 4.401(d)(8).
         c.   Step 3: Verification of Substantial Treatment by the HPO.
            1.   After the subject Structure and Land has been substantially
treated, the applicant must submit a sworn statement of completion to the HPO
attesting to the fact that the Structure and Land that is the subject of the
application for a historic site tax exemption has been substantially treated as
required herein.
            2.   The sworn statement must be in a form promulgate and approved
by the HPO; provided, however, that the form must, at the very least, require
the applicant to provide copies of all receipts for costs and be signed and
sworn to by the property owner of the Structure and Land that is the subject of
the application.
            3.   No later than 30 business days after receiving the sworn
statement of completion and any required supporting documents from the historic
property owner, the HPO must make an investigation of the subject Structure and
Land to verify whether the treatment project has been completed. If the HPO
finds that the Structure and Land that is the subject of the application for
the historic site tax exemption have not been substantially treated or the
treatment does not comply with the applicable COA, then the HPO must notify the
applicant, in writing, of its decision, along with the reasons supporting any
such findings. The applicant will have until the applicable deadline to
complete the treatment project or remedy any identified deficiencies. If the
HPO finds that the Structure and Land that is the subject of the application
for the historic site tax exemption have been substantially treated in
accordance with the applicable COA, then the HPO must recommend approval of
such tax exemption to the HCLC and the Fort Worth city council.
         d.   Step 4: consideration by the HCLC.
            1.   Once the HPO verifies that the Structure and Land that is the
subject of an application for a historic site tax exemption have been
substantially treated, then the HPO will schedule a hearing before the HCLC for
consideration of the exemption.
            2.   The HCLC must conduct a hearing and recommend approval or
denial of the historic site tax exemption to the city council or continue the
case to a date certain.
         e.   Step 5: consideration by city council.
            1.   No less than once per calendar year, the HPO must submit to
the Fort Worth city council for consideration any outstanding applications for
verification of historic site tax exemptions that have received a
recommendation from the HCLC.
            2.   The city council may declare the property to be entitled to
the historic site tax exemption as provided herein upon verification of
completion of treatment project.
         f.   Step 6: execution of commitment to repay.
            1.   Following approval of a historic site tax exemption by the
Fort Worth city council, the property owner must record a commitment to repay
document provided by the HPO as a notice of the historic site tax exemption and
commitment to repay taxes in the event of default. Failure to record such a
document in the official property records of the county where the property is
located may result in the delay of receipt of a historic site tax exemption.
            2.   The purpose of the commitment to repay is to provide
information on the approved scope of treatment work, the terms of the historic
site tax exemption, and penalties for negligently or willfully destroying the
subject property during the term of the exemption.
            3.   The commitment to repay must be filed by the owner in the
official property records of the county where the property is located, will run
with the land, and will bind the owner and any heirs and assigns. Within ten
calendar days of filing, the owner must provide the HPO with a copy of the
receipt or invoice proving that the commitment to repay has been filed. Any
unpaid amount will constitute a lien against the property. Failure to record
such a document may result in the delay of receipt of the historic site tax
exemption.
         g.   Step 7: notification of taxing authorities.
            1.   The HPO will give written notice of approval of the historic
site tax exemption to the chief appraiser of the appraisal district for the
county in which the property is located and designated staff for the City of
Fort Worth.
            2.   Thereafter, the property owner will be entitled to the
applicable historic site tax exemption, commencing on January 1 of the tax year
immediately following verification and approval by the Fort Worth city council.
            3.   Nothing in this section relieves the property owner from the
responsibility to apply to the appraisal district for the county in which the
property is located each year for the historic site tax exemption pursuant to
the terms of the Texas Tax Code.
      (8)   Transferability of historic site tax exemption. The benefits of the
historic site tax exemption are transferrable to subsequent owners of the same
property.
      (9)   Expiration of historic site tax exemption. Upon expiration of the
base term or extended term, as applicable, the historic site tax exemption
automatically expires without further action by the city, and the Structure and
Land will be taxed in accordance with all applicable laws.
      (10)   Loss of historic site tax exemption.
         a.   Where a historic property designated as HSE or HC is partially
destroyed or altered or completely demolished as a result of willful or
negligent acts or omissions without the appropriate city approvals, the HPO
will notify the owner of violations in writing and specify a deadline for
correction of such violations if such a correction is feasible. The HPO may
amend the deadline as needed. If satisfactory corrective measures are not
undertaken within the time specified or corrective measures are not feasible,
then the HPO may initiate procedures to terminate the historic site tax
exemption by scheduling the case for review by the HCLC. The HCLC must make a
recommendation to city council concerning whether to terminate the tax
exemption. Upon approval of the termination of the exemption by Fort Worth city
council, the HPO will notify the chief appraiser of the appropriate appraisal
district of the termination of the exemption and the property owner will be
required to repay the greater of the city taxes exempted, plus interest
calculated at the rate of ten percent per year, or the maximum amount allowed
by law pursuant to the terms of the commitment to repay. The city's remedies
pursuant to the commitment to repay will be in addition to all rights and
remedies pursuant to the Texas Tax Code.
         b.   Where a historic property designated as HSE or HC is completely
demolished, partially destroyed, or altered due to an event that is not the
result of a willful act or negligence, and it is determined that repair is
unfeasible, or the damage is irreversible and has caused the property to lose
historical significance or status as a contributing historic property to a HC
District, the HPO will notify the chief appraiser of the appraisal district of
the termination of the historic site tax exemption. Repayment of the tax
revenues and interest is not required.
   (g)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeal of the HPO. An applicant may appeal the decision of the HPO
to the HCLC. A written notice of appeal must be filed with the Fort Worth City
Secretary's Office and the HPO within 15 calendar days after the HPO mails
written notification of such decision to the applicant. The written notice of
appeal must specify the grounds for appeal. Any appeal to the HCLC will be
reviewed de novo.
      (2)   Appeal of the HCLC.
         a.   Eligibility.  An interested party may appeal all decisions of the
HCLC to the Board of Adjustment, except those relating to historic designations
and tax exemptions (which are decided by the Fort Worth city council). A
written notice of appeal must be filed with the Fort Worth city secretary's
office and the HPO within 15 calendar days after the HPO mails written
notification of the decision to the applicant. The written notice of appeal
must specify the grounds for appeal.
         b.   Public hearing. A hearing on such appeal will be scheduled with
the Board of Adjustment within 30 calendar days after the city secretary's
office and the HPO receive the written notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter
as is reasonably practicable. The HPO will forward a complete record of the
matter, including, but not limited to, a transcript of the hearing before the
HCLC, to the board of adjustment. At the hearing, the city and the applicant,
will have the opportunity to be heard. The board of adjustment may consider the
testimony and evidence concerning the previous recommendations and actions of
city staff and the HCLC.
         c.   Standard of review. The standard of review before the board of
adjustment is the substantial evidence test. The burden of proof is on the
appealing party to establish that the record reflects the lack of substantial
evidence in support of the HCLC decision.
         d.   Decision of the board of adjustment.
            1.   The board of adjustment may affirm or reverse any decision of
the HCLC or remand any case, either in whole or in part, back to the HCLC for
further review.
               i.   The board of adjustment must remand the matter back to the
HCLC in instances where testimony and evidence material to the matter is
presented that was not previously available at the time of the HCLC hearing.
               ii.   The board of adjustment must reverse the decision of the
HCLC if the HCLC's decision is not reasonably supported by substantial
evidence, considering the record as a whole.
               iii.   The board of adjustment may not substitute its judgment
for the judgment of the HCLC on the weight of the evidence on questions
committed to the HCLC's discretion.
            2.    Administrative remedies exhausted. An appeal hearing before
the board of adjustment will exhaust the administrative remedies of the
appellant under this Historic Preservation Ordinance.
   (h)   Penalties.
      (1)   Fines. Any person or entity that fails to comply with the
provisions of this Historic Preservation Ordinance will be subject to the fines
set out in §
1-6 of the city code.
      (2)   Restrictions on future development.
         a.   If a historic property is demolished or relocated without a COA,
then the following restrictions set forth below will be applicable to the
property at the site where the property was formerly located:
            1.   No building or other permits will be issued for construction
on the property, with the exception of a permit to restore such property after
obtaining a COA, for a period of five years after the date of such demolition
or relocation;
            2.   No permits will be issued by the city for any curb cuts on the
property for a period of three years from and after the date of such demolition
or relocation;
            3.   No parking lot for vehicles will be operated on the property
for a period of three years from and after the date of such demolition or
relocation; and
            4.   The owner of the property must maintain the same in a clean
and orderly state and must properly maintain all existing trees and landscaping
on the site.
         b.   When these restrictions become applicable to a particular
property, the HPO will cause to be filed a verified notice thereof in the real
property records of the county where the property is located and such
restrictions will then be binding on future owners of the property. The
restrictions imposed by this section will be in addition to any applicable
fines.
      (3)   Cumulative remedies. The provisions of this section are cumulative
of all other enforcement procedures and penalties that are available at law or
in equity, including, but not limited to, those available for adversely
affecting historic structures or property under Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 54.001
et seq., 211.001 et seq., 214.001 et seq., and 315.006 and Tex. Gov’ Code §
442.016.
(Ord. 19026, eff. 2-9-2010; Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012;
Ord. 20735-05-2013, §§ 1—4, passed 5-7-2013, eff. 5-21-2013; Ord. 21086-12-
2014, § 1, passed 1-7-2014, eff. 2-7-2014; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 3, passed 6-3-
2014; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5, passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 23166-04-2018, § 2, passed
4-3- 2018)
§ 4.402 URBAN DESIGN DISTRICT-DOWNTOWN.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the urban design district-downtown
is to establish design standards for new construction and certain renovations
of property in the downtown area in order to protect and enhance the character
of downtown, encourage economic development and protect property values.
   (b)   Boundaries of urban design district-downtown. The specific boundaries
of the Urban Design District-Downtown are shown on the official zoning map
maintained by the city and depicted and attached as Exhibit B.16.
   (c)   Relationship of urban design district-downtown to base zoning
districts. The urban design district-downtown is a zoning overlay that
supplements the primary underlying zoning district classification. The
permitted uses of the property shall be determined by the use regulations set
forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property.
Development of projects in the urban design district-downtown shall be subject
to the downtown urban design standards in accordance with this section. In the
event of any conflict between the design standards and any provision of this
section, the design standards shall control.
   (d)   Downtown urban design standards adopted. Development in the downtown
urban design district (“DUDD”) is subject to the development standards and
guidelines contained in the Downtown Urban Designs Standards and Guidelines as
referenced in Exhibit “A”. The Downtown Urban Design Standards and Guidelines
are hereby approved by the city council and are included in the zoning
ordinance by reference. All future amendments to the Downtown Urban Design
Standards and Guidelines must be considered by the zoning commission and
approved by the city council in accordance with the procedure set out in
Article 5, Chapter 3.
   (e)   Certificate of appropriateness required.
      (1)   Within the urban design district-downtown, issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance with the Downtown Urban
Design Standards and Guidelines is required as a condition for the following:
         a.   Issuance by the planning and development department of a building
permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Issuance by the planning and development department of a building
permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Issuance by the planning and development department of a building
permit for renovation, remodeling or other alterations of the exterior of an
existing structure; and
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot.
      (2)   Applications for a building permit may be submitted in conjunction
with an application for a certificate of appropriateness, however, no building
permit shall be issued for construction, expansion, renovation, remodeling or
other alterations on any building within the urban design district-downtown
until a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance with the Downtown
Urban Design Standards and Guidelines is approved by the downtown design review
board and issued by the planning and development department.
   (f)   Pre-design conference. A pre-design conference with the development
services director or a designee is required before an applicant makes
application for a certificate of appropriateness. Two copies of a site plan
containing the following information shall be submitted to the development
services director for discussion at the pre-design conference:
      (1)   Footprints of all existing structures;
      (2)   Proposed footprints of all new structures;
      (3)   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
      (4)   Existing and proposed floor plans of first and second floors
(schematic drawings);
      (5)   Building setbacks;
      (6)   Location of parking areas;
      (7)   Location of landscape areas;
      (8)   Two copies of building elevations for all sides of the building;
and
      (9)   Photographs of the site and adjoining properties.
   (g)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least ten days before the meeting of the
downtown design review board at which the application for a certificate of
appropriateness will be considered. At the time application materials are
submitted, the applicant shall receive a sign provided by the planning and
development department that shall be posted on the project site at street level
in a location readily visible to the public no less than ten days prior to the
meeting of the downtown design review board:
      (1)   Five copies of site plan including:
         a.   Footprints of all existing structures;
         b.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
         c.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
         d.   Building setbacks; and
         e.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
      (2)   Five copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system, and location and description of street furniture;
      (3)   Five copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
      (4)   Five copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
buildings(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
      (5)   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures;
and
      (6)   For all detached signs, five site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
   (h)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   Approval of requirements concerning walkway areas, landscape,
building edge and signs and banners, contained in the Downtown Urban Design
Standards and Guidelines shall be by the downtown design review board. Meetings
of the downtown design review board shall be conducted in accordance with §
2.104.
      (2)   Approval of requirements concerning building edge and signs and
banners contained in the Downtown Urban Design Standards and Guidelines shall
be by the downtown design review board. Meetings of the downtown design review
board shall be conducted in accordance with §
2.104.
   (i)   Appeal.
      (1)   Generally. All decisions of the development services director or a
designee concerning walkway areas and landscape may be appealed by the
applicant to the downtown design review board by submitting a written appeal to
the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of the
development services director’s or a designee's decision. Hearings by the
downtown design review board shall be held in accordance with §
2.104. The downtown design review board may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the development services director or a designee.
      (2)   Appeals board.
         a.   All decisions by the downtown design review board may be appealed
to the board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be
filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of
the downtown design review board's decision. The written notice of appeal shall
specify;
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon as thereafter
as reasonably practicable. Notice of such hearing shall be published with the
city secretary in the city's official newspaper not less than the fifteenth day
before the hearing. The secretary of the downtown design review board shall
forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a
transcript of the tape of the hearing before the downtown design review board.
In consideration of an appeal, the board of adjustment shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the downtown design
review board;
            2.   Hear new testimony and consider new evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the downtown design review board;
            3.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
downtown design review board, considering the record made before the downtown
design review board; and
            4.   Have the option to remand any case back to the downtown design
review board for further proceedings.
         c.   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the downtown design review board unless a continuance is agreed to
by the owner/appellant.
         d.   A hearing before the board of adjustment shall exhaust the
administrative remedies of the property owner/appellant under this title. Any
owner/appellant aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may file
in district court.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5,
passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 22268-06-2016, § 1, passed 6-14- 2016, eff. 7-24-2016;
Ord. 22516-12-2016, § 1, passed 12-6-2016; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020)
§ 4.403 PANTHER ISLAND PERIPHERAL ZONE (“PIP”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Panther Island peripheral
zone overlay district to provide design standards and guidelines and
administrative procedures for new construction and certain renovations in the
peripheral zone areas to promote and encourage pedestrian-oriented, urban
development, high-quality, sustainable development and creative design.
   (b)   Boundaries of Panther Island peripheral zone. Peripheral overlay zones
are described as follows and as shown on Exhibit B.21:
   Marine Creek Zone
A parcel of land out of Isaac Thomas Survey, Abstract Number 1526, Tarrant
County, Texas, being all of Block 20, and a portion of Block 10, Map of the
Property of the Fort Worth Stock Yards Company, according to plat thereof
recorded at Volume 388-A, Page 111, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County,
Texas, and a portion of Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 167, and a portion of Lot 7,
Block 168, M. G. Ellis Addition, according to plat thereof recorded at Volume
106, Page 64, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas, and a portion of
the right-of-way of N.E. Twenty-Third Street, and being more particularly
described by metes and bounds as follows to wit:
BEGINNING at the northeast corner of said Block 20;
THENCE with the east line of said Block, South 7 degrees 24 minutes East, 321.8
feet to its southeast corner;
THENCE with the south line of said Block, the following courses and distances;
North 78 degrees 42 minutes West, 102 feet;
North 53 degrees 36 minutes West, 109.4 feet;
North 54 degrees 58 minutes West, 112.4 feet;
NORTH, 32.5 feet;
And North 60 degrees West, 23 feet, to its southwest corner;
THENCE with the west line of said Block, NORTH, 106 feet, to the south right-
of-way of N.E. Twenty-Third Street;
THENCE with said right-of-way, WEST, 360 feet, to the northwest corner of Block
172 of said M. G. Ellis Addition;
THENCE crossing said right-of-way, North 43 degrees 44 minutes 05 seconds West,
86.79 feet, to the north right-of-way of N.E. Twenty-Third Street, and being
the northwest corner of right-of-way Parcel 10, according to the Right-of-Way
Map of N.E. 23 Street, on file at the City of Fort Worth, Transportation and
Public Works Department, File Number K-755, and being in a curve having a
radius of 555 feet;
THENCE northwesterly with said curve to the right, an arc distance of 154,87
feet, to the north corner of right-of-way Parcel 7, according said Right-of-Way
Map, and being in the east line of said Lot 4;
THENCE with said east line, NORTH, 103.14 feet, to the north face of a 12"
retaining wall on said Lot 3, according to the right-of-way and easement map of
Marine Creek, on file at the City of Fort Worth, Transportation and Public
Works Department, File Number 8-M-66,
THENCE bisecting said Lot 4, North 76 degrees 41 minutes 05 seconds West, 51.46
feet, to the west line of said Lot;
THENCE with said west line, North 00 degrees 20 minutes 37 seconds East, at
88.82 feet, pass the northwest corner of said Lot, in all 96.02 feet, to the
northeast corner of that certain parcel of land out of said Block 10, described
by deed recorded in Volume 9340 Page 1244, of the Deed Records of Tarrant
County, Texas, and being in the west line of Lot 3, of Block 10-A, Fort Worth
Stockyards Addition, according to plat thereof recorded at County Clerk’s
Instrument Number D192196130;
THENCE with the said west line, to and along the west line of Lot 1, according
to said plat, the following courses and distances;
North 63 degrees 11 minutes West, 173.3 feet;
North 24 degrees 58 minutes West, 220.17 feet;
North 19 degrees 03 minutes West, 97.8 feet, to the beginning of a curve having
a radius of 1,050.32 feet;
And Northerly with said curve to the right, an arc distance of 392.93 feet, to
the most westerly northwest corner of said Lot 1;
THENCE with the most westerly north line of said Lot, North 89 degrees 54
minutes 55 seconds East, some 50+ feet, to its intersection with the east line
of the Marine Creek Floodway & Beautification (Permanent Easement to the City
of Fort Worth) as shown on said plat;
THENCE with said east line the following courses and distances;
South 00 degrees 18 minutes 17 seconds East, 50.92 feet;
South 89 degrees 47 minutes 54 seconds West, 5 feet;
South 00 degrees 12 minutes 06 seconds East, 359.52 feet;
And South 25 degrees 02 minutes 18 seconds East, some 50+ feet, to its
intersection with the south line of said Lot 1;
THENCE with said south line, North 89 degrees 41 minutes 57 seconds East, to
and along the south line of Lot 2, according to said plat, and to and along the
south line of Lot 4, Block 10-A, Fort Worth Stockyards Addition, according to
plat thereof recorded at County Clerk’s Instrument Number D204114774, some 580
feet, to an ell corner of said Lot 4;
THENCE with the most south west line of said Lot, South 00 degrees 12 minutes
47 seconds East, 259.09 feet, to its southwest corner;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot, South 70 degrees 01 minutes 45 seconds
East, 160.17 feet, to its southeast corner;
THENCE with the east line of said Lot, North 00 degrees 12 minutes 52 seconds
West, 150 feet;
THENCE some South 68 East, bisecting the remainder of said Lot 3, of said Block
10-A, passing 10 feet South of the southwest corner of an existing building,
some 400 feet, to the east line of said Lot 3;
THENCE with said east line, South 00 degrees 08 minutes 16 seconds East, some
225 feet, to the southeast corner of said Block 10, and being in the original
north right-of-way of N.E. Twenty-Third Street, according to said Map;
THENCE crossing said right-of-way, South 02 degrees 33 minutes 30 seconds East,
59.6 feet, to the Place of Beginning.
   West Fork to Marine Creek
A parcel of land out of Isaac Thomas Survey, Abstract Number 1526, Edmund
Little Survey, Abstract Number 954, the J. Baugh Survey, Abstract Number 115,
and the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract Number 1045, Tarrant County, Texas,
and being more particularly described by bounds as follows to wit:
BEGINNING at the northeast corner of Block 20 according to the Map of the
Property of the Fort Worth Stock Yards Company, according to plat thereof
recorded at Volume 388-A, Page 111, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County,
Texas,
THENCE with the east line of said Block and along a projection of said line,
Southeasterly, to its intersection with the west line of Block 179, M. G. Ellis
Addition, according to plat thereof recorded at Volume 106, Page 64, of the
Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas;
THENCE with the west line of said Block, South, to its southeast corner;
THENCE with the north right-of-way of N.E. Twenty-First Street, East, to the
west line of the Fort Worth Belt Railway, as shown on said Map;
THENCE with said west line Southeasterly, to its intersection with the south
right-of-way of N.E. Twenty-First Street;
THENCE with said right-of-way, and along its projection, East, to an ell corner
of Block 18, according to said Map;
THENCE with the most south west line of said Block, and to and along its
projection, South, to the northwesterly right-of-way of the St. Louis
Southwestern Railroad;
THENCE Southwesterly, with said right-of-way, to and along the northwesterly
right-of-way of the St. Louis San Francisco and Texas Railroad, some 0.7 miles,
to its intersection with the north line of the proposed bypass channel of the
West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE with said north line, Northeasterly, to its intersection with the
present west bank of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE with said west bank, Northeasterly, to its intersection with the west
right-of-way of Samuels Avenue;
THENCE North with said right-of-way, to its intersection with the south right-
of-way of N.E. Twenty-Third Street;
THENCE with said right-of-way, West, to the Place of Beginning.
University/Jacksboro
A parcel of land out of the John Baugh Survey, Abstract Number 115, the Joseph
N. Connor Survey, Abstract Number 355 the Richard Crawley Survey, Abstract
Number 313, and the Robert O. Reeves Survey, Abstract Number 1293, Tarrant
County, Texas, and being more particularly described by bounds as follows;
BEGINNING at the intersection of the east right-of-way of Rockwood Park Drive
Ramp to University Drive with the north bank of the man made channel of the
West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE northerly with said right-of-way, to and along the east right-of-way of
University Drive, and northeasterly with said right-of-way, some 0.45 miles, to
its intersection with the southwesterly right-of-way of Jacksboro Highway;
THENCE southeasterly with said right-of-way and its projection, to its
intersection with said north bank, some 60 feet southwesterly of the centerline
of the Jacksboro Highway and Henderson Street Bridge over said River;
THENCE upstream with said bank, southwesterly and west some 0.5 miles to the
Place of Beginning.
   Parkview
A parcel of land out of the E.S. Harris Survey, Abstract Number 688, and the
George Shields Survey, Abstract Number 1402, Tarrant County, Texas, and being
more particularly described by bounds as follows;
BEGINNING at the intersection of the north right-of-way of Interstate Highway
Number 30, with the southeasterly bank of the man made channel of the West Fork
of the Trinity River;
THENCE downstream with said bank, northeasterly some 0.7 miles to its
intersection with the west right-of-way of the St. Louis, San Francisco & Texas
Rail Road;
THENCE with said right-of-way, southerly some 320 feet, to the northwesterly
right-of-way of Forest Park Boulevard;
THENCE with said right-of-way, southwesterly some 0.2 miles to its intersection
with said north right-of-way of said Interstate Highway Number 30;
THENCE with said right-of-way, westerly some 0.5 miles to the Place of
Beginning.
   Northside Drive
   Parcel I
A parcel of land out of Edmund Little Survey, Abstract Number 954 and the Felix
G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract Number 1045, Tarrant County, Texas, being all of
Lot 1, Block 1, North Side Drive Industrial Park, according to plat thereof
recorded at Volume 388—170, Page 42, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County,
Texas, being all of Blocks 1R and 2R, Northpark, according to plat thereof
recorded at Volume 388—41, Page 23, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County,
Texas, being a portion of Northpark Business Center, according to plat recorded
at Volume 388—109, Page 57, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas, and a
portion of the right-of-way of Northside Drive, and Northpark Drive, and being
more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows to wit:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the west right-of-way of the Samuels Avenue
with the east bank of the West Fork of the Trinity River, as channelized;
THENCE southerly with said right-of-way, to and along the west right-of-way of
the ramp from Samuels Avenue, to Northside Drive, crossing Northside Drive at
the south end of said ramp, to the north end of the ramp from Northside Drive
to Samuels Avenue, and with said ramp, to said west right-of-way of Samuels
Avenue, and continuing southerly with said right-of-way, some 0.7 miles to the
centerline of Northpark Drive, a private roadway and a 26 foot emergency access
and utility easement according to said plat of Northpark Business Center;
THENCE with said centerline, South 77 degrees 56 minutes 25 seconds West,
779.34 feet to the beginning of a curve having a radius of 400.0 feet;
THENCE northwesterly with said curve to the right, an arc distance of 93.78
feet, to the east right-of-way of the Texas Electric Service Company, according
to deed recorded in Volume 2691, Page 130, of the Deed Records of Tarrant
County, Texas;
THENCE with said right-of-way, South 14 degrees 53 minutes 15 seconds East,
406.15 feet, to the southeast corner of said right-of-way;
THENCE with the south line of said right-of-way, North 59 degrees 36 minutes 50
seconds West, 106.85 feet, to the south corner of Lot 11, according to said
Plat;
THENCE with the east line of said Lot, North 14 degrees 53 minutes 15 seconds
West, 360,74, to its northeast corner and being on said centerline, and in said
curve having a radius of 400.0 feet;
THENCE with the northeasterly line of said Lot, and northwesterly with said
curve to the right, an arc distance of 121.29 feet, to its end;
THENCE continuing with the northeasterly line of said Lot, North 59 degrees 36
minutes 50 seconds West, 106.85 feet, to the beginning of a curve having a
radius of 300.0 feet;
THENCE northwesterly with said curve to the right, an arc distance of 1.29
feet, to the north corner of Lot 11-B being a re-plat of a portion of said Lot
11, according to plat recorded at Volume 388-218, Page 37, of the Plat Records
of Tarrant County, Texas;
THENCE with the northwesterly line of said Lot, South 30 degrees 26 minutes 35
seconds West, 235.09 feet to the west corner of said Lot 11-B, and being in the
southwesterly line of said Lot 11;
THENCE with said line, North 59 degrees 36 minutes 50 seconds West, 303.66
feet, to an angle point;
THENCE continuing with said line, North 16 degrees 35 minutes 40 seconds West,
to and along the southwesterly line of Lot 1, according to said plat, 801.09
feet, to an angle point;
THENCE with the west line of said Lot 1, North 07 degrees 46 minutes East, at
505.81 feet pass the northwest corner of said Lot, and crossing Northside
Drive, in all some 620 feet, to the north right-of-way of Northside Drive, at
the southeast corner of said Lot 1, of said North Side Drive Industrial Park;
THENCE westerly with said right-of-way, some 420 feet, to said east bank of the
West Fork of the Trinity River, as channelized;
THENCE with said east bank, some 0.4 miles, to the Place of Beginning.
   Parcel II
A parcel of land being all of Lot 5, and a portion of Lot 6, Block A,
Holloway’s Addition, according to plat recorded at Volume 1530, Page 373, of
the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas, and being more particularly
described by metes and bounds as
follows to wit;
BEGINNING at the southeast corner of said Lot 5, and being in the southwesterly
right-of-way of Samuels Avenue;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot 5, South 83 degrees 40 minutes 30
seconds West, to and along the east line of Lot 9 of Northpark Business Center,
according to plat recorded at Volume 388-109, Page 57, of the Plat Records of
Tarrant County, Texas, 221.98 feet, to its southwest corner;
THENCE with the west line of said Lot 5, North 12 degrees 39 minutes West, and
continuing with the east line of said Lot 9, to and along the east line of said
Lot 6, 215.3 feet;
THENCE continuing with the east line of said Lot 9, North 73 degrees 52 minutes
30 seconds East, 114.24 feet, to said right-of-way;
THENCE with said right-of-way, South 36 degrees 01 minutes 15 seconds East,
269.48 feet, to the Place of Beginning.
Henderson Street
A parcel of land out of Bailey’s Industrial Addition, being all of Lots 4A and
5, Block 13, according to plats recorded at Volume 388-71, Page 744, and Volume
388-C, Page 95, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas, respectively,
being all of Lots 1 and 2, Block 20, and being all of Lot D, Block 21,
according to plat recorded in Volume 388-50, Page 53 of the Plat Records of
Tarrant County, Texas, and a portion of Henderson Street, Cullen Street, and
Rupert Street adjacent to said Lots, and being more particularly described by
metes and bounds as follows to wit;
BEGINNING at the intersection of the west right-of-way of the St. Louis, San
Francisco & Texas Rail Road, with the east line of said Block 21 projected
north;
THENCE with said right-of-way, to and along the east line of said Block, South
22 degrees 02 minutes West, 524.1 feet, to the south corner of said Lot D;
THENCE with the most south west line of said Lot, North 00 degrees 58 minutes
East, 186.6 feet, to an ell corner;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot, South 80 degrees 05 minutes West, 113
feet, to its most west corner, and being on the centerline of a Spur Track;
THENCE with the west line of said Lot, and said centerline, the following
chords:
North 76 degrees 11 minutes East 50 feet;
North 70 degrees 47 minutes East 50 feet;
And North 64 degrees 18 minutes East 33.76 feet, to its intersection with the
centerline of a Spur Track;
THENCE continuing with the west line of said Lot, and said centerline, the
following chords:
North 11 degrees 03 minutes West 54.2 feet;
North 17 degrees 00 minutes West 50 feet;
North 23 degrees 00 minutes West 50 feet;
North 28 degrees 36 minutes West 50 feet;
And North 35 degrees 14 minutes East 49.8 feet, to the most north west corner
of said Lot;
THENCE continuing with said centerline, some North 41 degrees West, 50 feet, to
its intersection with the centerline of Cullen Street;
THENCE with said centerline, South 42 degrees 15 minutes West, 17 feet, to the
beginning of a curve having a radius of 290 feet;
THENCE continuing with said centerline, and with said curve westerly and to the
right, through a central angle of 46 degrees 45 minutes, an arc length of 241.7
feet, to its end;
THENCE continuing with said centerline, WEST, 124.2 feet, to its intersection
with the centerline of Rupert Street;
THENCE with said centerline, NORTH, 368.5 feet, to an angle point;
THENCE continuing with said centerline, North 50 degrees 41 minutes West, 158.2
feet, to its intersection with the southeast line of said Lot 4-A, projected
southwest;
THENCE North 39 degrees 19 minutes East, 55.3 feet, to the south corner of said
Lot 4-A;
THENCE with southwest line of said Lot, North 50 degrees 41 minutes West,
774.47 feet, to the north corner of Lot 1-A, Block 13, according to plat
recorded at Volume 388-71, Page 119, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County,
Texas;
THENCE with west line of said Lot 4-A, NORTH, 2.98 feet, to its west corner;
THENCE with north line of said Lot, North 78 degrees 05 minutes East, 234.98
feet, to the southwest right-of-way of Henderson Street;
THENCE North 42 degrees 15 minutes East, 140 feet, to the centerline of
Henderson Street;
THENCE with said centerline Southeasterly, some 1,438 feet, to the Place of
Beginning.
South of Oakwood Cemetery
A parcel of land out of the John Baugh Survey, Abstract Number 115, and the
Richard Crawley Survey, Abstract Number 313, Tarrant County, Texas, and being
more particularly described by bounds as follows;
BEGINNING at the intersection of the northeasterly right-of-way of Jacksboro
Highway with the most north east line of Lot 1, Bailey Gardens Addition,
according to plat recorded in Volume 939, Page 569, of the Deed Record of
Tarrant County, Texas;
THENCE with said east line, North 00 degrees 12 minutes East, 110.5 feet, to
the southwest corner of Lot 1R, Block 1, Oakwood Cemetery, according to plat
thereof recorded in Volume 388-198, Page 35 of the Plat Records of Tarrant
County, Texas;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot 1R, the following courses and distances;
South 89 degrees 58 minutes East, 23 feet, to the beginning of a curve, having
a radius of 2,400 feet;
Easterly with said curve to the left, an arc distance of 176.28 feet, to its
end;
North 68 degrees 49 minutes 36 seconds East, 218.56 feet;
South 89 degrees 19 minutes 49 seconds East, 299.99 feet,
And South 82 degrees 24 minutes 43 seconds East, 138.55 feet, to a line shown
on said Plat labeled “EDGE OF CEMETERY MAINTENANCE” as surveyed by the City of
Fort Worth, in 1989;
THENCE with said line labeled “EDGE OF CEMETERY MAINTENANCE” the following
courses and distances;
South 54 degrees 50 minutes 48 seconds East, 113.26 feet;
South 71 degrees 25 minutes 54 seconds East, 89.39 feet;
North 71 degrees 54 minutes 41 seconds East, 134.32 feet;
And North 86 degrees 30 minutes 58 seconds East, 58.51 feet, to the south line
of said Cemetery;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot 1R, the following courses and distances;
South 82 degrees 24 minutes 43 seconds East, 40.79 feet;
And South 89 degrees 16 minutes 10 seconds East, 295 feet, to an ell corner;
THENCE bisecting said Lot 1R, North 28 degrees 28 minutes 35 seconds East,
238.78 feet, to a corner in said south line;
THENCE with the south line of said Lot 1R, the following courses and distances;
North 60 degrees 26 minutes 48 seconds East, 86.45 feet;
And South 70 degrees 56 minutes 25 seconds East, 334.3 feet, to an east corner
of said Lot, being at an angle point in the southwesterly line of Lot A, Block
1, Gifford-Hill & Co. Plant No. 41 Site, according to plat thereof recorded in
Volume 388-133, Page 100, of the Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
being in the northeasterly line of the right-of-way of the Tarrant County Water
Control and Improvement District No. 1, according to deed recorded in Volume
2313, Page 509 of the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas;
THENCE with said southwesterly and northeasterly line South 56 degrees 44
minutes East, at 130 feet, pass the southeast corner of said Lot A, and to and
along the southwest line of that certain tract of land conveyed to Oather M.
Tow, by deed recorded in Volume 1720, Page 474, of the Deed Records of Tarrant
County, Texas, in all some 500 feet, to the northwesterly right-of-way of the
St. Louis, San Francisco and Texas Railroad;
THENCE Southwesterly with said northwesterly right-of-way, some 200 feet, to
its intersection with the north bank of the man made channel of the West Fork
of the Trinity River;
THENCE upstream with said bank, westerly, to its intersection with the
northeasterly right-of-way of Jacksboro Highway;
THENCE northwesterly with said right-of-way, some 700 feet, to the Place of
Beginning.
“This document was prepared under 22 TAC 663.21, does not reflect the results
of an on the ground survey, and is not to be used to convey or establish
interests in real property except those rights or interests implied or
established by the creation or reconfiguration of the boundary of the political
subdivision for which it was prepared.”
   (c)   Relationship of Panther Island peripheral zone to base zoning
districts. The Panther Island peripheral zone is a zoning overlay that
supplements the primary underlying zoning district classification. The
permitted uses of the property shall be determined by the use regulations set
forth for the primary zoning district classification for the property.
Development projects in the Panther Island peripheral zone shall be subject to
the Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines in
accordance with this section. In the event of any conflict between the design
standards and any provision of this ordinance, the development standards and
guidelines shall control.
   (d)   Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines
adopted. The Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and
Guidelines, attached as Exhibit “A,” are hereby approved by the city council
and are included in the zoning ordinance by reference. All future amendments to
the Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines must
be considered by the zoning commission and approved by the city council in
accordance with the procedure set forth in
Article 5, Chapter 3 of the zoning ordinance.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Panther Island
peripheral zone district overlay, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
reflecting compliance the Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning
Standards and Guidelines is required as a condition for the following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure;
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot; and
         e.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will
be considered:
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
            4.   Building setbacks; and
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system, and location and description of street furniture;
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures;
and
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when:
            1.   The project conforms to all standards and guidelines of the
Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines when
both are applicable; or
            2.   A project is submitted wherein only the guidelines of the
Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines are
applicable.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with and invested
with the authority to enforce the standards in the Panther Island Peripheral
Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and Guidelines for new construction and exterior
renovations by hearing and deciding applications for certificates of
appropriateness with this section that require interpretation or discretionary
judgment with respect to the project’s compliance with the standards. The urban
design commission is hereby charged with and invested with the authority to
enforce the Panther Island Peripheral Zone Overlay Zoning Standards and
Guidelines for new construction and exterior renovations by hearing and
deciding applications for certificates of appropriateness with this section
that require interpretation or discretionary judgment with respect to the
project’s compliance with standards and guidelines.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the development services director may be appealed
to the urban design commission. A written notice of the appeal must be filed
with the executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days of
notice of the decision of the development services director or designee. The
standard of review before the UDC shall be de novo
      (2)   All decisions by the urban design commission may be appealed to the
board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of the
urban design commission’s decision.
         a.   The written notice of appeal shall specify:
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the urban design commission shall
forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a
transcript of the tape of the hearing before the urban design commission. In
consideration of an appeal, the board of adjustment shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the urban design
commission;
            2.   Hear new testimony and consider new evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the urban design commission;
            3.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
urban design commission, considering the record made before the urban design
commission; and
            4.   Have the option to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
         c.   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to by
the owner/appellant.
         d.   A hearing before the board of adjustment shall exhaust the
administrative remedies of the property owner/appellant under this title. Any
owner/appellant aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may file
in district court.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5,
passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 23886-10-2019, §§1, 3, passed 10-15-2019, eff. 11-7-2019;
Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.404 I-35W CORRIDOR (“I-35W”) DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the I-35W design overlay to
provide standards and guidelines and administrative procedures for new
construction and certain renovations in the corridor zones to promote and
encourage excellence in development though quality site layout, lighting
landscaping and design while creating a unified and natural landscape along the
corridor zones.
   (b)   Boundaries of I-35W design overlay district. Corridor zones are
described as follows and as shown on Exhibit B.22:
South Zone: Meacham Boulevard to Basswood Boulevard
A parcel of land situated in the County of Tarrant, being 1,000 feet each side
of the following described centerline of Interstate Highway 35 West, from its
intersection with the centerline of Meacham Boulevard, to its intersection with
the centerline of Basswood Boulevard;
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West,
and Meacham Boulevard (formerly known as Odum Road), according to the right-of-
way map of Interstate Highway 35W, Project No. I-35W-5(27)-429, from N. of St.
Louis & S.W. R.R. North to Loop 217 (now known as Loop 820), and being at
Engineer’s Station 407+44;
THENCE northerly with said centerline, North 00 degrees 13 minutes 00 seconds
East, to and along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35W, according to the
right-of-way map of Interstate Loop 820, Project No. I-820-4(56)-454, from
present U. S. 377 West to proposed location of Interstate 35W, 2544 feet, to an
angle point at Engineer’s Station 382+00;
THENCE continuing northerly with said centerline, North 00 degrees 04 minutes
00 seconds West, 2,963.15 feet, to its intersection with the centerline of said
Interstate Loop 820 at Engineer’s Station 352+36.85, at Interstate Loop 820
Engineer’s Station 662+58.39;
THENCE east with said centerline, North 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds East,
30.00 feet, to its intersection with the centerline of said Interstate Highway
35W, at Interstate Loop 820 Engineer’s Station 662+88.39, at Interstate Highway
35W Engineer’s Station 619+06.89;
THENCE northerly with said centerline, North 00 degrees 04 minutes 00 seconds
West, 2,988.79 feet, to an angle point at Engineer’s Station 589+18.10,
according to the right-of-way map of Interstate Highway 35W, Project No. I-35W-
5(41)-431, from Proposed U.S. 81 to Interstate Loop 820;
THENCE continuing northerly with said centerline, according to said right-of-
way map, the following courses and distances;
North 00 degrees 02 minutes 05 seconds West, 810.05 feet, to the beginning of a
curve having a radius of 11,459.16 feet, at Engineer’s Station 581+08.05;
Northerly with said curve to the left, through a central angle of 10 degrees 05
minutes 11 seconds, an arc distance of 2,017.28 feet, to its end at Engineer’s
Station 560+90.77;
North 10 degrees 07 minutes 16 seconds West, 6,014.19 feet, to the beginning of
a curve having a radius of 11,459.16 feet, at Engineer’s Station 500+76.58;
Northerly with said curve to the right, through a central angle of 01 degrees
07 minutes 58 seconds, an arc distance of 226.58 feet, to its Terminus at the
intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West, and Basswood
Boulevard at Engineer’s Station 498+50;
Basis of called bearings and distances, per recited right-of-way maps.
This description prepared by Hans Kevin Hansen, Registered Professional Land
Surveyor, Number 4786, in April 2009, in an electronic format.
“This document was prepared under 22 TAC § 663.21, does not reflect the results
of an on the ground survey, and is not to be used to convey or establish
interests in real property except those rights or interests implied or
established by the creation or reconfiguration of the boundary of the political
subdivision for which it was prepared.”
Revision I, September 21, 2009, width changed from “one thousand five hundred
(1,500)” to “one thousand feet (1,000).”
Revision II, November 15, 2010, Title changed to reflect limits changed from
Meacham Blvd. to SH 114, divided into three sections, Meacham Blvd. to Basswood
Blvd., Basswood Blvd. to Keller Hicks Rd., and Keller Hicks to SH 114.
Central Zone - Basswood Boulevard to Keller Hicks Road
A parcel of land situated in the County of Tarrant, being one thousand feet
(1,000) each side of the following described centerline of Interstate Highway
35 West, from its intersection with the centerline of Basswood Boulevard, to
its intersection with the centerline of Keller Hicks Road (County Road Number
4033);
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West,
and Basswood Boulevard according to the right-of-way map of Interstate Highway
35W, Project No. I-35W-5(41)-431, from Proposed U.S. 81 to Interstate Loop 820,
and being at Engineer’s Station 498+50, and being in a curve having a radius of
11,459.16 feet;
THENCE northerly with said centerline, according to said right-of-way map, the
following courses and distances;
Northerly with said curve to the left, through a central angle of 08 degrees 59
minutes 06 seconds, an arc distance of 1,796.98 feet, to its end at Engineer’s
Station 480+53.02;
North 00 degrees 00 minutes 12 seconds West, at 3,638.40 feet pass the end of
said project, at Engineer’s Station 444+14.62, and continuing with said
centerline, according to the right-of-way map of Interstate Highway 35W,
Project No. I-35W-5(21)-435, from Denton County Line to Proposed U.S. 81, in
all 17,707.45 feet, to the beginning of a curve having a radius of 5,729.58
feet, at Engineer’s Station 303+45.57;
Northerly with said curve to the left, through a central angle of 14 degrees 57
minutes 07 seconds, an arc distance of 1,495.19 feet, to its end at Engineer’s
Station 288+50.38;
North 14 degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds East, 4,503.36 feet, to its Terminus at
the intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West, and Keller
Hicks Road at Engineer’s Station 243+47.02;
Basis of called bearings and distances, per recited right-of-way maps.
This description prepared by Hans Kevin Hansen, Registered Professional Land
Surveyor, Number 4786, in April 2009, in an electronic format.
“This document was prepared under 22 TAC § 663.21, does not reflect the results
of an on the ground survey, and is not to be used to convey or establish
interests in real property except those rights or interests implied or
established by the creation or reconfiguration of the boundary of the political
subdivision for which it was prepared.”
Revision I, September 21, 2009, width changed from “one thousand five hundred
(1,500)” to “one thousand feet (1,000).”
Revision II, November 15, 2010, Title changed to reflect limits changed from
Meacham Blvd. to SH 114, divided into three sections, Meacham Blvd. to Basswood
Blvd., Basswood Blvd. to Keller Hicks Rd., and Keller Hicks to SH 114.
Scribner’s errors corrected December 2, 2010.
North Zone - Keller Hicks Road to State Highway 114
A parcel of land situated in the Counties of Denton and Tarrant, being 1,000
feet each side of the following described centerline of Interstate Highway 35
West, from its intersection with the centerline of Keller Hicks Road (County
Road Number 4033), to its intersection with the centerline of State Highway
114;
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West,
and Keller Hicks Road according to the right-of-way map of Interstate Highway
35W, Project No. I-35W-5(21)-435, from Denton County Line to Proposed U.S. 81,
and being at Engineer’s Station 243+07.02;
THENCE northerly with said centerline, according to said right-of-way map, the
following courses and distances;
North 14 degrees 56 minutes 55 seconds East, 1,779.10 feet, to the beginning of
a curve having a radius of 5,729.58 feet, at Engineer’s Station 225+67.92;
Northerly with said curve to the left, through a central angle of 14 degrees 40
minutes 59 seconds, an arc distance of 1,468.31 feet, to its end at Engineer’s
Station 210+99.61;
North 00 degrees 15 minutes 56 seconds East, 4,997.63 feet, to the beginning of
a curve having a radius of 5,729.58 feet, at Engineer’s Station 161+01.98;
Northerly with said curve to the right, through a central angle of 10 degrees
26 minutes 03 seconds, an arc distance of 1,043.42 feet, to its end at
Engineer’s Station 150+58.56;
North 10 degrees 41 minutes 59 seconds East, 3,744.61 feet, to the beginning of
a curve having a radius of 5,729.58 feet, at Engineer’s Station 113+13.98;
Northeasterly with said curve to the right, through a central angle of 19
degrees 14 minutes 39 seconds, an arc distance of 1,924.42 feet, to its end at
Engineer’s Station 93+89.56;
THENCE northeasterly with said centerline, North 29 degrees 56 minutes 38
seconds East, at 2,848.83 feet, pass the called County Line at Engineers
Station Equation 65+40.73=0+00, and at 2,872.13 feet pass Engineers Station
Equation 0+23.30=0+00, to and along the centerline of Interstate Highway 35W,
according to the right-of-way map of Interstate Highway 35-W, Project No. I
35W-6(47)442, from Tarrant Co. Line to F.M. 407, in all 4,924.48 feet, to the
beginning of a curve having a radius of 11,459.16 feet, at Engineer’s Station
20+52.35;
THENCE continuing northeasterly with said centerline, according to said right-
of-way map, the following courses and distances;
Northeasterly with said curve to the right, through a central angle of 00
degrees 58 minutes 10 seconds, an arc distance of 193.89 feet, to its end at
Engineer’s Station 22+46.24;
North 30 degrees 54 minutes 48 seconds East, 11,222.42 feet, to the beginning
of a curve having a radius of 5,729.58 feet, at Engineer’s Station 134+68.66;
Northeasterly with said curve to the right, through a central angle of 06
degrees 48 minutes 35 seconds, an arc distance of 680.97 feet, to its end at
Engineer’s Station 141+49.63;
North 37 degrees 43 minutes 23 seconds East, 1845.43 feet, to its Terminus at
the intersection of the centerlines of Interstate Highway 35 West, and State
Highway 114, at Engineer’s Station 159+95.06;
Basis of called bearings and distances, per recited right-of-way maps.
This description prepared by Hans Kevin Hansen, Registered Professional Land
Surveyor, Number 4786, in April 2009, in an electronic format.
“This document was prepared under 22 TAC § 663.21, does not reflect the results
of an on the ground survey, and is not to be used to convey or establish
interests in real property except those rights or interests implied or
established by the creation or reconfiguration of the boundary of the political
subdivision for which it was prepared.”
Revision I, September 21, 2009, width changed from “one thousand five hundred
(1,500)” to “one thousand feet (1,000).”
Revision II, November 15, 2010, Title changed to reflect limits changed from
Meacham Blvd. to SH 114, divided into three sections, Meacham Blvd. to Basswood
Blvd., Basswood Blvd. to Keller Hicks Rd., and Keller Hicks to SH 114.
Scribner’s errors corrected December 2, 2010.
   (c)   Relationship of I-35W design overlay district to base zoning
districts. The I-35W design overlay district is a zoning overlay that
supplements the primary underlying zoning district classification. The
permitted uses of the property shall be determined by the use regulations set
forth in the primary zoning district classification for the property.
Development of projects in the “I-35W” design district shall be subject to the
I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines in accordance with this section. In
the event of a conflict between the I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines
and other sections of the City of Fort Worth zoning ordinance or other
applicable regulations, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. If
there is a conflict between the I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines and
a mixed-use zoning district (or planned development based on mixed-use zoning:
i.e., “PD/MU-1” or “PD/MU-2”) located on along I-35W frontage roads, the mixed-
use regulations will govern the setbacks.
   (d)   I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines adopted. The I-35W
Development Standards and Guidelines, attached as Exhibit “A,” are hereby
approved by the city council and are included in the zoning ordinance by
reference. All future amendments to the I-35W Development Standards and
Guidelines must be considered by the zoning commission and approved by the city
council in accordance with the procedure set forth in
Article 5, Chapter 3 of the zoning ordinance.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the “I-35W” overlay
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
with the I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines is required for the
following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure; or
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application of the certificate of appropriateness
will be considered:
         a.   Copies of the site plan including:
            1.   Foot prints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property; and
            4.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscaping plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation systems, and location and description of street furniture;
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing the design of all elevations existing grade, proposed
grade, finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment,
location and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall
signs(s) and notations regarding exterior colors and materials; and
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building site materials, finishes and fixtures.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and exterior renovations when the project
conforms to all standards and guidelines of the I-35W Development Standards and
Guidelines.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with and invested
with the authority to enforce the I-35W Development Standards and Guidelines
for new construction and exterior renovations that do not conform to all of the
standards and guidelines by hearing and deciding application for certificates
of appropriateness in accordance with this section.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the development services director may be appealed
to the urban design commission. A written notice of the appeal must be filed
with the executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days of
notice of the decision of the development services director or designee. The
standard of review before the urban design commission shall be de novo.
      (2)   All decisions by the urban design commission may be appealed to the
board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city secretary’s office within ten days after receipt of notification
of the decision of the urban design commission’s decision. The written notice
of appeal shall specify:
         a.   That the decision of the urban design commission is unreasonable,
either in whole or in part; and
         b.   The grounds for the appeal.
      (3)   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal as
soon as reasonably practicable. The executive secretary of the urban design
commission shall forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the
matter including but not limited to, a transcript of the hearing before the
urban design commission.
      (4)   In consideration of an appeal, the appeal board shall:
         a.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the previous
recommendations and actions of city staff and the urban design commission;
         b.   Hear new evidence that was not available at the time of the
hearing before the urban design commission. New evidence does not include
information that was created after the date of the hearing before the urban
design commission;
         c.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the urban
design commission, considering the record made before the urban design
commission; and
         d.   Have the option to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
      (5)   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the decision
of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to by the
appellant.
      (6)   A hearing before the board of adjustment shall exhaust the
administrative remedies of the appellant under this title. Any appellant
aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may file in district
court.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22792-06-2017, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 6-20-2017; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.405 AIRPORT/AIRFIELD (“AO”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the airport/airfield overlay
district is the regulation of land uses in the vicinity of the city’s airports
and airfields and to ensure the protection of the airports where it has been
determined that they are an essential economic element of the city and
surrounding cities. It is also the purpose of this section to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the public where it is recognized that
aircraft accidents and excessive noise have the potential for endangering or
harming the lives and or property of users or occupants of land in the vicinity
of the airports that serve Fort Worth.
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   Applicability.
         a.   Airport zoning regulations shall apply to all of the incorporated
areas of the City of Fort Worth which are located within an accident potential
zone or clear zone as described herein. The use of all land and any buildings
or structures located upon the land, and the height, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, expansion or relocation of any building or
structure upon the land shall conform to all regulations applicable to this
section. No land, building, structure or premises shall be constructed and/or
used for any purpose or in any manner other than is permitted in this section.
         b.   The airport zoning regulation shall also be in accordance with
prescribed regulations contained in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code §§ 241.001
et seq.
      (2)   Electrical interference. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this section, no use shall be made of land or water nor institution within an
airport/airfield overlay district in such a manner as to create electrical
interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the
airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards or otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing,
takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the City of Fort Worth airports or
the Naval Air Station Fort Worth Joint Reserve Base (NAS FW JRB).
      (3)   Maps. Maps identifying the boundaries of the airport/airfield
overlay district for the applicable airports and further described by each
applicable airport subsection are hereby incorporated into the city’s official
zoning map.
      (4)   Zoning classification.
         a.   Airport/airfield overlay district. The airport/airfield overlay
district is designed as an overlay to the base zoning district. Property
located within this zoning overlay must also be designated as being within one
of the base zoning districts. Permitted uses must be allowed in both the base
zoning district and the overlay district and must comply with height, yard,
area and parking requirements of the base zoning district.
         b.   Zoning designation. The zoning designation of the property
located within the airport/airfield overlay district shall consist of the base
zoning symbol and the overlay symbol as a suffix. For example, if a parcel is
zoned “A-5” and is also located in the airport/airfield overlay district, the
zoning of the parcel would be “A-5/AO.” The zoning designation of parcels
located within a compatible use zone shall consist of the base zoning symbol
and the following as a suffix: “AO-CUZ.”
      (5)   Height considerations.
         a.   14 C.F.R. Part 77, Subpart C establishes the following imaginary
surfaces for airports: approach surface; conical surface; horizontal surface;
primary surface; and transitional surface as defined in the applicable airport
layout plan.
            1.   Structures cannot penetrate Federal Aviation Regulation Part
77 imaginary surfaces and elevation at the site of construction.
            2.   Construction or alteration requiring notice: any person
proposing construction or alteration whether permanent, temporary or of natural
growth in the area surrounding any municipal or military airport shall notify
the manager, Air Traffic Division of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Regional Office and the manager of the municipal airport or community liaison
or other appointee of the NAS FW JRB, as applicable, if such construction or
alteration exceeds any of the following height standards.
               i.   The height limits are defined in terms of imaginary
surfaces in the airspace extending about two to three miles around airport
runways and approximately nine and one-half miles from the ends of the runways
having a precision instrument approach.
               ii.   Notice must be provided for all structures measuring 200
feet above ground level measured at the point of highest elevation of the
foundation or where it has been determined that the proposed construction
penetrates the Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77 imaginary surfaces.
            3.   When requested by the FAA, any construction or alteration that
would be in an instrument approach area and available information indicates the
height might exceed any FAA obstruction standard, must be submitted for review.
         b.   Notice to FAA: nothing in this section shall be construed as
relieving any property owner, sponsor or agent from the requirement for filing
a notice of proposed construction or alteration with the appropriate Federal
Aviation Administration.
         c.   A copy of a determination of no hazard or similar documentation
will be required from the FAA, and the NAS FW JRB, as applicable, before
release of a building permit by the City of Fort Worth.
      (6)   Marking of nonconforming structures. The owner of any nonconforming
structure or object of natural growth deemed an operational hazard by the City
of Fort Worth and/or Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base is required to
install and maintain thereon markers and lighting to indicate to the operators
of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at
the expense of the property owner, as required by the FAA.
   (c)   Naval Air Station Fort Worth Joint Reserve Base.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The City of Fort Worth has designated a NAS FW
JRB compatible use zone (AO-CUZ) in order to promote the public health, safety,
peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of and near
military airport environs and to prevent the impairment of military airfields
and the public investment therein. The land areas below military airport take
off and final approach paths are exposed to significant danger of aircraft
accidents. It is, therefore, necessary to limit the density of development and
intensity of uses in such areas. The NAS FW JRB compatible use zone is intended
to: guide, control and regulate future growth and development; promote orderly
and appropriate use of land; protect the character and stability of existing
land uses; enhance the quality of living in the areas affected; protect the
general economic welfare by restricting incompatible land uses; prevent the
establishment of any land use which would endanger aircraft operations and the
continued use of the NAS FW JRB.
      (2)   Boundaries. The specific boundaries of the NAS FW JRB compatible
use zone are shown on the official zoning map maintained by the city and
depicted and attached as Exhibit B.27. The compatible use zones include the
clear zones and accident potential zones (APZs).
      (3)   Use restrictions in accident potential zones and clear zone.
         a.   Permitted uses shall be allowed in accordance with Table 1,
attached and incorporated hereinto the zoning ordinance.
         b.   Certain uses, unless stated otherwise, within Table 1 shall be
prohibited within the APZs. Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to,
new residences, schools, places of public assembly and outdoor recreation uses.
Other prohibited uses include the manufacture of flammable or combustible
liquids or materials, the generation of any substance that would impair
visibility or otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft including
steam/dust/smoke; and uses that may encourage the congregation of birds or
waterfowl increasing the chance of a bird strike including landfills.
         c.   Above ground fuel storage facilities shall be permitted only in
accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
         d.   All new nonresidential uses indicated on the table as “N” Not
Compatible on Table 1 are considered prohibited.
      (4)   Residential uses. In lieu of the requirements of
Chapter 7, Nonconformities regarding construction, the following shall be
allowed within the AO-CUZ.
         a.   Existing residential one-family uses located within a platted
residential subdivision will be permitted to reconstruct a single-family
residential structure.
         b.   New residential construction shall be permitted only on vacant
lots that are within an existing platted residential subdivision. This section
does not apply to residential properties located within the clear zone.
         c.   Tracts or lots may not be subdivided.
      (5)   Existing nonresidential uses and structures. In lieu of the
requirements of
Chapter 7, Nonconformities regarding construction and continuation of use, the
following shall be allowed within the AO-CUZ
         a.   Existing nonresidential uses or structures may reconstruct a
structure for the same nonconforming use with equal or less square footage that
had previously existed on the property or for such other use that has a density
equal to or less than the prior use. Density will be measured from the
occupancy count as determined by the city’s building official.
         b.   A nonresidential structure that is vacant for any period of time
will be allowed to request a certificate of occupancy for a new tenant or
property owner provided that the use requested is identical to the use
identified on the last certificate of occupancy for the structure, or is for a
use that has a density equal to or less than the previous use of the structure.
Density will be measured from the occupancy count as determined by the city’s
building official.
         c.   A certificate of occupancy may be issued for new tenants or
property owners and changes of use for any use allowed in a shopping center
with multiple tenant spaces or an existing regional mall site, as stated in
Table 1, Note 7 and Note 8.
         d.   In an existing structure, a use not allowed in Table 1 will be
allowed provided that the proposed nonconforming use has a density equal to or
less than the previous use of the structure. A use changed to a lower density
than had previously existed may not thereafter be returned to a use of higher
density, provided however the aforementioned shall not apply to a shopping
center or an existing regional mall site.
         e.   Any tenant or property owner of a building within an existing
regional mall site shall be permitted to construct, re-construct, relocate and
redevelop the square footage existing within the APZ-I area as of the effective
date of this ordinance plus an additional 25,000 square feet of building
improvements at any location solely within 400 feet of the eastern APZ-
I boundary. The additional 25,000 square feet within 400 feet of the eastern
APZ-1 boundary shall be allocated to and located upon the applicable portion of
the property described as Parcel 1 in the special warranty deed filed of record
under Instrument No.D205100827, Real Property Records, Tarrant County, Texas
(the “developer’s parcel”) or such other tract within 400 feet of the eastern
APZ-I boundary designated by the owner of the developer’s parcel.
         f.   A nonconforming use if changed to a conforming use may not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use, provided however the
aforementioned shall not apply to a shopping center or an existing regional
mall site.
      (6)   Boundaries. The specific boundary of the Naval Air Station Fort
Worth Joint Reserve Base Airport Overlay is shown on the official zoning map
maintained by the city and depicted and attached as Exhibit B.27A.
      (7)   Communications facilities and electrical interference. No use shall
cause electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
at the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio, radio-
telephone, television transmission facilities, electrical transmission lines
and wind turbines shall be coordinated through the Department of the Navy
Representative, FAA Central Service Area prior to approval.
      (8)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   No use shall project lighting directly onto an existing runway or
taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths except where
necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new or expanded
use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light away from
airport approach and landing paths. Control of outdoor lighting shall be
achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement.
         b.   Criteria. Lighting shall meet the following criteria:
            1.   Lighting arrangement. Lighting arrangements that mimic runway
lighting (i.e., long linear parallel rows of lighting) that could be confused
with runway or taxiway lighting are not permitted.
            2.   Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities,
uniformities and glare control in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), unless otherwise
directed by the City of Fort Worth.
            3.   Lighting fixture design.
               i.   Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
               ii.   For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such
as, but not limited to parking areas, roadways, vehicular and pedestrian
passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and
passive recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and
pedestrian paths, and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria. Fixtures, except those containing
directional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard non-directional 40-watt
incandescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. In the
case of decorative street lighting, the City of Fort Worth may approve the use
of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA cutoff criteria.
               iii.   For the lighting of predominantly non-horizontal surfaces
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs, billboards,
fountains, displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed so as to not project their output past the object being
illuminated or skyward. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps,
with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated
output of a standard non-directional 40-watt incandescent lamp, are exempt from
the requirements of this subsection.
               iv.   “Barn lights,” aka “dusk-to-dawn lights,” shall be
shielded.
            4.   Billboards and signs.
               i.   Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The
fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to shield the source from off-site
view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard.
The face of the sign or billboard and the illumination shall not exceed 30-
vertical footcandles during the hours of darkness.
               ii.   The light source for internally illuminated signs and
billboards shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign face.
               iii.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating
light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted.
               iv.   The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard is not permitted.
      (9)   Glare.
         a.   No use shall cause glare by highly reflective materials,
including but not limited to unpainted metal or reflective glass, on the
exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths or on
nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot’s vision. Proposed solar arrays
shall be coordinated through the Department of the Navy Representative, FAA
Central Service Area prior to approval. The control of glare shall meet the
following criteria:
         b.   Criteria.
            1.   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement. Glare surface suppressants that effectively
reduce glare may also be utilized.
            2.   All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to pilots or the safe operation of
aircraft.
            3.   Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
be shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output past the
object being illuminated or skyward.
            4.   Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting,
fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess
of 16 feet above finished grade. Fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade.
            5.   Flag lighting sources shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be adequately shielded.
      (10)   Emissions. No use shall, as part of its regular operations, cause
emissions of smoke, ash, vapor, gas, dust, steam or other emissions that could
obscure visibility of pilots or conflict with airport operations.
      (11)   Wildlife attractants. No use shall foster an increase in wildlife
population and thereby increase the likelihood of a bird impact problem.
      (12)   Waste disposal facilities.
         a.   No new waste disposal facilities shall be permitted with 10,000
feet of any airport unless approval is obtained from the FAA.
         b.   Expansions of existing land disposal facilities within these
distances shall be permitted only upon demonstration that the facility is
designed and will operate so as not to increase the likelihood of bird/aircraft
collisions. Timely notice of any proposed expansion shall be provided to the
City of Fort Worth, Texas DOT and the FAA, and any approval shall be
accompanied by such conditions as are necessary to ensure that an increase in
bird/aircraft collisions is not likely to result.
   (d)   Spinks Airport.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The City of Fort Worth has designated the
Spinks Airport Overlay and Runway Protection Zone (AO and RPZ) in order to
promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the inhabitants of and near municipal airport environs and to
prevent the impairment of municipal airports and the public investment therein.
      (2)   Boundaries. The specific boundaries of the Spinks Airport Overlay
and Runway Protection Zones are shown on the official zoning map maintained by
the city and depicted and attached as Exhibit B.28. The Runway Protection Zones
(RPZs) are as defined in the airport layout plan for the airport.
      (3)   Use restrictions in runway protection zones.
         a.   Permitted uses shall be allowed in accordance with Table 2,
attached and incorporated hereinto the zoning ordinance.
         b.   Certain uses within Table 2 shall be prohibited within the RPZs.
Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, new residences, schools,
places of public assembly and outdoor recreation uses. Other prohibited uses
include the manufacture of flammable or combustible liquids or materials, the
generation of any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere
with the operation of aircraft including steam/dust/smoke; and uses that may
encourage the congregation of birds or waterfowl increasing the chance of a
bird strike including landfills.
         c.   Above ground fuel storage facilities shall be permitted only in
accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
         d.   All new nonresidential uses indicated on the table as “N” Not
Compatible on Table 2 are considered prohibited.
      (4)   Communications facilities and electrical interference. No use shall
cause electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
at the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio, radio-
telephone, television transmission facilities, electrical transmission lines
and wind turbines shall be coordinated with the Federal Aviation
Administration’s (FAA) Texas Airports Development Office prior to approval.
      (5)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   Generally. No use shall project lighting directly onto an
existing runway or taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths
except where necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new
or expanded use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light
away from airport approach and landing paths. Control of outdoor lighting shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement.
         b.   Criteria. Lighting shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Lighting arrangement. Lighting arrangements that mimic runway
lighting (i.e., long linear parallel rows of lighting) that could be confused
with runway or taxiway lighting are not permitted.
            2.   Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities,
uniformities and glare control in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), unless otherwise
directed by the City of Fort Worth.
            3.   Lighting fixture design.
               i.   Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
               ii.   For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such
as, but not limited to, parking areas, roadways, vehicular and pedestrian
passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and
passive recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and
pedestrian paths, and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria. Fixtures, except those containing
directional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard non-directional 40-watt
incandescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. In the
case of decorative street lighting, the City of Fort Worth may approve the use
of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA cutoff criteria.
               iii.   For the lighting of predominantly non-horizontal surfaces
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs, billboards,
fountains, displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed so as to not project their output past the object being
illuminated or skyward. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps,
with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated
output of a standard non-directional 40-watt incandescent lamp, are exempt from
the requirements of this subsection.
               iv.   “Barn lights,” aka “dusk-to-dawn lights,” shall be
shielded.
            4.   Billboards and signs.
               i.   Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The
fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to shield the source from off-site
view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard.
The face of the sign or billboard and the illumination shall not exceed 30-
vertical footcandles during the hours of darkness.
               ii.   The light source for internally illuminated signs and
billboards shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign face.
               iii.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating
light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted.
               iv.   The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard is not permitted.
      (5)   Glare.
         a.   Generally. No use shall cause glare by highly reflective
materials, including but not limited to unpainted metal or reflective glass, on
the exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths or
on nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot’s vision. Proposed solar
arrays shall be coordinated with the FAA’s Texas Airports Development Office
prior to approval.
         b.   Criteria. The control of glare shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement. Glare surface suppressants that effectively
reduce glare may also be utilized.
            2.   All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to pilots or the safe operation of
aircraft.
            3.   Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
be shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output past the
object being illuminated or skyward.
            4.   Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting,
fixtures not meeting IESNA Full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess
of 16 feet above finished grade. Fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade.
            5.   Flag lighting sources shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be adequately shielded.
      (6)   Emissions. No use shall, as part of its regular operations, cause
emissions of smoke, ash, vapor, gas, dust, steam or other emissions that could
obscure visibility of pilots or conflict with airport operations.
      (7)   Wildlife attractants. No use shall foster an increase in bird
population and thereby increase the likelihood of a bird impact problem.
      (8)   Waste disposal facilities.
         a.   No new waste disposal facilities shall be permitted with 10,000
feet of any airport unless approval is obtained from the FAA.
         b.   Expansions of existing land disposal facilities within these
distances shall be permitted only upon demonstration that the facility is
designed and will operate so as not to increase the likelihood of bird/aircraft
collisions. Timely notice of any proposed expansion shall be provided to the
City of Fort Worth, Texas DOT and the FAA, and any approval shall be
accompanied by such conditions as are necessary to ensure that an increase in
bird/aircraft collisions is not likely to result.
   (e)   Meacham International Airport.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The City of Fort Worth has designated the
Meacham International Airport Overlay and Runway Protection Zone (AO and RPZ)
in order to promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and
general welfare of the inhabitants of and near municipal airport environs and
to prevent the impairment of municipal airports and the public investment
therein.
      (2)   Boundaries. The specific boundaries of the Meacham Airport Overlay
and Runway Protection Zones are shown on the official zoning map maintained by
the city and depicted and attached as Exhibit B.29. The Runway Protection Zones
(RPZs) are as defined in the airport layout plan for the airport.
      (3)   Use restrictions in runway protection zones.
         a.   Permitted uses shall be allowed in accordance with Table 2,
attached and incorporated here into the zoning ordinance.
         b.   Certain uses within Table 2 shall be prohibited within the RPZs.
Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, new residences, schools,
places of public assembly and outdoor recreation uses. Other prohibited uses
include the manufacture of flammable or combustible liquids or materials, the
generation of any substance that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere
with the operation of aircraft including steam/dust/smoke; and uses that may
encourage the congregation of birds or waterfowl increasing the chance of a
bird strike including landfills.
         c.   Above ground fuel storage facilities shall be permitted only in
accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
         d.   All new nonresidential uses indicated on the table as “N” Not
Compatible on Table 2 are considered prohibited.
      (4)   Communications facilities and electrical interference. No use shall
cause electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
at the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio, radio-
telephone, television transmission facilities, electrical transmission lines
and wind turbines shall be coordinated with the Federal Aviation
Administration’s (FAA) Texas Airports Development Office prior to approval.
      (5)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   Generally. No use shall project lighting directly onto an
existing runway or taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths
except where necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new
or expanded use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light
away from airport approach and landing paths. Control of outdoor lighting shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement.
         b.   Criteria. Lighting shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Lighting arrangement. Lighting arrangements that mimic runway
lighting (i.e., long linear parallel rows of lighting) that could be confused
with runway or taxiway lighting are not permitted.
            2.   Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities,
uniformities and glare control in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), unless otherwise
directed by the City of Fort Worth.
            3.   Lighting fixture design.
               i.   Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
               ii.   For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such
as, but not limited to, parking areas, roadways, vehicular and pedestrian
passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and
passive recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and
pedestrian paths, and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria. Fixtures, except those containing
directional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard non-directional 40-watt
incandescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection (e)
(5)b.3.ii. In the case of decorative street lighting, the City of Fort Worth
may approve the use of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA
cutoff criteria.
               iii.   For the lighting of predominantly non-horizontal surfaces
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs, billboards,
fountains, displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed so as to not project their output past the object being
illuminated or skyward. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps,
with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated
output of a standard non-directional 40-watt incandescent lamp, are exempt from
the requirements of this subsection.
               iv.   “Barn lights,” aka “dusk-to-dawn lights,” shall be
shielded.
            4.   Billboards and signs.
               i.   Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The
fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to shield the source from off-site
view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard.
The face of the sign or billboard and the illumination shall not exceed 30-
vertical footcandles during the hours of darkness.
               ii.   The light source for internally illuminated signs and
billboards shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign face.
               iii.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating
light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted.
               iv.   The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard is not permitted.
      (6)   Glare.
         a.   No use shall cause glare by highly reflective materials,
including, but not limited to, unpainted metal or reflective glass, on the
exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths or on
nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot’s vision. Proposed solar arrays
shall be coordinated with the FAA’s Texas Airports Development Office prior to
approval.
         b.   Criteria. The control of glare shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement. Glare surface suppressants that effectively
reduce glare may also be utilized.
            2.   All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to pilots or the safe operation of
aircraft.
            3.   Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
be shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output past the
object being illuminated or skyward.
            4.   Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting,
fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess
of 16 feet above finished grade. Fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade.
            5.   Flag lighting sources shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be adequately shielded.
      (7)   Emissions. No use shall, as part of its regular operations, cause
emissions of smoke, ash, vapor, gas, dust, steam or other emissions that could
obscure visibility of pilots or conflict with airport operations.
      (8)   Wildlife attractants. No use shall foster an increase in bird
population and thereby increase the likelihood of a bird impact problem.
      (9)   Waste disposal facilities.
            1.   No new waste disposal facilities shall be permitted with
10,000 feet of any airport unless approval is obtained from the FAA.
            2.   Expansions of existing land disposal facilities within these
distances shall be permitted only upon demonstration that the facility is
designed and will operate so as not to increase the likelihood of bird/aircraft
collisions. Timely notice of any proposed expansion shall be provided to the
City of Fort Worth, Texas DOT and the FAA, and any approval shall be
accompanied by such conditions as are necessary to ensure that an increase in
bird/aircraft collisions is not likely to result.
   (f)   Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The City of Fort Worth has designated the
Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Overlay (AO) in order to promote the
public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of and near municipal airport environs and to prevent the
impairment of municipal airports and the public investment therein.
      (2)   Boundaries. The specific boundary of the Dallas/Fort Worth
International Airport Overlay is shown on the official zoning map maintained by
the city and depicted and attached as Exhibit B.30.
      (3)   Communications facilities and electrical interference. No use shall
cause electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
at the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio, radio-
telephone, television transmission facilities, electrical transmission lines
and wind turbines shall be coordinated with the Federal Aviation
Administration’s (FAA) Texas Airports Development Office prior to approval.
      (4)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   Generally. No use shall project lighting directly onto an
existing runway or taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths
except where necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new
or expanded use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light
away from airport approach and landing paths. Control of outdoor lighting shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement.
         b.   Criteria. Lighting shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Lighting arrangement. Lighting arrangements that mimic runway
lighting (i.e., long linear parallel rows of lighting) that could be confused
with runway or taxiway lighting are not permitted.
            2.   Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities,
uniformities and glare control in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), unless otherwise
directed by the City of Fort Worth.
            3.   Lighting fixture design.
               i.   Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
               ii.   For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such
as, but not limited to, parking areas, roadways, vehicular and pedestrian
passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and
passive recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and
pedestrian paths, and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria. Fixtures, except those containing
directional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard non-directional 40-watt
incandescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. In the
case of decorative street lighting, the City of Fort Worth may approve the use
of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA cutoff criteria.
               iii.   For the lighting of predominantly non-horizontal surfaces
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs, billboards,
fountains, displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed so as to not project their output past the object being
illuminated or skyward. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps,
with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated
output of a standard non-directional 40-watt incandescent lamp, are exempt from
the requirements of this subsection (f)(4)b.3.iii.
               iv.   “Barn lights,” aka “dusk-to-dawn lights,” shall be
shielded.
            4.   Billboards and signs.
               i.   Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The
fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to shield the source from off-site
view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard.
The face of the sign or billboard and the illumination shall not exceed 30-
vertical footcandles during the hours of darkness.
               ii.   The light source for internally illuminated signs and
billboards shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign face.
               iii.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating
light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted.
               iv.   The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard is not permitted.
      (5)   Glare.
         a.   Generally. No use shall cause glare by highly reflective
materials, including, but not limited to, unpainted metal or reflective glass,
on the exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths
or on nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot’s vision. Proposed solar
arrays shall be coordinated with the FAA’s Texas Airports Development Office
prior to approval.
         b.   Criteria. The control of glare shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement. Glare surface suppressants that effectively
reduce glare may also be utilized.
            2.   All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to pilots or the safe operation of
aircraft.
            3.   Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
be shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output past the
object being illuminated or skyward.
            4.   Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting,
fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess
of 16 feet above finished grade. Fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade.
            5.   Flag lighting sources shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be adequately shielded.
      (6)   Emissions. No use shall, as part of its regular operations, cause
emissions of smoke, ash, vapor, gas, dust, steam or other emissions that could
obscure visibility of pilots or conflict with airport operations.
      (7)   Wildlife attractants. No use shall foster an increase in bird
population and thereby increase the likelihood of a bird impact problem.
      (8)   Waste disposal facilities.
         a.   No new waste disposal facilities shall be permitted with 10,000
feet of any airport unless approval is obtained from the FAA.
         b.   Expansions of existing land disposal facilities within these
distances shall be permitted only upon demonstration that the facility is
designed and will operate so as not to increase the likelihood of bird/aircraft
collisions. Timely notice of any proposed expansion shall be provided to the
City of Fort Worth, Texas DOT and the FAA, and any approval shall be
accompanied by such conditions as are necessary to ensure that an increase in
bird/aircraft collisions is not likely to result.
   (g)   Fort Worth Alliance Airport.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The City of Fort Worth has designated the Fort
Worth Alliance Airport Overlay (AO) in order to promote the public health,
safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of
and near municipal airport environs and to prevent the impairment of municipal
airports and the public investment therein.
      (2)   Boundaries. The specific boundary of the Fort Worth Alliance
Airport Overlay is shown on the official zoning map maintained by the city and
depicted and attached hereto as Exhibit B.31 and located in Appendix B of the
zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Communications facilities and electrical interference. No use shall
cause electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications
at the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport
and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio,
radiotelephone, television transmission facilities, electrical transmission
lines and wind turbines shall be coordinated with the Federal Aviation
Administration’s (FAA) Texas Airports Development Office prior to approval.
      (4)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   Generally. No use shall project lighting directly onto an
existing runway or taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths
except where necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new
or expanded use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light
away from airport approach and landing paths. Control of outdoor lighting shall
be achieved primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement.
         b.   Criteria. Lighting shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Lighting arrangement. Lighting arrangements that mimic runway
lighting (i.e., long linear parallel rows of lighting) that could be confused
with runway or taxi way lighting are not permitted.
            2.   Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities,
uniformities and glare control in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), unless otherwise
directed by the City of Fort Worth.
            3.   Lighting fixture design.
               i.   Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application.
               ii.   For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such
as, but not limited to, parking areas, roadways, vehicular and pedestrian
passage areas, merchandising and storage areas, automotive-fuel dispensing
facilities, automotive sales areas, loading docks, cul-de-sacs, active and
passive recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle and
pedestrian paths, and site entrances, fixtures shall be aimed straight down and
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria. Fixtures, except those containing
directional lamps, with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard non-directional 40-watt
incandescent lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. In the
case of decorative street lighting, the City of Fort Worth may approve the use
of luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA cutoff criteria.
               iii.   For the lighting of predominantly non-horizontal surfaces
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs, billboards,
fountains, displays and statuary, fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be
installed and aimed so as to not project their output past the object being
illuminated or skyward. Fixtures, except those containing directional lamps,
with an aggregate rated lamp output not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated
output of a standard non-directional 40-watt incandescent lamp, are exempt from
the requirements of this subsection.
               iv.   “Barn lights,” aka “dusk-to-dawn lights,” shall be
shielded.
            4.   Billboards and signs.
               i.   Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and aimed downward. The
fixtures shall be designed, fitted and aimed to shield the source from off-site
view and to place the light output onto and not beyond the sign or billboard.
The face of the sign or billboard and the illumination shall not exceed 30-
vertical footcandles during the hours of darkness.
               ii.   The light source for internally illuminated signs and
billboards shall not exceed 1,000 initial lumens per square foot of sign face.
               iii.   Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating
light sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting shall not be
permitted.
               iv.   The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard is not permitted.
      (5)   Glare.
         a.   Generally. No use shall cause glare by highly reflective
materials, including, but not limited to, unpainted metal or reflective glass,
on the exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths
or on nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot’s vision. Proposed solar
arrays shall be coordinated with the FAA’s Texas Airports Development Office
prior to approval.
         b.   Criteria. The control of glare shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height, wattage,
aiming angle and fixture placement. Glare surface suppressants that effectively
reduce glare may also be utilized.
            2.   All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to pilots or the safe operation of
aircraft.
            3.   Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
be shielded, installed and aimed that they do not project their output past the
object being illuminated or skyward.
            4.   Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting,
fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess
of 16 feet above finished grade. Fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade; provided
however, fixtures in industrial areas meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria may be
mounted on existing light structures or any like-kind replacement at the same
height as the existing light fixture.
            5.   Flag lighting sources shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag and shall be adequately shielded.
      (6)   Emissions. No use shall, as part of its regular operations, cause
emissions of smoke, ash, vapor, gas, dust, steam or other emissions that could
obscure visibility of pilots or conflict with airport operations.
      (7)   Wildlife attractants. No use shall foster an increase in bird
population and thereby increase the likelihood of a bird impact problem.
      (8)   Waste disposal facilities.
         a.   No new waste disposal facilities shall be permitted with 10,000
feet of any airport unless approval is obtained from the FAA.
         b.   Expansions of existing land disposal facilities within these
distances shall be permitted only upon demonstration that the facility is
designed and will operate so as not to increase the likelihood of bird/aircraft
collisions. Timely notice of any proposed expansion shall be provided to the
City of Fort Worth, Texas DOT and the FAA, and any approval shall be
accompanied by such conditions as are necessary to ensure that an increase in
bird/aircraft collisions is not likely to result.
      (9)   Compatible land use regulations.
         a.   All uses from time to time permitted by any underlying zoning
classifications shall be permitted except the following uses which are
prohibited:
            1.   All residential uses; provided, however, residential uses that
are incidental to or ancillary to the operation of the airport or to the
conduct of the aviation-related activities, including, for example, and without
limitation, crew rest quarters and temporary housing for aviation trainees
permitted by this subsection, shall be permitted;
            2.   New kindergarten through twelfth grade educational uses and
child care facilities. This limitation shall not include existing public or
private school campuses and shall not limit the ability of such campuses to add
or expand buildings onto existing school campus property as of the date of this
ordinance, April 15, 2014. All other educational uses, including, without
limitation, colleges and universities, including courses offered by colleges
and universities which serve as credit for both college degree programs and
high school graduation, facilities for employee or client training, schools for
flight instruction and vocational schools shall be permitted; and
            3.   Hospitals, nursing homes, institutions or any other facilities
providing convalescent or rehabilitative care; establishments for the care,
treatment or rehabilitation of alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients;
residence homes for the aged including assisted living and nursing homes; and
institutions, homes or rehabilitation centers for persons convicted of crimes;
provided, however, medical, dental or optical clinics for the examination,
consultation or treatment of patients, medical laboratories, establishments for
the sale or rental of or industrial facilities for the manufacture of medical
or optical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, veterinarian clinics and related
facilities, emergency medical facilities operated by or in connection with the
airport shall be permitted.
         b.   Heliports, helistops and any other facilities for the landing and
taking off of helicopters, and accessory uses thereto, shall be permitted as a
matter of right in the overlay; provided, however, no heliport, helistop or
other facility for the landing and taking off of helicopters shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any church, library or public park. The city council may,
however, approve the location of a heliport, helistop or other facility for the
landing and taking off of helicopters that is less than 1,000 feet from any
church, library or public park.
(Ord. 20898-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-10-2013, eff. 9-25-2013; Ord. 21032-11-2013,
§ 1, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 21046-12-2013, § 1, passed 12-3-2013, eff. 12-31-
2013; Ord. 21147-03-2014, 1, passed 3-4-2014, eff. 3-29-2014; Ord. 21207-04-
2014, § 1, passed 4-15-2014; eff. 5-26-2014; Ord. 21430-09-2014, § 1, passed 9-
9-2014, eff. 10-7-2014)
Table 1: Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential
Zones (Revised 8-30-2013)
2012 NAICS No. Land Use Name Clear Zone APZ-I APZ-II Density Guidelines
Table 1: Compatible Use Zones Land Use Compatibility in Accident Potential Zones (Revised 8-30-2013)
2012                    Clear       APZ-
NAICS   Land Use Name   Zone  APZ-I II    Density Guidelines
No.
       Residential                     
       Household Units                 
236115  Single units:   N     N     N     See Note 2 below
        detached (new)
        Single units:                     * Existing homes may be rebuilt; refer to §
       detached        *     *     *     4.405(c)(4) for regulations in existing residential subdivisions
        (existing)
2361    Single units:   N     N     N      
        semidetached
2361    Single units:   N     N     N      
        attached row
2361    Two units:      N     N     N      
        side-by-side
2361    Two units: one  N     N     N      
        above the other
236116  Apartments:     N     N     N      
        walk-up
236116  Apartment:      N     N     N      
        elevator
7213    Group quarters  N     N     N      
7211    Residential     N     N     N      
        hotels
       Mobile home     N     N     N      
        parks or courts
7211    Transient       N     N     N      
        lodgings
       Other           N     N     N      
        residential
        Existing                          * Existing structures may be rebuilt to the same use and s.f.; refer to §
       Nonresidential  *     *     *     4.405(c)(5) for regulations
        Uses
       Manufacturing                      
        Food and
311     kindred         N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.56 in APZ-II
        products;
        manufacturing
313,    Textile mill
314     products;       N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.56 in APZ-II
        manufacturing
        Apparel and
        other finished
        products:
315,    products made
316     from fabrics,   N     N     N      
        leather and
        similar
        materials;
        manufacturing
        Lumber and wood
        products
321     (except         N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
        furniture);
        manufacturing
        Furniture and
337     fixtures;       N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
        manufacturing
        Paper and
322,    allied          N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
323     products;
        manufacturing
        Printing,
511     publishing and  N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
        allied
        industries
        Chemicals and
325     allied          N     N     N      
        products;
        manufacturing
        Petroleum
32411   refining and    N     N     N      
        related
        industries
        Rubber and
3252    misc. plastic   N     N     N      
        products;
        manufacturing
327991, Stone, clay and
3271,   glass products; N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.56 in APZ-II
3272    manufacturing
        Primary metal
331     products;       N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.56 in APZ-II
        manufacturing
        Fabricated
332     metal products; N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.56 in APZ-II
        manufacturing
        Professional
        scientific, and
        controlling
3333    instruments;    N     N     N      
        photographic
        and optical
        goods; watches
        and clocks
339     Miscellaneous   N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
        manufacturing
        Transportation,
       communication                   
        and utilities
        Railroad, rapid
482,    rail transit,
485     and street      N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        railway
        transportation
485     Motor vehicle   N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        transportation
481     Aircraft        N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        transportation
483     Marine craft    N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        transportation
        Highway and
485     street right-   N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        of-way
81293   Automobile      N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.S6 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        parking
517     Communication   N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
22      Utilities       N     Y 5   Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II; see Note 3 below
        Solid waste
        disposal
562     (landfills,     N     N     N      
        incineration
        and the like)
        Other
       transportation, N     Y 5   Y     See Note 5 below
        communication
        and utilities
       Trade                           
42      Wholesale trade N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 in APZ-I and 0.56 in APZ-II
        Retail trade -
        building
444     materials,      N     Y     Y     See Note 6 below
        hardware and
        farm equipment
        Retail trade
        (7)- shopping
        centers, home
452     improvement     N     N     Y     See Note 7 below
        store, discount
        club,
        electronics
        superstore
        Retail trade -                    See Note 8 below.
452     regional mall   N     *     *     * Refer to §
        (existing)                        4.405(c)(5) for regulations
445     Retail trade -  N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.24 in APZ-II
        food
        Retail trade -
        automotive,
441     marine craft,   N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.14 in APZ-I and 0.28 in APZ-II
        aircraft and
        accessories
        Retail trade -
448     apparel and     N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.28 in APZ-II
        accessories
        Retail trade -
        furniture,
442     home,           N     N     Y     Max. FAR 0.28 in APZ-II
        furnishings and
        equipment
        Retail trade -
722     eating and      N     N     N      
        drinking
        establishments
45399   Other retail    N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.16 in APZ-II
        trade services
       Services                           
        Finance,
52      insurance and   N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.22 for general office/office park in APZ-II; see Note 9 below
        real estate
        services
812     Personal        N     N     Y     Office uses only; max. FAR of 0.22 in APZ-II
        services
81222   Cemeteries      N     Y 10  Y 10   
        Business
        services
        (credit
5614    reporting,      N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.22 in APZH
        mail,
        stenographic,
        reproduction
        advertising)
        Warehousing and
493     storage         N     Y     Y     Max. FAR 1.0 APZ-I; 2.0 in APZ-II
        services
811     Repair services N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.11 APZ-I; 0.22 in APZ-II
        Professional
54, 62  services/       N     N     Y      
        offices
622,    Hospitals,
623     nursing homes/  N     N     N      
        assisted living
621999  Other medical   N     N     N     See Note 11 below
        facilities
        Contract
23      construction    N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.11 APZ-I; 0.22 in APZ-II
        services
92      Government      N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.24 in APZ-II
        services
61      Educational     N     N     N      
        services
       Miscellaneous   N     N     Y     Max. FAR of 0.22 in APZ-II
        Cultural,
       entertainment                      
        and
        recreational
        Cultural
813     activities (and N     N     N      
        religious
        Institutions)
71219   Nature exhibits N     Y 12  Y 12   
813     Public assembly N     N     N      
71      Auditoriums,    N     N     N      
        concert halls
        Outdoor music
71      shells,         N     N     N      
        amphitheaters
        Outdoor sports
7112    arenas,         N     N     N      
        spectator
        sports
        Amusements -
        fairgrounds,
713     miniature golf, N     N     Y      
        driving ranges,
        amusement
        parks, etc.
        Recreational
        activities
713     (include golf   N     Y 12  Y 12  Max. FAR of 0.11 APZ-I; 0.22 in APZ-II
        courses, riding
        stables, water
        recreation)
7212    Resorts and     N     N     N      
        group camps
       Parks           N     Y 12  Y 12  Max. FAR of 0.11 APZ-I; 0.22 in APZ-II
        Other cultural,
7139    entertainment   N     Y 9   Y 9   Max. FAR of 0.11 APZ-I; 0.22 in APZ-II
        and recreation
        Resource
       Production and                     
        Extraction
        Agriculture
111     (except         Y 4   Y 13  Y 13   
        livestock)
        Livestock             Y     Y
112     farming and     N     13,14 13,14  
        breeding
        Agriculture                       Max. FAR of 0.28 APZ-I; 0.56 APZ-II no activity which produces smoke, glare
       related         N     Y 13  Y 13  or involves explosives
        activities
113     Forestry        N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 APZ-I; 0.56 APZ-II no activity which produces smoke, glare
        activities 15                     or involves explosives
114     Fishing         N 16  Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 APZ-I; 0.56 APZ-II no activity which produces smoke, glare
        activities 16                     or involves explosives
21      Mining          N     Y     Y     Max. FAR of 0.28 APZ-I; 0.56 APZ-II no activity which produces smoke, glare
        activities                        or involves explosives
        Other resource                    Max. FAR of 0.28 APZ-I; 0.56 APZ-II no activity which produces smoke,
212399  production or   N     Y     Y     glare, or involves explosives
        extraction
       Other                              
       Undeveloped     Y     Y     Y      
        land
       Water areas     N 17  N 17  N 17   
Keys to Table 1
(Based on Operational Navy Instruction “Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) Program” OPNAVINST 11010.36C;
dated 10-9-2008)
NAICS = North American Industry Classification System, United States Department of Commerce, 2012
Y (Yes) = Land use and related structures are normally compatible without restriction
N (No) = Land use and related structures are not normally compatible and should be prohibited
Y # (Yes with restrictions) = The land use and related structures are generally compatible. However, see notes
indicated by the number.
N # (No with exceptions) = The land use and related structures are generally incompatible. However, see notes
indicated by the number.
FAR = Floor Area Ratio; a floor area ratio is the ratio between the square feet of floor area of the building and the
site area.
Du/Ac = Dwelling Units Per Acre This metric is customarily used to measure residential densities.
Notes for Table 1
1   A “Yes” or a “No” designation for compatible land use is to be used only for general comparison. Within each,
uses exist where further evaluation may be needed in each category as to whether it is clearly compatible, normally
compatible or not compatible due to the variation of densities of people and structures. In order to assist
installations and local governments, general suggestions as to floor/area ratios are provided as a guide to density,
in some categories. In general, except with respect to an existing regional mall site, land use restrictions which
limit commercial, services or industrial buildings or structure occupants to 25 per acre in APZ-I, and 50 per acre in
APZ-II are the range of occupancy levels considered to be low density. Outside events should normally be limited to
assemblies of not more than 25 people per acre in APZ-I, and maximum assemblies of 50 people per acre in APZ-II.
2   The suggested maximum density for detached single-family housing is one to two du/ac in a planned development
(PD) of single-family detached units where clustered housing development results in large open areas, this density
could possibly be increased provided the amount of surface area covered by structures does not exceed 20% of the PD
total area. PD encourages clustered development that leaves large open areas.
3   Other factors to be considered: labor intensity, structural coverage, explosive characteristics, air pollution,
electronic interference with aircraft, height of structures and potential glare to pilots.
4   No structures (except airfield lighting), buildings or aboveground utility/communications lines should normally
be located in clear zone areas on or off the installation. The clear zone is subject to severe restrictions.
5   No passenger terminals and no major above ground transmission lines in APZ-I
6   Maximum FARs for lumber yards are 0.20 in APZ-I and 0.40 in APZ-II. For hardware/paint and farm equipment stores,
the maximum FARs are 0.12 in APZ-I and 0.24 in APZ-II
7   A shopping center is an integrated group of commercial establishments that is planned, developed, owned or
managed as a unit. Shopping center types include strip, neighborhood, community, regional and super regional
facilities anchored by a supermarket, or drug store, discount retailer, department store or several department
stores. Shopping centers include retail businesses, personal services, storefront offices and storefront financial
services. The following uses are prohibited: any type of residential including hotels, hospitals/nursing homes/
assisted living, other medical facilities, educational services, call centers, concert halls, sports arenas and
religious institutions. Eating and drinking establishments are limited to 40% of the total gross floor square foot
area of the shopping center. Included in this category are such uses as big box discount clubs, home improvement
superstores, office supply superstores, and electronics superstores. The maximum recommended FAR should be applied to
the gross leasable area of the shopping center rather than attempting to use the other recommended FARs listed in
this table under retail or trade. FARs do not apply to existing shopping centers.
8   An “existing regional mall” site, inclusive of anchor stores, and including commercial redevelopment of the site,
is a type of shopping center. An existing regional mall site may have the uses allowed in the Trade and Services
sections, with Eating and Drinking establishments limited to 40% of the total existing square footage. Movie theaters
are allowed up to 7% of the total existing square footage. Other medical facilities, excluding blood banks and
surgery centers, are permitted up to a maximum of 25,000 s.f. within 400 feet of the eastern APZ boundary. The
following uses are prohibited: any type of residential including hotels, hospitals/nursing homes/assisted living, day
care (child or adult), kindergarten, elementary or secondary school, college or university, call centers, concert
halls, sports arenas and religious institutions. FARs do not apply to an existing regional mall site.
9   Low intensity office uses only. Accessory uses such as meeting places, auditoriums and the like are not
recommended.
10   No chapels are allowed within APZ-I and APZ-II.
11   “Other medical facilities” includes medical and dental clinics, blood banks, outpatient/ambulatory surgery
centers, dialysis centers and similar higher density and sensitive uses.
12   Facilities much be low intensity and provide no tot lots and the like. Facilities such as clubhouses, meeting
places, auditoriums, large classes and the like are not recommended.
13   Includes livestock grazing, but excludes feedlots and intensive animal husbandry. Activities that attract
concentrations of birds creating a hazard to aircraft operation should be excluded.
14   Includes feedlots and intensive animal husbandry.
15   Lumber and timber products removed due to establishment, expansion, or maintenance of clear zones will be
disposed of in accordance with appropriate DOD Natural Resources Instructions.
16   Controlled hunting and fishing may be permitted for the purpose of wildlife management.
17   Naturally occurring water features (e.g., rivers, lakes, streams, wetlands) are compatible.
 
Table 2: Land Use Compatibility in Runway Protection Zones (Revised 10-29-
2013)
2012 NAICS No. Land Use Name Permitted Use Density Guidelines
Table 2: Land Use Compatibility in Runway Protection Zones (Revised 10-29-2013)
2012 NAICS No.     Land Use Name      Permitted Use Density Guidelines
                  Residential                      
                  Household Units                  
236115             Single units:      N              
                   detached (new)
2361               Single units:      N              
                   semidetached
2361               Single units:      N              
                   attached row
2361               Two units: side-   N              
                   by-side
2361               Two units: one     N              
                   above the other
236116             Apartments: walk-  N              
                   up
236116             Apartment:         N              
                   elevator
7213               Group quarters     N              
7211               Residential hotels N              
                  Mobile home parks  N              
                   or courts
7211               Transient lodgings N              
                  Other residential  N              
                  Manufacturing                     
                   Food and kindred
311                products;          Y             Max. FAR 0.56
                   manufacturing
                   Textile mill
313, 314           products;          Y             Max. FAR 0.56
                   manufacturing
                   Apparel and other
                   finished products:
                   products made from
315, 316           fabrics, leather   N              
                   and similar
                   materials;
                   manufacturing
                   Lumber and wood
321                products (except   Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   furniture);
                   manufacturing
                   Furniture and
337                fixtures;          Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   manufacturing
                   Paper and allied
322, 323           products;          Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   manufacturing
                   Printing,
511                publishing, and    Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   allied industries
                   Chemicals and
325                allied products;   N              
                   manufacturing
                   Petroleum refining
32411              and related        N              
                   industries
                   Rubber and misc.
3252               plastic products;  N              
                   manufacturing
                   Stone, clay and
327991, 3271, 3272 glass products;    Y             Max. FAR 0.56
                   manufacturing
                   Primary metal
331                products;          Y             Max. FAR 0.56
                   manufacturing
                   Fabricated metal
332                products;          Y             Max. FAR 0.56
                   manufacturing
                   Professional
                   scientific, and
                   controlling
3333               instruments;       N              
                   photographic and
                   optical goods;
                   watches and clocks
339                Miscellaneous      Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   manufacturing
                   Transportation,
                  communication and                 
                   utilities
                   Railroad, rapid
482, 485           rail transit, and  Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                   street railway                   3 below
                   transportation
485                Motor vehicle      Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                   transportation                   3 below
481                Aircraft           Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                   transportation                   3 below
483                Marine craft       Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                   transportation                   3 below
485                Highway and street Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                   right-of-way                     3 below
81293              Automobile parking Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                                                    3 below
517                Communication      Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                                                    3 below
22                 Utilities          Y             Max. FAR of 0.28; see Note
                                                    3 below
                   Solid waste
                   disposal
562                (landfills,        N              
                   incineration and
                   the like)
                   Other
                  transportation,    Y             See Note 5 below
                   communication and
                   utilities
                  Trade                             
42                 Wholesale trade    Y             Max. FAR of 0.28
                   Retail trade -
                   building
444                materials,         Y             See Note 6 below
                   hardware and farm
                   equipment
                   Retail trade (7)-
                   shopping centers,
452                home improvement   Y             See Note 7 below
                   store, discount
                   club, electronics
                   superstore
445                Retail trade -     Y             Max. FAR of 0.24
                   food
                   Retail trade -
441                automotive, marine Y             Max. FAR of 0.14
                   craft, aircraft
                   and accessories
                   Retail trade -
448                apparel and        Y             Max. FAR 0.28
                   accessories
                   Retail trade -
442                furniture, home,   Y             Max. FAR 0.28
                   furnishings and
                   equipment
                   Retail trade -
722                eating and         N              
                   drinking
                   establishments
45399              Other retail trade Y             Max. FAR of 0.16
                  Services                          
                   Finance, insurance               Max. FAR of 0.22 for
52                 and real estate    Y             general office/office park;
                   services                         see Note 8 below
812                Personal services  Y             Office uses only; max. FAR
                                                    of 0.22
81222              Cemeteries         Y 9            
                   Business services
                   (credit reporting,
5614               mail,              Y             Max. FAR of 0.22
                   stenographic,
                   reproduction,
                   advertising)
493                Warehousing and    Y             Max. FAR 1.0
                   storage services
811                Repair services    Y             Max. FAR of 0.11
54, 62             Professional       Y              
                   services/offices
                   Hospitals, nursing
622, 623           homes/assisted     N              
                   living
621999             Other medical      N              
                   facilities
                   Contract
23                 construction       V             Max. FAR of 0.11
                   services
92                 Government         Y             Max. FAR of 0.24
                   services
61                 Educational        N              
                   services
                  Miscellaneous      Y             Max. FAR of 0.22
                   Cultural,
                  entertainment and                 
                   recreational
                   Cultural
813                activities (and    N              
                   religious
                   institutions)
71219              Nature exhibits    Y 10           
813                Public assembly    N              
71                 Auditoriums,       N              
                   concert halls
                   Outdoor music
71                 shells,            N              
                   amphitheaters
                   Outdoor sports
7112               arenas, spectator  N              
                   sports
                   Amusements -
                   fairgrounds,
713                miniature golf,    Y              
                   driving ranges,
                   amusement parks
                   and the like
                   Recreational
                   activities
713                (include golf      Y 10          Max. FAR of 0.11
                   courses, riding
                   stables, water
                   recreation)
7212               Resorts and group  N              
                   camps
                  Parks              Y 10          Max. FAR of 0.11
                   Other cultural,
7139               entertainment and  Y 8           Max. FAR of 0.11
                   recreation
                   Resource
                  Production and                    
                   Extraction
111                Agriculture        Y 11           
                   (except livestock)
112                Livestock farming  Y 11,12        
                   and breeding
                                                    Max. FAR of 0.28; no
                  Agriculture        Y 11          activity which produces
                   related activities               smoke, glare or involves
                                                    explosives
                                                    Max. FAR of 0.28; no
113                Forestry           Y             activity which produces
                   activities 13                    smoke, glare or involves
                                                    explosives
                                                    Max. FAR of 0.28; no
114                Fishing activities Y             activity which produces
                   14                               smoke, glare or involves
                                                    explosives
                                                    Max. FAR of 0.28; no
21                 Mining activities  Y             activity which produces
                                                    smoke, glare or involves
                                                    explosives
                   Other resource                   Max. FAR of 0.28; no
212399             production or      Y             activity which produces
                   extraction                       smoke, glare or involves
                                                    explosives
                  Other                             
                  Undeveloped land   Y              
                  Water areas        N 15           
(Based on Operational Navy Instruction “Air Installation Compatible Use Zone
(AICUZ) Program” OPNAVINST 11010.36C; dated 10-9-2008)
Keys to Table 2
NAICS = North American Industry Classification System, United States Department
of Commerce, 2012
Y (Yes) = Land use and related structures are normally compatible without
restriction
N (No) = Land use and related structures are not normally compatible and should
be prohibited
Y # = (Yes with restrictions)
N # = (No with exceptions)
FAR = Floor Area Ratio
Du/Ac = Dwelling Units Per Acre
Notes for Table 2
1   A “Yes” or a “No” designation for compatible land use is to be used only
for general comparison. Within each, uses exist where further evaluation may be
needed in each category as to whether it is clearly compatible, normally
compatible or not compatible due to the variation of densities of people and
structures. In order to assist installations and local governments, general
suggestions as to floor/area ratios are provided as a guide to density, in some
categories. In general, land use restrictions which limit commercial, services
or industrial buildings or structure occupants to 25 per acre is the range of
occupancy levels considered to be low density. Outside events should normally
be limited to assemblies of not more than 25 people per acre.
2   The suggested maximum density for detached single-family housing is one to
two du/ac. In a planned development (PD) of single-family detached units where
clustered housing development results in large open areas, this density could
possibly be increased provided the amount of surface area covered by structures
does not exceed 20% of the PD total area. PD encourages clustered development
that leaves large open areas.
3   Other factors to be considered; labor intensity, structural coverage,
explosive characteristics, air pollution, electronic interference with
aircraft, height of structures and potential glare to pilots.
4   No structures (except airfield lighting), buildings or aboveground utility/
communications lines should normally be located in clear zone areas on or off
the installation. The clear zone is subject to severe restrictions.
5   No passenger terminals and no major above ground transmission lines.
6   Maximum FARs for lumber yards are 0.20. For hardware/paint and farm
equipment stores, the maximum FARs are 0.12.
7   A shopping center is an integrated group of commercial establishments that
is planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit. Shopping center types
include strip, neighborhood, community, regional and super regional facilities
anchored by a supermarket, or drug store, discount retailer, department store
or several department stores. The following uses are prohibited: any type of
residential including hotels, hospitals/nursing homes/assisted living, other
medical facilities, educational services, call centers, concert halls sports
arenas and religious institutions. Included in this category are such uses as
big box discount clubs, home improvement superstores, office supply superstores
and electronics superstores. The maximum recommended FAR should be applied to
the gross leasable area of the shopping center rather than attempting to use
the other recommended FARs listed in this table under retail or trade.
8   Low intensity office uses only. Accessory uses such as meeting places,
auditoriums and the like are not recommended
9   No chapels are allowed.
10   Facilities much be low intensity and provide no tot lots and the like.
Facilities such as clubhouses, meeting places, auditoriums, large classes and
the like are not recommended.
11   Includes livestock grazing, but excludes feedlots and intensive animal
husbandry. Activities that attract concentrations of birds creating a hazard to
aircraft operation should be excluded.
12   Includes feedlots and intensive animal husbandry.
13   Lumber and timber products removed due to establishment, expansion, or
maintenance of clear zones will be disposed of in accordance with appropriate
DOD Natural Resources Instructions.
14   Controlled hunting and fishing may be permitted for the purpose of
wildlife management.
15   Naturally occurring water features (e.g., rivers, lakes, streams,
wetlands) are compatible.
 
§ 4.406 TCU RESIDENTIAL (“TCU”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the TCU residential overlay
district is to facilitate preservation of existing single-family residential
neighborhoods by establishing limitations and special requirements on property
uses within the area that are inconsistent with the underlying zoning and
original construction thereof by providing a mechanism for making such
inconsistent uses compatible.
   (b)   Applicability. The requirements set forth in this section shall only
apply to one-family zoned property located within the boundaries of the TCU
residential overlay district. These requirements should be applicable in
addition to any other requirement set forth in the zoning ordinance or any
other section of the Fort Worth City Code. Should a requirement set forth in
this section conflict with another requirement set forth in the zoning
ordinance, the requirement set forth in this section shall, unless otherwise
provided, supersede the zoning requirement to the extent of such inconsistency.
   (c)    Boundaries. The specific boundaries of the TCU residential overlay
district are shown on the official zoning map maintained by the city and
depicted and attached as
Exhibit B.32.
   (d)   Zoning classification.
      (1)   TCU residential overlay district. The TCU residential overlay
district is designed as an overlay to the base zoning district. Property
located within this zoning overlay must also be designated as being within one
of the base zoning districts. Permitted uses must be allowed in both the base
zoning district and the overlay district and must comply with height, yard,
area and parking requirements of the base zoning district.
      (2)   Zoning designation. The zoning designation of the property located
within the TCU residential overlay district shall consist of the base zoning
symbol and the overlay symbol as a suffix. For example, if a parcel is zoned
"A-5" and is also located in the TCU residential overlay district, the zoning
of the parcel would be "A-5/TCU."
   (e)   Use restrictions. No more than three unrelated persons may occupy a
single dwelling unit in the TCU residential overlay district unless the owner
has registered as a nonconforming use by March 31, 2015. When counting the
number of unrelated persons in a single dwelling unit, persons related by
blood, marriage or adoption shall count as one unrelated person, provided all
other persons shall each count as one unrelated person.
   (f)   Discontinuance of nonconforming use. A residential nonconforming use
in the TCU residential overlay district, when discontinued or abandoned, shall
not be resumed. Discontinuance or abandonment shall be defined as when a
building ceases to be occupied in a bona fide manner as a nonconforming use for
a period of 24 consecutive calendar months; provided, however, use of a
building by persons related by blood, marriage or adoption for up to a 24 month
period of time shall not affect the nonconforming status of the building. All
other sections of
App A. Chapter 7, "Nonconformities" shall apply.
   (g)   Procedure for registering as nonconforming. Owners of a building
located within the TCU residential overlay district being occupied by four or
five unrelated persons, or issued a building permit as of the effective day of
this ordinance, may continue such use by registering as a nonconforming use on
or before March 31, 2015. Application for registering as a nonconforming use
shall be made by submitting to the planning and development department a
completed application on a form approved for such purpose by the development
services director. Registration as a nonconforming use shall limit occupancy to
the demonstrated preexisting density not to exceed five unrelated persons.
Failure to register as a nonconforming use with the planning and development
department shall result in failure to obtain nonconforming use status.
(Ord. 21547-12-2014, § 1, passed 12-2-2014, eff. 12-8-2014; Ord. 24030-02-2020,
§ 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.407 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT (“CUP”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   Purpose and intent.  This purpose of this section is to set forth
the standards for the zoning commission and city council to evaluate proposed
conditional uses and provide the procedures for considering and approving
conditional use permit applications. Conditional uses are those uses which are
generally compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district,
but which require individual review of their proposed location, design and
configuration, and the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the
appropriateness of the use at a particular location within a given zoning
district.
      (2)   Relation to base zoning district. The conditional use permit is a
zoning overlay that supplements the primary underlying zoning district
classification by adding the specified use not otherwise allowed by right in
the base zoning district. The zoning designation of property with a conditional
use permit shall consist of the base zoning symbol and the overlay symbol as a
suffix.
      (3)   Conditional use permit amendment to zoning ordinance. Every
conditional use permit approved under the provisions of this section shall be
considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to the
property involved.
      (4)   Status of conditional permitted uses. The following general rules
apply to all conditional uses:
         a.   Conditional use permits in residential districts shall be limited
to those uses designated "CUP" in the Residential District Use Table in §
4.603.
         b.   Approval of a conditional use permit shall authorize only the
particular use or category of related uses for which the conditional use permit
is issued.
         c.   A conditional use shall not be enlarged, extended or otherwise
modified unless approved by the city council or approved administratively as
applicable.
         d.   The use of property for the purposes described in a conditional
use permit shall not commence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all or approvals which may
be required by the codes and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited
to, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy and subdivision approval have
been satisfied.
   (b)   Application for conditional use permit.
      (1)   An application shall be filed with the planning and development
department on a form prepared by that department and accompanied by a site
plan. An application shall not be accepted for filing until the information
required by the application and the site plan is provided and the appropriate
filing fee has been paid or a request for a site plan to be required and
considered through the site plan public hearing process. The zoning
administrator shall determine the completeness of the application and the
required application fee has been paid.
      (2)   The application shall include any additional information as
determined by the zoning administrator.
         a.   The application will be scheduled for a public hearing before the
zoning commission with appropriate notifications, once all comments from the
zoning administrator have been addressed.
         b.   The zoning commission and the city council may request additional
information to be included in the application.
      (3)   An application for a conditional use permit may be withdrawn at any
time, but if the application has been recommended for denial by the zoning
commission in compliance with Chapter 3, any new application requesting
substantially the same use on all or part of the same described land shall not
be considered within one year of withdrawal. No application for a conditional
use permit shall be considered for one year after a final decision denying the
application by the city council nor shall an application for a planned
development district be accepted for one year after denial of a conditional use
permit for a substantially similar use.
   (c)   Procedure.
      (1)   Public hearing required. The zoning commission and the city council
shall hold a public hearing on all applications for conditional use permits.
The procedures for public hearings for a request for approval of an application
shall be in accordance with Chapter 3, Article 5.
      (2)   Written notice. Written notice of the public hearing before the
zoning commission shall be in conformance with
Chapter 3, Article 5.
      (3)   Zoning commission recommendation. All recommendations by the zoning
commission shall be forwarded to the city council for the setting and holding
of a public hearing thereon. At the public hearing the zoning commission shall
review the application and receive from the applicant, the city staff, and
others who have an interest in the matter, facts and opinions concerning the
proposed use and the proposed conditions to which such use would be subject.
The zoning commission may recommend approval to the city council with or
without conditions or modifications or recommend denial of the application.
      (4)   City council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the zoning
commission, the city council may approve the application or deny the
application with or without prejudice. Approval of a conditional use permit
shall be by ordinance.
   (d)   Standards.
      (1)   Factors for consideration. When considering applications for a
conditional use permit, the zoning commission in making its recommendation and
the city council in rendering its decision on the application shall on the
basis of the site plan, if applicable, and other information submitted,
evaluate the impact of the conditional use on, and the compatibility with
surrounding properties and the neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of
the use at a particular location. The zoning commission and the city council
shall consider the following:
         a.   The proposed use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
         b.   The proposed use is compatible with the existing and adjacent
uses;
         c.   The proposed use meets all supplemental use standards
specifically applicable to the use as set forth in Chapter 5;
         d.   The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character
and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhoods;
         e.   The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare, or results in material damage or prejudice to
other property in the vicinity.
      (2)   Conditions. In approving the application, the zoning commission may
recommend and the city council may impose such conditions as are reasonably
necessary to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use in accordance with
these standards and the purpose and intent of this section. Conditions and
modifications may include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Regulation of period of time the use will be allowed;
         b.   Limitation of building size or height;
         c.   Increased open space;
         d.   Limitations on impervious surfaces;
         e.   Enhanced loading and parking requirements;
         f.   Additional landscaping, curbing, sidewalk, vehicular access and
parking improvements;
         g.   Placement or orientation of buildings and entryways;
         h.   Buffer yards, landscaping and screening;
         i.   Signage restrictions and design;
         j.   Maintenance of buildings and outdoor areas; and
         k.   Development in accordance with a submitted site plan.
   Conditions imposed shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy
is issued for the use of the land or any structure which is part of the
conditional use permit; and such conditions shall not be construed as
conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be
construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of
occupancy.
      (3)   Waivers and variances. The city council may waive or modify
specific standards otherwise made applicable to the conditional use as
reasonably necessary to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use in
accordance with the standards and purpose of this section. Conditions imposed
by the city council may not be waived or varied by the board of adjustment.
   (e)   Site plan requirements.
      (1)   Site plan requirements. The site plan submitted in support of a
request for a conditional use permit shall contain sufficient information
delineating the characteristics of the site, changes in those characteristics
as may be proposed by the development, how the development will relate to
public services and facilities, and what protection features are included to
ensure that the development will be compatible with existing and allowable
development on adjacent property and to mitigate development-related adverse
impacts. The site plan shall show at least the following items of information:
         a.   A current plat of the site including all easements;
         b.   Description of the proposed use(s);
         c.   Height, square footage, and setbacks of structures;
         d.   Required yards and open space;
         e.   Driveway widths and locations, roadway adjustments, traffic
control devices, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert
traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated traffic
on neighborhood streets, as approved by Transportation and Public Works (TPW).
A traffic impact analysis may be necessary as determined by TPW;
         f.   Off-street parking and loading areas;
         g.   Refuse and service areas including access and screening;
         h.   Utilities with reference to location, availability, and
compatibility;
         i.   Note indicating that the development will comply with the below
development standards of Chapter 6 unless otherwise provided on the site plan.
            1.   Exterior construction material and building design;
            2.   Location and dimensions of signs;
            3.   Lighting, including shielding and ambient light level not to
exceed one foot candle when adjacent to one- or two-family residential zoning
districts or uses;
            4.   Landscaping requirements.
         j.   An analysis of the existing land uses within 300 feet and the
relationship of the proposed development to the existing land uses;
         k.   Locations of floodplains and provisions for drainage, as approved
by TPW;
         l.   Any sustainable construction methods or design to be used in the
development;
         m.   Surface type of streets, alleys, and sidewalks, existing and
proposed; and
         n.   Any requested waivers to development standards shall be listed
and clearly identified on the site plan.
   (f)   Amendments. An amendment is a request for a modification of any
condition of a previously approved and currently valid conditional use permit.
      (1)   Review and Evaluation. Any revisions to the conditional use permit
after the approval by the city council shall be submitted to the zoning
administrator for distribution, review and evaluation by city staff prior to
resubmission and consideration by the zoning commission and city council where
applicable.
      (2)   Minor amendments. A conditional use permit is eligible for a minor
amendment if the request conforms to the provisions of this section, is in
keeping with the intent of the comprehensive plan, and there have not been more
than two minor amendments previously granted pursuant to this subsection. Minor
amendments to an approved site plan, which will not cause any of the following
circumstances to occur, may be authorized by the zoning administrator:
         a.   For all zoning districts other than mixed-use, form-based or
urban residential:
            1.   A change in the character of the development;
            2.   A 5% or greater increase in the gross floor areas of
structures;
            3.   Any substantial and material changes in such external effects
on adjacent property as noise, heat, light, glare and vibration;
            4.   A substantial and material reduction in the originally
approved separations between buildings;
            5.   Any adverse changes in traffic circulation, safety, drainage
or utilities;
            6.   A 5% or greater increase in the height of structures;
            7.   A 10% or greater reduction in the originally approved setbacks
from property lines;
            8.   A 5% or greater increase in ground coverage by structures;
            9.   A 5% or greater reduction in the ratio of off-street parking
and loading space (provided that the minimum requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2 are met);
            10.   A change in the size, height, lighting, flashing, animation
or orientation of originally approved signs. The decision of the Zoning
Administrator as to whether requested changes are minor shall be final and non-
appealable.
         b.   For all mixed-use, form-based or urban residential districts:
            1.   A change in the character of the development;
            2.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in the gross floor areas
of structures;
            3.   Any substantial and material changes in such external effects
on adjacent property as noise, heat, light, glare and vibration;
            4.   A substantial and material increase in the originally approved
separations between buildings;
            5.   Any adverse changes in traffic circulation, safety, drainage
or utilities;
            6.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in the height of
structures;
            7.   A 10% or greater increase in the originally approved front
yard setbacks from property lines;
            8.   A 5% or greater reduction or increase in ground coverage by
structures;
            9.   A 5% or greater increase in the ratio of off-street parking
and loading space unless provided in structured parking (provided that the
minimum requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2 are met); and
            10.   A change in the size, height, lighting or orientation of
originally approved signs.
The applicant for a minor amendment shall submit a site plan that is consistent
with the requirements of subsection (e) above. The submittal shall include the
site plan approved with the original application and a revised copy with
annotation of the requested changes. The revised site plan shall be prepared to
scale the zoning administrator to indicate acceptance of the revised site plan
and, if applicable, shall include appropriate signature and seals of the design
professional (i.e. architect, engineer, and surveyor) that prepared the site
plan. The site plan shall be processed only upon payment of the applicable fee.
If approved, the site plan shall be recorded with the ordinance approving the
conditional use permit in the office of the city secretary and kept on file in
the planning and development department.
      (3)   Major amendments. Any proposed amendment other than those provided
for in subsection (f)(2) above shall be considered a major amendment of a
previously approved and currently valid conditional use permit. A new
conditional use permit authorization shall be approved in the same manner and
under the same procedures as are applicable to the issuance of the original
permit.
   (g)   Duration.
      (1)   Period of conditional use. Conditional use permits shall be in
effect for the duration of the use, or for a time period specified in the
conditions of approval, or a time period is specified in
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, or until the time a revocation of the
permit is effectuated.
      (2)   Renewal.
         a.   Public hearing renewal. A conditional use permit that is not
eligible for administrative renewal shall be scheduled for public hearings
before the zoning commission and the city council when an application is filed
and accepted as complete by the zoning administrator. The property owner or
representative must file a complete application for renewal with the zoning
administrator not later than 90 days before the expiration date of the
conditional use permit. The conditional use may continue to operate during the
public hearing renewal process provided that an application for renewal was
submitted 90 days before the date of expiration. Notice of the public hearing
shall be provided as would be required for a new application of a conditional
use permit. The zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city
council regarding the proposed renewal based on staff reports, field
inspections and evidence presented at its hearing of the following:
            1.   Documentation of any health and safety concerns including but
not limited to:
               (i)   Police records, and municipal or other court records as
applicable, for time period since council approval;
               (ii)   Code compliance records for time period since city
council approval;
               (iii)   Any state license required for operation of the use.
   (h)   Discontinuation of use. In the event the use under the conditional use
permit is discontinued for six months, the use of the same shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the base zoning district of such property unless
a new and separate conditional use permit is granted by the city council for
continuation of the use.
   (i)   Expiration. A conditional use permit shall expire and be considered
invalid if any of the below apply:
      (1)   A building permit, if any, a plat for unplatted property or a
certificate of occupancy is not issued within 180 days of the date of approval
or the building permit subsequently expires, provided however, the zoning
administrator may authorize an extension the conditional use permit for an
additional 180 days for the issuance of a building permit, to plat the
unplatted property or to obtain a certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   The termination date in the ordinance approving the conditional use
permit has passed. Continued operation of the conditional use permit shall
require re-approval through the public hearing process.
   (j)   Revocation. If the zoning administrator determines based on inspection
or reasonable investigation by the city, that there are reasonable grounds for
revocation of a conditional use permit, a public hearing shall be set before
the zoning commission and the city council.
      (1)   Circumstances that warrant revocation of an approved conditional
use permit include but shall not be limited to the following:
         a.   There is a conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of
the zoning ordinance, the ordinance approving the conditional use or any
ordinance of the city that occurs on the property for which the conditional use
permit is granted;
         b.   The building, premise, or land uses under the conditional use
permit is enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly
changed without the approval of a separate conditional use permit for such
enlargement, modification, structural alteration or change;
         c.   Violation of any provision of the site plan encompassing the
property for which the conditional use permit was issue for, terms or
conditions of a conditional use permit;
         d.   The conditional use permit was obtained by fraud or with
deception.
      (2)   Revocation process. The revocation process shall be conducted as
for a zoning district change including notice to holder of the conditional use
permit and property owners within 300 feet, a public hearing and recommendation
by the zoning commission, and a public hearing and ordinance amendment
consideration by the city council. The city council may revoke the conditional
use permit, deny the revocation and allow the use to continue, deny the
revocation and amend the conditional use permit to attach conditions to assure
that the terms, conditions and requirements of the conditional use permit be
met.
      (3)   Effect of revocation.  Upon the effective date of the revocation,
it shall be unlawful to undertake or perform any activity that was previously
authorized by the conditional use permit. The property subject to the
conditional use permit may be used for any permitted use within the base zoning
district.
   (k)   Effect on existing special exceptions. Special exceptions for certain
land uses in existence upon the effective date of the adoption of the
conditional use permit, shall continue for the term granted by the board of
adjustment. Upon the expiration of the term for the special exception, a
request to continue the use shall conform to the requirements for a conditional
use permit.
(Ord. 23609-03-2019, §1, passed 3-19-2019)
Editor’s note:
   Section 4 of Ord. 22703-05-2017, adopted May 2, 2017, repealed § 4.407,
Stockyards Design (“SYD”) Overlay District, derived from § 1 of Ord. 22083-02-
2016, adopted February 2, 2016. See also Code Comparative Table.
§ 4.408 STOP SIX (“SS”) OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Stop Six Overlay District is to
provide high quality detached single family dwellings that will retain their
value over time.
   (b)   Applicability. The requirements set forth in this section shall only
apply to the construction of detached single-family dwellings within the
boundaries of the Stop Six Overlay District. These requirements should be
applicable in addition to any other requirement set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance or any other section of the Fort Worth City Code. Should a
requirement set forth in this section conflict with another requirement set
forth in the zoning ordinance, the requirement set forth in this section shall,
unless otherwise provided, supersede the zoning requirement to the extent of
such inconsistency.
   (c)   Boundaries. The specific boundaries of the Stop Six Overlay District
are shown on the official zoning map maintained by the city and depicted and
attached as Exhibit B.36 to Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (d)   Zoning classification.
      (1)   Stop Six Overlay District. The Stop Six Overlay District is
designed as an overlay to the base zoning district. Property located within
this zoning overlay must also be designated as being within one of the base
zoning districts.
      (2)   Zoning designation. The zoning designation of the property located
within the Stop Six Overlay District shall consist of the base zoning symbol
and the overlay symbol as a suffix. For example, if a parcel is zoned "A-5" and
is also located in the Stop Six Overlay District, the zoning of the parcel
would be "A-5/SS."
   (e)   Development standards. Development in the Stop Six Overlay District
shall comply with the applicable development standards for the base zoning
district except as herein provided:
      (1)   Building materials. At least 70% of all sides of a new residential
structure shall be masonry: stone, brick, terra cotta, patterned pre-cast
concrete, cement board siding, cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
      (2)   Garages A two-car garage is required. Garages facing the street
shall be located at or behind the front wall and shall not project in front of
the front wall. All required parking spaces above two shall be behind the front
wall.
      (3)   Building design, architectural features.
         a.   Homes shall have an entry feature such as a porch or stoop that
faces the street.
         b.   Open porches can extend up to ten feet into the minimum front
yard to encourage larger porches. If a porch is provided, it shall be a minimum
six feet in depth.
         c.   Homes shall have a minimum of one eight square foot window on all
sides of the house. The front wall shall have a minimum total window area of 16
square feet.
         d.   Front doors shall face the public street and shall be visible
from the public street. Front door openings shall not be recessed more than six
feet from the front wall of the home.
      (4)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be kept to allow visibility to and
from street-facing doors and windows. A variety of landscape plants and
materials in the front yard is highly encouraged.
(Ord. 23811-09-2019, §1, passed 9-10-2019, eff. 10-24-2019)
ARTICLE 5: RESERVED
ARTICLE 6: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE
§ 4.600 ALLOWED USES.
   The table on the following pages sets forth the uses permitted within the
residential districts.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.601 KEY TO TABLE DESIGNATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” in a cell indicates that a use is allowed by
right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all
other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. A “P*” in any cell means
that supplemental use standards apply. (Refer to Supplemental Use Standards,
Chapter 5, Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses.) The specific section number
of the standard is noted in the right-hand column titled “Supplemental
Standards.”
   (b)   Special exception uses (SE). An “SE” in a cell indicates that a use is
allowed only if reviewed and approved as a special exception use, in accordance
with the review procedures of
Chapter 3, Article 3. An “SE*” in any cell means that supplemental use
standards apply.
   (c)   Conditional use permit (CUP). A "CUP" in a cell indicates that the use
is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a conditional use permit, in
accordance with the review procedures in
Chapter 4, Article 4. A CUP* in any cell means that supplemental use standards
apply.
   (d)   Uses not allowed. An empty cell indicates that a use is not allowed in
the respective zoning district.
   (e)   Supplemental use standards (*). The numbers contained in the right-
hand column of the table are references to additional standards and
requirements (refer to Supplemental Use Standards,
Chapter 5, Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses) that may apply to the use
listed. Standards referenced in this column apply only in zoning districts
where the designation includes a “*.”
   (f)   Use also included in nonresidential district use table (<<). The “<<“
symbol in the second column from the right (titled “refer to Nonresidential
District Use Table”) indicates this use can also be found in the Nonresidential
District Use Table in Article 8.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 2,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 4.602 UNLISTED USES.
   Additional uses have been interpreted as part of or similar to many of the
uses listed in the table. The full list of such uses is included in
Appendix C, Use Index. If a use is not listed, then the zoning administrative
official shall, upon request of any interested party, make a determination
within which district, if any, a proposed use should be allowed.
(Ord. 23110-02-2018, § 5, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 4.603 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE.
Note: To view 4.603 Residential District Use Table in PDF, click 4.603 TABLE
4.603
Residential One/Two-Family Districts       Multifamily Special
District                                               Districts In NR Supplemental
Use Table                                                        Table Standards
Residential A    A  A  A  A                               PD/
Use         2.5A 43 21 10 7- A5 AR B R1 R2 CR C D UR   MH CUP
                          5
4.603 Residential District Use  One/Two-Family Districts                  Multifamily         Special
Table                                                                                         Districts In NR Supplemental
Residential Use                 A    A   A   A   A   A5  AR  B    R1  R2  CR   C    D    UR   MH PD/    Table Standards
                                2.5A 43  21  10  7-5                                             CUP
                                                                                                              * Not >
             One-family         P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>    10,000 sq.
             detached dwelling                                                                                ft.
                                                                                                              6.507
             One-family zero                             P   P    P*  P*  P    P    P    P              >>    6.101(c)
             lot line detached
             One-family zero
             lot line attached                               P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
            (twin home)
            Two-family                                      P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
            detached
            Duplex/two-family                               P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
            attached dwelling
            One-family
            attached                                                 P*  P    P    P    P              >>    6.101(c)
            (townhouse,
            rowhouse)
            Cluster housing                                          P   P    P    P    P              >>
            HUD-code
Household    manufactured                                                                     P
Living       housing
             Industrialized     P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.116.B
             housing
             Manufactured home                                                                P         >>    4.202(b)
             park
             Manufactured home                                                                P
             subdivision
             Mobile home                                                                      P
             Multifamily                                                  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    6.506
             dwelling apartment
             Boarding home      P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*              5.153
             facility
             Lodging house                                                     P*   P*   P*             >>    5.107A
            Community home     P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.110
            Fraternity or                                                          P    P              >>
            sorority house
Group Living Group home I                                                      P*   P*   P*             >>    5.115
             Group home II                                                          P*   P*                   5.115
             Halfway house                                                                       CUP    >>    5.147
             Shelter                                                                             CUP*   >>    5.155
             Day care center                                                                     CUP    >>    5.111
             (child or adult)
Education    School, elementary
             or secondary       P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P    P         >>
             (public or
             private)
             Government office  P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P    P         >>
             facility
            Museum, library or
Government   fine arts center,
             government         P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             operated or
             controlled
Religious    Place of worship   P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             Center, community
             recreation or                                                                       cup    >>
             welfare, private
            or non-profit
            Country club       P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
            (private)
            Golf course        P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
Recreation   Golf driving range                                                                         >>
            Neighborhood       P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             recreation center
             Park or playground P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             (public)
             Park (private)     P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             Electric power                                                                      PD     >>
             substation
             Stealth
             telecommunications SE   SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  SE   SE  SE  SE   SE   SE   SE             >>    5.137
            towers*
            Telecommunications
            antenna (on        P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*        >>    5.136
            structure)
            Utility
Utilities    transmission tower P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.140
             or distribution
             line
             Water supply,
             treatment or                                                                        PD     >>
             storage facility
             Airport, aviation
             field or landing                                                                    PD     >>
             area
             Ambulance dispatch                                                                  CUP*   >>    5.101
             station
             Bed and breakfast                               CUP*         CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP*           >>    5.106
             home
             Bed and breakfast                                                      CUP* CUP*           >>    5.107
Other        inn
             Greenhouse or                                                                       CUP*   >>    5.114,
             plant nursery                                                                                    5.133
             Hospice                                                           P    P    P              >>
             Gas drilling and                                                                                 Ch. 15, city
             production         P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    codes;
                                                                                                              5.140
             Parking, auxiliary                                                                  CUP*   >>    6.202(f)
             Short term home
             rental
             Accessory use or   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.301
             building
             Home occupation    P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.116A
             Large animals      P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                         >>    5.307
            Private carport/
            private porte
            cochere (reduced                P*  P*                                                     >>    5.301(b)(1)
            rear and side yard
            setbacks)
            Private carport/
            private porte      SE*  SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE*  SE* SE*                               >>    5.301(b)(1)
            cochere (front
            yard)
            Recreation area
            (private), indoor                                            P    P    P    P              >>
            or outdoor
Accessory    Satellite antenna  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>
             (dish)
             Terrace garage (in
             required yard      P    P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P   P   P    P    P    P              >>
             setbacks)
             Amusement, outdoor                                                                  CUP*   >>    5.400
             (temporary)
             Batch plant,
             concrete or                                                                         CUP*   >>    5.401
             asphalt
             (temporary)
            Garage or other    P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.402
            occasional sale
Temporary    Mobile vendor,     P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*              5.406
             fresh market
             Model home         P    P   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*              5.403
             Trailer, portable;
             sales,             P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    5.405
             construction or
             storage
             Vendor, transient  P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*             >>    9.101
Agricultural Community Garden   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*  P*  P*   P*   P*   P*                   5.146
 
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22154-04-2016, §3,
passed 4-5-2016, eff. 4-21-2016; Ord. 22335-08-2016, §4, passed 8-2-2016; Ord.
23110-02-2018, §2, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 23609-03-2019, §2, passed 3-19-2019;
Ord. 26358-08-2023, § 2, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 26652-12-2023, § 2, passed 12-
12-2023, eff. 1-9-2024)
ARTICLE 7: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 4.700 ONE-FAMILY (“A-2.5A”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-2.5A”) district to provide a zone with a minimum lot size of two and one-
half acres for rural-style development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and
accessory uses. The minimum lot size of two and one-half acres may also be
appropriate to maintain compatible lot sizes in developed areas, ensure
compatibility with adjacent uses, or otherwise promote the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-2.5A”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-2.5A”) district, the minimum dimension of
lots and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the
accompanying table:
One-Family (“A-2.5A”) District
One-Family (“A-2.5A”) District
Lot area        2-1/2 acres (108,900 square feet) minimum (§§
                6.501 and 7.106)
Lot width       150 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    20% maximum
Front yard*     35 feet minimum
Rear yard       25 feet minimum
Side yard*      25 feet minimum
   Interior l35 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot25 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100 Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6 Development Standards, §
6.101(d) Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301 Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §§
6.101 Yards.
         b.   Fences see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
5.305 Fences.
         c.   Facade see materials and appearance under §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7197.jpg]
   ONE-FAMILY “A-2.5A” DISTRICT, 2.5 ACRE LOTS
   Picture 4.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7199.jpg]
   ONE-FAMILY “A-2.5A” DISTRICT, 2.5 ACRE LOTS
   Picture 4.2
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family (“A-2.5A”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers.
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301(c) Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots. A nonconforming accessory
building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other cause beyond the
control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the same rear and side
yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the identical footprint
(replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is the same design,
height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed) and the owner or
an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure within six months
after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of proof to establish
the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.701 ONE-FAMILY (“A-43”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-43”) district to provide a zone with a minimum lot size of one acre for
rural-style development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and accessory
uses. The minimum lot size of one acre may also be appropriate to maintain
compatible lot sizes in developed areas, ensure compatibility with adjacent
uses, or otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-43”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-43”) district, the minimum dimension of lots
and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying
table:
One-Family (“A-43”) District
One-Family (“A-43”) District
Lot area        1 acre (43,560 square feet) minimum (§§
                6.501 and 7.106)
Lot width       125 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    30% maximum
Front yard*     35 feet minimum
Rear yard       25 feet minimum
Side yard*      25 feet minimum
   Interior l35 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot25 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres see
Chapter 5 Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301 Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.
         b.   Fences see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
5.305 Fences.
         c.   Facade see materials and appearance under §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7817.png]
   Picture 4.3
   (d)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6 Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.702 ONE-FAMILY (“A-21”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-21”) district to provide a zone with a minimum lot size of one-half acre
for semi-rural development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and accessory
uses. The minimum lot size of one-half acre may also be appropriate to maintain
compatible lot sizes in developed areas, ensure compatibility with adjacent
uses, or otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-21”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-21”) district, the minimum dimension of lots
and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying
table:
One-Family (“A-21”) District
One-Family (“A-21”) District
Lot area        1/2 acre (21,780 square feet) minimum (§§
                6.501 and 7.106)
Lot width       85 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    30% maximum
Front yard*     30 feet minimum
Rear yard       10 feet minimum
Side yard *     10 feet minimum
   Interior l15 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot10 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301 Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.
         b.   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305 Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
         c.   Facade, materials and appearance, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7203.jpg]
   Picture 4.4
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family (“A-21”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6 and the following provisions:
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.703 ONE-FAMILY (“A-10”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-10”) district to provide a zone with a minimum lot size of 10,000 square
feet for the development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and accessory
uses. The minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet may also be appropriate to
maintain compatible lot sizes in development areas, ensure compatibility with
adjacent uses, or otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals or
general welfare.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-10”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-10”) district, the minimum dimension of lots
and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying
table:
One-Family (“A-10”) District
One-Family (“A-10”) District
                10,000 square feet minimum, see
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
Lot area        6.501 Lot Area not served by Sanitary Sewer and
                Chapter 7, Nonconformities, §
                7.106, Nonconforming Lot of Record)
Lot width       60 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    40% maximum
Front yard*     25 feet minimum
Rear yard       10 feet minimum
Side yard *     5 feet minimum
   Interior l10 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot5 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum see (
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100 Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see (
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6 Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.)
         b.   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
         c.   Facade, materials and appearance, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7205.jpg]
   Picture 4.5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7207.jpg]
   Picture 4.6
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family (“A-10”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.704 ONE-FAMILY (“A-7.5”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-7.5”) district to provide a zone with a minimum lot size of 7,500 square
feet for the development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and accessory
uses. The minimum lot size of 7,500 square feet may also be appropriate to
maintain compatible lot sizes in developed areas, ensure compatibility with
adjacent uses, or otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals or
general welfare.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-7.5”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-7.5”) district, the minimum dimension of lots
and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying
table:
One-Family (“A-7.5”) District
One-Family (“A-7.5”) District
                7,500 square feet minimum see
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
Lot area        6.501 Lot Area not served by Sanitary Sewer and
                Chapter 7 Nonconformities, §
                7.106 Nonconforming Lot of Record
Lot width       55 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    45% maximum
Front yard*     20 feet minimum (local streets) 15 feet minimum (limited local
                streets)
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
Side yard*      5 feet minimum
   Interior l10 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot5 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.
         b.   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
         c.   Facade, materials and appearance, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7209.jpg]
   Picture 4.7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7211.jpg]
   Picture 4.8
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family (“A-7.5”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses that are not residential.
The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no higher than six
feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet behind the property
line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of drives providing ingress
and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential district. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
      (8)   Side and rear yard setbacks. The side and rear yard setbacks for
detached garages located behind the rear wall of the house may be reduced to
three feet. The side yard of an attached garage may be located within three
feet of the property line when located a minimum of 18 feet back of the front
wall of the house.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.705 ONE-FAMILY (“A-5”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the one-family
(“A-5”) district to provide a specific zone with a minimum lot size of 5,000
square feet for the development of a one-family dwelling on each lot and
accessory uses.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family (“A-5”) district, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In the one-family (“A-5”) district, the minimum dimension of lots
and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying
table.
One-Family (“A-5”) District
One-Family (“A-5”) District
                5,000 square feet minimum see
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
Lot area        6.501 Lot Area not served by Sanitary Sewer and
                Chapter 7, Nonconformities, §
                7.106 Nonconforming Lot of Record
Lot width       50 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    50% maximum
Front yard*     20 feet minimum (local street) 15 feet minimum (limited local
                street)
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
Side yard*      5 feet minimum
   Interior l10 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot5 feet minimum for interior lot line
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.
         b.   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
         c.   Facade, materials and appearance, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7213.jpg]
   Picture 4.9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7215.jpg]
   Picture 4.10
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family (“A-5”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces located behind the front building wall for
dwelling units with three or fewer bedrooms, plus one space located behind the
front building wall or in the driveway for each bedroom above three. For
nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6 Development Standards,
Article 3 Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500 Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements, or
other cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in
the same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to
the identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the
building is the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material
is allowed) and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the
structure within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the
burden of proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
      (8)   Side and rear yard setbacks. The side and rear yard setback for
detached garages located behind the rear wall of the house may be reduced to
three feet. The side yard of an attached garage may be located within three
feet of the property line when located a minimum of 18 feet back of the front
wall of the house.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21528-11-2014, § 1,
passed 11-11-2014)
§ 4.706 ONE-FAMILY RESTRICTED (“AR”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the one-family restricted
(“AR”) district to provide a specific zone for the development of detached one-
family dwelling units upon lots where such dwelling units are developed on
smaller lot areas and zero yards, including such uses accessory thereto.
   (b)   Uses. In the one-family restricted (“AR”) district, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   Unless the property development standards applicable in the “A”
district are used, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of
buildings in the one-family restricted (“AR”) district, shall be as shown in
the accompanying table.
One-Family Restricted (“AR”) District
One-Family Restricted (“AR”) District
Lot area        3,500 square feet minimum
Lot width       35 feet minimum at building line
Front yard*     20 feet minimum
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
                One side 10 feet, the other parallel side 0 feet (See
Side yard*      Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.503, Zero Lot Line Dwellings)
   Interior l10 feet adjacent to side street, interior lot line subject to
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
   Corner lot**503, Zero Lot Line Dwellings

                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
      (2)   Commentary.
         a.   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101,Yards.
         b.   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
         c.   Facade, materials and appearance, see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7217.jpg]
   Picture 4.11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7219.jpg]
   Picture 4.12
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the one-family restricted
(“AR”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses allowed that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit, located behind the front
building line, except for limited local streets, where four spaces shall be
required with at least two spaces located behind the front building line (see§
6.201(b)). “Stacked” or tandem spaces may be counted toward the required number
of spaces. For nonresidential uses see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500, Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.707 TWO-FAMILY (“B”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the two-family (“B”) district
to provide a specific zone for the development of a maximum of two dwelling
units upon a single lot and such uses accessory thereto.
   (b)   Uses. In the two-family (“B”) district, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. The following four housing types shall be permitted:
      (1)   Two attached units on a single lot;
      (2)   Two detached units on a single lot (subject to
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.502, Two Detached Dwelling Units on One Lot);
      (3)   Detached zero lot line unit on a single lot (subject to Development
Standards, §
6.503, Zero Lot Line Dwellings); and
      (4)   Attached zero lot line unit on a single lot (subject to
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.503, Zero Lot Line Dwellings).
   (c)   Property development standards. Unless the property development
standards applicable in the “AR” district are used, the minimum dimension of
lots and yards and the height of buildings in the two-family (“B”) district,
shall be as shown in the tables on the following pages.
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the two-family (“B”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit with up to three bedrooms,
plus one space per bedroom over three bedrooms, all located behind the front
building wall. For nonresidential uses see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. For design standards related to zero
lot line units and two dwellings on a single lot see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.507, Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.502, Two Detached Dwelling Units on One Lot. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3 Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Access through residential districts. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.500, Access through Residential Districts.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements or other
cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in the
same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to the
identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the building is
the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material is allowed)
and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the structure
within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the burden of
proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
“B” District, Two Attached Units on a Single Lot
“B” District, Two Attached Units on a Single Lot
                5,000 square feet minimum see
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
Lot area        6.501, Lot Area not served by Sanitary Sewer and
                Chapter 7, Nonconformities, §
                7.106, Nonconforming Lot of Record
                50 feet minimum at building line see
                Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
Lot width       6.501, Lot Area not served by Sanitary Sewer and
                Chapter 7 Nonconformities, §
                7.106, Nonconforming Lot of Record
Lot coverage    50% maximum
Front yard*     20 feet minimum
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
Side yard*      5 feet minimum
   Interior l10 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot5 feet minimum for interior lot line
Height          35 feet maximum (refer to Development Standards, §
                6.100 Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101 Yards.
      (2)   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7221.jpg]
   Picture 4.13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7223.jpg]
   Picture 4.14
“B” District, Two Detached Units on a Single Lot
“B” District, Two Detached Units on a Single Lot
Lot area, 2 units 7,500 square feet minimum
Lot width         50 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage      50% maximum
Front yard*       20 feet minimum
Rear yard         10 feet minimum
Side yard*        5 feet minimum
   Interior lot10 feet minimum adjacent to side street and
   Corner lot**5 feet minimum for interior lot line
Bldg. separation  10 foot minimum
                  35 feet maximum (see
Height            Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                  6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.100, Height for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.100, Height.)
      (2)   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7225.jpg]
   Picture 4.15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7227.jpg]
   Picture 4.16
“B” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Unit on a Single Lot
“B” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Unit on a Single Lot
Lot area       2,500 square feet minimum
Lot width      25 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage   50% maximum
Front yard*    20 feet minimum
Rear yard      5 feet minimum
Side yard*     1 side 10 feet, the other parallel side 0 feet (§
               6.503)
   Interior
lot            10 feet minimum adjacent to side street, interior lot line subject to §
   Corner   6.503
lot**
               35 feet maximum (see
Height         Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
               6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards, for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301(d), Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(a), Yards.)
      (2)   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 6, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7229.jpg]
   Picture 4.17
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7231.jpg]
   Picture 4.18
“B” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Unit on a Single Lot
“B” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Unit on a Single Lot
Lot area        2,500 square feet minimum
Lot width       25 feet minimum at building line
Lot coverage    50% maximum
Front yard*     20 feet minimum
Rear yard       5 feet minimum
                1 side 5 feet, the other parallel side 0 feet (see
Side yard*      Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.503, Zero Lot Line Dwellings)
   Interior l10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
   Corner lot**
                35 feet maximum (see
Height          Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres, allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301, Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101, Yards.
      (2)   Fences, two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard, see
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.305, Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7233.jpg]
   Picture 4.19
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7235.jpg]
   Picture 4.20
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22284-06-2016, § 1,
passed 6-21-2016, eff. 7-24-2016)
§ 4.708 ZERO LOT LINE/CLUSTER (“R1”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the zero lot line/cluster
(“R1”) district to provide a specific zone for the development of one-family
and two-family dwelling units where such dwelling units are developed on
smaller lot areas and zero yards, including such uses accessory thereto. It is
also for the purpose of providing for the development of one-family homes on
unique patterned lots clustered around a common access road or cul-de-sac.
   (b)   Uses. In the zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) district, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. The following housing types shall be permitted:
      (1)   Detached zero lot line units;
      (2)   Attached zero lot line units; and
      (3)   Cluster housing units.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) district
shall be as shown in the tables on the following pages. See division (d)(5) of
this section.
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the zero lot line/cluster
(“R1”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area.
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade, and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit, located behind the front
building line, except for limited local streets, where four spaces shall be
required, located behind the front building line (see Section 403.D of the
subdivision regulations). For nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6 Development Standards,
Article 2 Off-Street Parking and Loading.
      (3)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6, Article 3.
      (4)   Access through residential districts. See §
6.500 Access Through Residential Districts. (A driveway or walk on private
property in a one- or two-family district shall not provide access for uses in
the “CR” District through the “K” District.)
      (5)   Residential design standards. A site plan for residential
development is required.
         a.   Zero lot line dwellings.
            1.   Platting required. All blocks using the zero yard concept
shall be platted or replatted to provide a zero-foot setback and a ten-foot
access easement per lot.
            2.   Pattern of yards. The first dwelling unit constructed on a lot
within a block shall set the zero lot line pattern of yards for the remaining
lots within the block.
            3.   Corner lot setback. Depending on the zero lot line pattern,
the last corner lot may have a setback adjacent to the street a ten-foot
setback on the interior side to maintain the pattern.
         b.   Cluster housing in the “R1” district.
            1.   General. Under this provision, clustering of residential units
may be permitted where such units cluster around a common access road or feed
from a loop or cul-de-sac and provided that such development shall conform to
the following regulations regarding buildings and structures.
            2.   Plat required. Such properties shall be platted showing the
following, if applicable:
               i.   Public streets.
               ii.   Private streets and private access.
               iii.   Private open space and open space easements.
               iv.   Utility easements.
               v.   Public parks.
               vi.   Pedestrian walkways and bicycle trails.
               vii.   Lot, block and addition name.
               viii.    The building setback lines for each lot. Setback lines
may be shown on each lot, described in margin comments or described by common
detail. In the alternative, the setback lines may be described in a development
plan submitted pursuant to division (d)(5)b.vi. below.
            3.   Open space.
               i.   The open space, exclusive of paved areas, parking spaces
and patios, must be not less than 15 percent of the total lot area.
               ii.   Provisions, such as a homeowner’s association, shall be
instituted to provide maintenance for all common open space.
            4.   One building per lot. No more than one residential building
may be located on any lot.
            5.   Building separation. A ten-foot setback shall be required
between all buildings.
            6.   Development plan.
               i.   Unless setbacks are shown or described on the plat, a
development plan must be submitted showing the proposed setbacks on each lot.
               ii.   Adjustments in the development plan that change the
setbacks from one lot to another will not be accepted without a written release
from all property owners involved in the adjustment. When amendments are
accepted, the original development plan must be withdrawn in its entirety.
               iii.   A development plan shall be reviewed as a site plan.
      (6)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements, or
other cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in
the same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to
the identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the
building is the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material
is allowed) and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the
structure within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the
burden of proof to establish the damage date.
      (7)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
“R1” District, One-Family Detached Units
“R1” District, One-Family Detached Units
Lot area    3,000 square feet minimum per unit
Lot width   30 feet minimum at building line
Front yard* 0 feet minimum
Side yard*  3 feet minimum; fire and building codes apply
Rear yard   5 feet minimum
Height      35 feet maximum (see §
            6.100, Height)
Notes:
No front yard entry driveway or parking
*   See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres – allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances. (See §
5.301(d) Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and §
6.101(a) Yards.)
      (2)   Fences – two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard. (See § §
5.305 Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
      (3)   Facade – materials and appearance under §
6.507.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7771.png]
   Picture 4.21
“R1” District, Detached Zero Lot Line Units
“R1” District, Detached Zero Lot Line Units
Lot area       2,500 square feet minimum per unit
Lot width      25 feet minimum at building line
Units per acre Maximum number of 13 units per acre on average, unless located in a “C” or “D”
               district where authorized density shall apply.
Front yard*    0 feet minimum, garage setback 18 feet if required parking is in front yard
Rear yard      5 feet minimum
Side yard*     One side 10 feet minimum, the other parallel side 0 feet (§
               6.503)
   Interior
lot            10 feet minimum adjacent to side street, interior lot line subject to §
   Corner   6.503
lot**
Height         35 feet maximum (see §
               6.100)
Notes:
*   See §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres – allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances. (See §
5.301(d) Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and §
6.101(a) Yards.)
      (2)   Fences – two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard. (See §
5.305 Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7773.png]
Picture 4.22
“R1” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Units
“R1” District, Attached Zero Lot Line Units
Lot area       2,500 square feet minimum per unit
Lot width      25 feet minimum at building line
Units per acre Maximum number of 13 units per acre on average, unless located in a “C” or “D”
               district where authorized density shall apply.
Front yard*    0 feet minimum, garage setback 18 feet if required parking is in front yard
Rear yard      5 feet minimum
Side yard*     One side 5 feet minimum, the other parallel side 0 feet (§
               6.503)
   Interior
lot            10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
   Corner
lot**
Height         35 feet maximum (see §
               6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   See §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres – allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances. (See §
5.301(d) Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots and §
6.101(a) Yards.)
      (2)   Fences – two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard. (See §
5.305 Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
      (3)   Facade – materials and appearance under §
6.507.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7775.png]
Picture 4.23
“R1” District, Cluster Housing Units
“R1” District, Cluster Housing Units
Open space     15% minimum (see §
               6.504)
Units per acre Maximum 15 units per acre on average, unless located in a “C” or “D” district where
               authorized density shall apply
Front yard*     
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to street
lot
   Corner   10 feet minimum adjacent to both streets
lot**
Rear yard      5 feet minimum
Side yard*      
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to street
lot
   Corner   10 feet minimum adjacent to both streets
lot**
Height         35 feet maximum (see §
               6.100, Height)
Bldg.          10 feet minimum
separation
Notes:          
*   See §
6.101(d), Yards for front yard setback requirements.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   Commentary.
      (1)    Carports – not allowed in front of building line or in required
yards. (§§
5.300(b) and
6.101(a).)
      (2)   Fences – two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard. (See §
5.305 Fences for fence requirements for fences allowed for residential
dwellings.)
      (3)   Facade – materials and appearance under §
6.507 .
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7777.png]
Picture 4.24
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21672-03- 2015, § 1,
passed 3-3-2015, eff. 3-19-2015; Ord. 27545-03- 2025, § 9, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 4.709 TOWNHOUSE/CLUSTER (“R2”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the townhouse/cluster ("R2")
district to provide a specific zone for the development of row houses and
townhouses on unique patterned lots clustered around a common access road or
cul-de-sac.
   (b)   Uses. In the townhouse/cluster ("R2") district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. Property in R2 may be developed to the
property development standards defined in the "R1" district. The minimum
dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings in the townhouse/
cluster ("R2") district shall be as shown in the accompanying table. See
division (d)(3) below.
Townhouse/Cluster (“R2”) District
Townhouse/Cluster (“R2”) District
Open space      15% minimum
Units per acre  Maximum number of 24 units per acre on average, unless located in a “C” or “D”
                district where authorized density shall apply.
Maximum façade Maximum building façade length of 250 feet
length
Front yard*     None required
Side yard*       
   Interior l5 feet minimum adjacent to street
   Corner lot10 feet minimum adjacent to both streets
Height          35 feet maximum (refer to Development Standards, §
                6.100, Height)
Bldg.           10 feet minimum
separation
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(f), Yards).
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements (see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards).
 
   Commentary.
      (1)   Carports/porte cocheres – allowed in side, rear and front yard in
certain circumstances. (See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.301 Accessory Buildings on Residential Lots, and §
6.101 Yards.)
      (2)   Fences – Two feet high in public open space easement, eight feet
high behind front yard. (See
Chapter 6 Supplemental Use Standards Fences for fence requirements for fences
allowed for residential dwellings.)
      (3)   Facade – materials and appearance. See
Chapter 6 Development Standards, §
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Districts.
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the townhouse/cluster
(“R2”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards in
Chapter 6 , and the following provisions:
      (1)   Signs. On-premises signs subject to the following:
         a.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area.
         b.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade, and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit, located behind the front
building line, except for limited local streets or private access easements,
where four spaces shall be required, located behind the front building line or
may be provided within the development. For nonresidential uses, see
Chapter 6  Development Standards,
Article 2 Off Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (3)   Residential design standards. A site plan for residential
development is required.
         a.   General. Under this provision, townhouses, rowhouses or the
clustering of residential units may be permitted where such units cluster
around a common access road or feed from a loop or cul-de-sac and provided that
such development shall conform to the following regulations regarding buildings
and structures.
         b.   Plat required. Such properties shall be platted showing the
following, if applicable:
            1.   Public streets.
            2.   Private streets and private access.
            3.   Private open space and open space easements.
            4.   Utility easements.
            5.   Public parks.
            6.   Pedestrian walkways and bicycle trails.
            7.   Lot, block and addition name.
         c.   Open space.
            1.   The open space, exclusive of paved areas, parking spaces and
patios, must be not less than 15 percent of the total lot area.
            2.   Provisions, such as a homeowner's association, shall be
instituted to provide maintenance for all common open space.
         d.   One building per lot. Each residential building shall be located
on a separately platted lot.
         e.   Maximum building façade length. Building face shall not exceed a
maximum of 250 feet.
         f.   Development plan.
            1.   Unless setbacks are shown or described on the plat, a
development plan must be submitted showing the proposed setbacks on each lot.
            2.   Adjustments in the development plan that change the setbacks
from one lot to another will not be accepted without a written release from all
property owners involved in the adjustment. When amendments are accepted, the
original development plan must be withdrawn in its entirety.
            3.   A development plan shall be reviewed as a site plan.
      (4)   Landscaping and buffers. Nonresidential uses may require
landscaping or buffers. See
Chapter 6  Development Standards,
Article 3 Landscaping, Buffers, and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (5)   Reconstruction of nonconforming accessory buildings. A
nonconforming accessory building that is damaged by fire, the elements, or
other cause beyond the control of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed in
the same rear and side yard setbacks provided the construction is limited to
the identical footprint (replacement of the foundation is allowed); the
building is the same design, height and roof pitch (use of different material
is allowed) and the owner or an agent obtains a building permit to repair the
structure within six months after the damage date. The owner shall have the
burden of proof to establish the damage date.
      (6)   Garage/carport. No more than one garage and one carport or porte
cochere shall be allowed per residential unit on a single residential lot,
unless the additional garages or porte cocheres are an integral part of the
main residential structure with the same roofline and driveway as the
residential structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7779.png]
Picture 4.25
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21672-03-2015, § 2,
passed 3-3-2015, eff. 3-19-2015; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 10, passed 3-11-2025,
eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 4.710 LOW DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (“CR”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the low density multifamily
("CR") district to provide a specific zone for low density multifamily
development. In adopting multifamily design development regulations, it is also
the intent of the City Council to encourage the most appropriate uses of land;
to encourage higher quality design and materials; to provide safe and improved
access to public walkways, to install street trees and enhanced landscaping
along the public walkways to improve the pedestrian environment; and to provide
criteria for development of land zoned for multifamily dwelling use.
   (b)   Uses. In the low density multifamily ("CR") district, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration or revision
for multifamily development unless there has been a site plan approved by the
development services director or an authorized representative.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   All one-family and two-family residential development may be
developed under the property development standards of §§
4.705 through
4.709 for one-family or two-family use. See the selected district and also see
§
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (2)   a.   All multifamily residential development (three or more
dwelling units) shall meet the property development standards of multifamily
development as shown in the accompanying table.
“CR” District, Multifamily Development
“CR” District, Multifamily Development
Open space                       60% minimum
Units per acre                   16 maximum
Front yard*                      20 feet minimum
Rear yard                        5 feet minimum
Side yard*                        
   Interior lot               5 feet minimum
   Corner lot**               20 feet minimum adjacent to side street
                                 Three feet for every one foot (3:1) as
                                 measured from slab to top of sill plate,
                                 or two feet for every one foot (2:1) in
                                 overall height when measured from lowest
Setback adjacent to one- or two- finished grade to the peak of the roof,
family residential district ***  whichever is greater; 30 feet minimum
                                 1:1 setback with a 10-foot minimum setback
                                 for one-story garages and carports
                                 20-foot minimum setback for dumpster
                                 enclosures and one-story accessory
                                 structures
                                 36 feet maximum, slab to top plate (see
Height                           Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                 6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f), Yards). Paving shall not be permitted between the building face
and street and must remain as open space.
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements
(see Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards).
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be
placed on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see
§
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities,
waterways, railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a
public right-of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
         b.   Carports are not allowed between the front of the building face
and street, see §§
6.101(a) and
6.300(b).
      (3)   For all nonresidential uses in the low density multifamily (“CR”)
district, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
“CR” District, Nonresidential Development
“CR” District, Nonresidential Development
Lot width                              50 feet minimum
Front yard*                            20 feet minimum
Rear yard                              5 feet minimum
Side yard*                              
   Interior lot                     5 feet minimum
   Corner lot **                    10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
Setback adjacent to one- or two-family 20 feet minimum
residential district ***
                                       35 feet maximum (see
Height                                 Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                       6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f), Yards).
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements.
(See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards.)
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be placed
on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see §
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities, waterways,
railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a public right-
of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the low density
multifamily ("CR") district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards, including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Signs.
         a.   For non-multifamily development on-premises signs are subject to
the following:
            i.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
            ii.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
         b.   Identification signs for multifamily development shall be
permitted, subject to the following provisions:
            i.   Signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the
property upon which displayed.
            ii.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure on each dedicated street frontage of not more than one square
foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said street;
provided, however, at least one sign shall be allowed having an area of 12
square feet.
            iii.   Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not
be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing; revolving signs shall not
be permitted.
            iv.   Not more than 50% of the total allowable sign area may be
located in the required yard space along a dedicated street. However, no
individual sign in such required yard space shall exceed 20 square feet in sign
area.
            v.   Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building
structure and symbols and signs which are not visible or readable from the
public street shall not be limited by the above regulations.
            vi.   Nothing contained herein shall exempt the owner of any
multifamily building from placing identification signs on buildings as required
by the City of Fort Worth fire code.
      (2)   Parking.
         a.   One- and two-family residential development shall meet the
parking requirements for the selected district.
         b.   For nonresidential parking requirements see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
         c.   Multifamily development parking requirements shall be as follows:
            i.   No parking or driveways shall be provided between a building
and a public or private street. Frontage on a controlled access highway shall
not be considered a street for purposes of this section. Parking shall be
provided per §
6.201.
 
Use                                Requirement
                                   1 space per bedroom plus 1 space per 250
                                   square feet of common areas, offices and
Multifamily Residential            recreation (less laundry rooms and storage);
                                   2 spaces may be tandem if assigned to the
                                   same unit and restricted from use for
                                   storage.
                                   Two spaces per dwelling unit, located within
                                   a garage of the individual unit, having
Multifamily Residential: Townhouse access to and from that unit, and not
configuration                      accessible or usable by other residential
                                   units. Plus 1 space per 250 square feet of
                                   common areas, offices and recreation (less
                                   laundry rooms and storage).
 
            ii.   On-street parking along the lot frontage may be applied
toward the minimum parking requirements only when located fully out of the
travel lanes as defined in the Master Thoroughfare Plan when there is parking
on both sides of the street. On-street parking that is applied toward minimum
parking requirements shall be counted towards the maximum parking limitations.
      (3)   Accessory uses in multifamily design developments. In addition to
other uses which qualify as accessory uses, the following shall be considered
as accessory uses to multifamily design development:
         a.   Recreation areas and spaces within buildings primarily for use of
the dwelling occupants;
         b.   Kindergarten and day care center primarily for the use of the
dwelling occupants;
         c.   Mechanical and storage buildings necessary for operation and
maintenance of the multi family design development;
         d.   Manager's office; and
         e.   Garages, carports.
      (4)   Fences and gates.
         a.   One- and two-family residential development.  Open design fences
up to five feet high in front yard and projected front yard for one-family and
two-family residential dwellings per regulations in §
5.305(b)(2).
         b.   Multifamily development. Fences shall not be located in the area
between building facades and the property line. Frontage on a controlled access
highway shall not be considered a street for purposes of this section.
Perimeter security fencing is prohibited; however, security fencing is
permitted on interior property lines. Solid screening fences are required when
adjacent to a one or two family district unless adjacent to a public park or
controlled access highway when a solid screening fence is not permitted and an
open design fence shall be installed, if a fence is installed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8824.png]
         c.   Exterior security fences and gates that are located along public
streets, along a public access easement, or along publicly accessible open
space shall not extend beyond building facades.
         d.   All fences and railings shall be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
         e.   All walls shall be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         f.   For private residential patios and yards, a fence, railing, or
low wall may extend beyond the building facade if the following requirements
are met.
            i.   Fences, railings, and walls shall not exceed four feet (48")
in total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing
and/or the wall; however
            ii.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence railing and/
or wall height shall not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8826.png]
      (5)   Façade and building orientation standards for multifamily
development. The following design standards apply:
         a.   Building orientation. Buildings located on public streets must
face the street with the longest length of the building placed parallel/
adjacent to the street. Where site constraints require, the building end
(shortest length of the building) may face a public street only when the same
exterior quality to the building facade is provided including architecture,
masonry and fenestration proportion on the side of other buildings facing the
public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8828.png]
         b.   Facade design standards.
            1.   Required drawings. To illustrate compliance with the following
standards, elevation drawings shall be submitted as part of the multifamily
design site plan review to the planning and development department for those
building facades that are oriented to:
               a.   Public streets.
               b.   Private streets and walkways that are publicly accessible
through a public use easement; or
               c.   Publicly accessible open space.
            2.   Facade variation.
               a.   Each new building facade oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open space shall incorporate each of the following scaling elements.
For building facades less than 50 feet in width, a minimum of two elements are
required. The following items and calculations shall be provided as part of the
multifamily design submittal for review:
                  1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
                     i.   Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
                     ii.   Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less
than one inch deep and six inches wide).
                     iii.   Foundation (water tables, rustication).
                  2.   At least two variations in wall plane not less than
three feet in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for
multi-story buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window
openings by utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window
elements, and/or more pronounced architectural features such as porches,
alcoves, and roof dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8830.png]
                  3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable
change in color or shade. Each change of material shall involve a minimum one
inch variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
               b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open spaces shall include differentiation between the first and
second level and the upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade, or
other architectural features.
               c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction shall contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in and/or other architectural features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8832.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8834.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8836.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8838.png]
            3.   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building
facades (not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible
streets or open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
               i.   Stone.
               ii.   Brick.
               iii.   Terra cotta.
               iv.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
               v.   Cement plaster stucco.
               vi.   Cement board siding.
               vii.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
      (6)   Landscaping.
         a.   Enhanced landscaping point system requirement. Enhanced
landscaping is required along all public rights-of-way, see Section (h)(4), and
shall earn a minimum set of points that are awarded for providing and
maintaining specific landscaping and design features. The points are
accumulated as follows:
ENHANCED LANDSCAPING SYSTEM
20 points required
10 of the required points shall come from the installation of street trees as
described below:
Public Feature Requirement Points Awarded
ENHANCED LANDSCAPING SYSTEM
20 points required
10 of the required points shall come from the installation of street trees as
described below:
Public Feature              Requirement                          Points Awarded
                            Trees shall be planted within a
                            planting strip or flush with the
                            sidewalk surface; location and type
                            as approved by the City Forester if
                            within the right of way. If trees
                            cannot be installed within the right
                            of way, trees shall be installed in
                            a location where the tree canopy
                            affects the public sidewalk.
                            Required Spacing as specified below
Street Trees                or as approved by the City Forestry  10
                            Small/Medium Canopy = 25-30 ft. on
                            center
                            Large Canopy = 35-40 ft. on center
                            *Where necessary spacing exceptions
                            may be made to accommodate mature
                            trees, curb cuts, fire hydrants and
                            other infrastructure elements.
                            Street trees may be counted toward
                            the planting requirements for the
                            Urban Forestry required tree canopy
                            coverage.
                            *1 light post for every 60-70 ft.
                            (based on size of street tree) of
                            street frontage.
Pedestrian- Scaled Lighting Style to be approved by the          10
                            Transportation and Public Works
                            Department (TPW) and consistent with
                            other pedestrian lights on the same
                            block.
                            1 pt. for every additional foot of
Paved Walkway Enhancement   sidewalk width over the city         1- 11
                            standard (up to 15 ft. wide total).
Pool/Playground             5 percent (%) of net land area with  5 for each
                            minimum area not less than 1,000 sf.
                            Must provide recreational
Private Park/dog park       facilities/amenities. May include    5
                            open drainage area/easement/pond as
                            long as amenities are provided
Community Garden            1 pt. for every 250 sf. with minimum 5- 10
                            area not less than 1,250 sf.
Proximity to Public Park    Within 1,000 ft. as measured from    5
                            property line to property line
                            Xeriscaping, rain gardens, bio-
                            swales, landscaped bio retention
                            area.
                            See Chapter 6, Table A for a
                            recommended list of native plants
Sustainable Landscaping     for landscape use in North Central   5
                            Texas
                            Landscaped bio-retention areas are
                            encouraged for natural drainage
                            channels to reduce runoff and
                            increase infiltration of water into
                            the soil.
*If no pedestrian lights or street trees exist on the project's block face,
measure from the end of the block to determine spacing. For trees, begin 40
feet from the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement
requirement. If trees or lights exist, measure from existing trees or lights.
 
            i.   Points shall be awarded only one for each feature category,
per project.
            ii.   Submittal of site plan. The location and description of
decorative paving, sidewalk furniture or other decorative elements, if any,
shall be indicated on the site plan.
            iii.   All landscaped areas shall:
               1.   Be located outside the perimeter of the footprint of a
building or structure;
               2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas; and
               3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch or low maintenance
groundcover.
            iv.   In addition to required trees, all of the open space and
unpaved areas must be covered with grass, organic mulch, live groundcover, or
decorative paving.
         b.   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
            i.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and
parallel to a public street shall be screened from the public right-of-way with
landscaping, berms, fences, or walls up to four (4') feet in height.
Landscaping installed to comply with this section shall be shown on the site
plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8840.png]
            ii.   Landscape islands, linear landing strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens shall be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All parking
areas shall provide tree canopy coverage per the Urban Forestry Ordinance, §
6.302.
         c.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
follow §
6.302(g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
      (7)   General site plan requirements.
         a.   Location of buildings. All buildings and structures shall be
shown on the site plan with dimensions of the buildings and adequate dimensions
showing distance from property lines, easements, driveways, parking spaces and
other buildings.
         b.   Driveways and parking spaces. The location of all driveways and
parking spaces shall be shown on the site plan, including ingress-egress, and
all calculations for required parking.
         c.   Emergency access.  Emergency access as required in accordance
with the Fire Code and addresses approved by the Fire Department shall be shown
on the multifamily design site plan.
         d.   Landscape and walkways. Show enhanced landscaping point chart,
landscape materials, required and proposed height of perimeter walls,
bufferyards and recreational facilities. Walkways shall be provided to connect
to all buildings, parking areas and recreational facilities and shall be shown
on the site plan. Walkways shall connect to public streets where street
frontage exceeds 500 feet and to adjacent public property, commercial areas,
and trails.
         e.   Garbage collection. Garbage collection locations shall be shown
on the site plan. Such locations shall not be placed within 20 feet of adjacent
one- or two-family districts. Dumpsters shall be visually screened, except from
the access side, and shall not be placed within the required open space. Access
shall face internally and not face upon adjacent properties or the public
street.
         f.   Open space and recreational facilities. All open space and
recreational facilities shall be identified on the site plan. Open space is the
ratio of open space to net land area (see Chapter 9, Definitions).
         g.   Open space shall be clustered in areas upon the site to provide
views and vistas for a given group of buildings. Open spaces and recreational
amenities shall be designed as functional space with appropriate distribution
on the total site plan. Any recreational facilities shall be used primarily by
the residents and their guests. No alcohol, beer or wine shall be sold on the
premises unless permitted in a district zoned for that use.
            i.   Except for required front yards, no space or area less than 25
feet in either dimension shall be counted as open space.
            ii.   Patios adjacent to dwelling units, unless enclosed, may be
included as part of the open space.
         h.   Miscellaneous requirements.
            i.   The developer shall submit a site plan that shows the zoning
of all adjacent properties.
            ii.   The submitted site plan shall include a location map, north
point, scale and date.
            iii.   The face of the site plan shall include a table showing net
land area, floor area, open space area, number of parking spaces, maximum units
per acre and maximum height.
            iv.   The developer shall prepare and submit a checklist to
accompany the submitted site plan which shall constitute an application and
include a listing of those basic requirements found in the zoning ordinance,
the subdivision ordinance and the plan commission rules and regulations.
      (8)   Site plan expiration. A multifamily development site plan submitted
to the planning and development department shall expire one year from the date
of site plan submittal if not approved. If approved, the site plan shall expire
two years from the date of approval unless a certificate of occupancy is issued
for a multifamily use building in accordance with the approved site plan.
      (9)   Certificate of occupancy requirements.
         a.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a multifamily
development until a final landscape plan has been approved by the development
services director or a designated representative and all landscaping required
by the plans has been installed
         b.   During the construction phase where development regulations
contained herein have not been met, construction permits may be issued, and
construction may proceed, but no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
all regulations have been complied with. The city shall refuse any final
connection of utilities prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23495-12-2018, § 1,
passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.711 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (“C”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the medium density
multifamily ("C") district to provide a specific zone for medium density
multifamily development. In adopting multifamily design development
regulations, it is also the intent of the City Council to encourage the most
appropriate uses of land; to encourage higher quality design and materials; to
provide safe and improved access to the public walkways; to install street
trees and enhanced landscaping along public walkways to improve the pedestrian
environment; and to provide criteria for development of land zoned for
multifamily dwelling use.
   (b)   Uses. In the medium density multifamily ("C") district, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration or revision
for multifamily development unless there has been a site plan approved by the
development services director or an authorized representative.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   All one-family and two-family residential development may be
developed under the property development standards of §§
4.705 through
4.709 for one-family or two-family use. See the selected district and also see
§
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (2)   a.   All multifamily residential development (three or more
dwelling units) shall meet the property development standards of §
6.506, Multifamily Design Development and the minimum dimension of lots and
yards shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
“C” District, Multifamily Development
“C” District, Multifamily Development
Open space                       45% minimum
Units per acre                   24 maximum
Front yard*                      20 feet minimum
Rear yard                        5 feet minimum
Side yard*                        
   Interior lot               5 feet minimum
   Corner lot **              20 feet minimum adjacent to side street
                                 Three feet for every one foot (3:1) as
                                 measured from slab to top of sill plate,
                                 or two feet for every one foot (2:1) in
                                 overall height when measured from lowest
Setback adjacent to one- or two- finished grade to the peak of the roof,
family residential district ***  whichever is greater; 30 feet minimum
                                 1:1 setback with a 10-foot minimum setback
                                 for one-story garages and carports
                                 20-foot minimum setback for dumpster
                                 enclosures and one-story accessory
                                 structures
                                 36 feet maximum, slab to top plate (see
Height                           Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                 6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(f), Yards). Paving shall not be permitted between the building face
and street and must remain as open space.
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements
(see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards).
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be
placed on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see
§
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities,
waterways, railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a
public right-of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
         b.   Carports not allowed between the front of the building face and
street, see §§
6.101(a) and
6.300(b).
“C” District, Nonresidential Development
“C” District, Nonresidential Development
Lot width                              50 feet minimum
Front yard*                            20 feet minimum
Rear yard                              5 feet minimum
Side yard*                              
   Interior lot                     5 feet minimum
   Corner lot **                    10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
Setback adjacent to one- or two-family 20 feet minimum
residential district***
                                       35 feet maximum (see
Height                                 Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                       6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(f), Yards). Paving shall not be permitted between the minimum yard
setback line and street and must remain as open space.
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements
(see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(c), Yards).
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be placed
on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see §
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities, waterways,
railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a public right-
of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the medium density
multifamily ("CR") district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards, including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Signs.
         a.   For non-multifamily development on-premises signs are subject to
the following:
            i.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
            ii.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
         b.   Identification signs for multifamily development shall be
permitted, subject to the following provisions:
            i.   Signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the
property upon which displayed.
            ii.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure on each dedicated street frontage of not more than one square
foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said street;
provided, however, at least one sign shall be allowed having an area of 12
square feet.
            iii.   Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not
be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing; revolving signs shall not
be permitted.
            iv.   Not more than 50% of the total allowable sign area may be
located in the required yard space along a dedicated street. However, no
individual sign in such required yard space shall exceed 20 square feet in sign
area.
            v.   Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building
structure and symbols and signs which are not visible or readable from the
public street shall not be limited by the above regulations.
            vi.   Nothing contained herein shall exempt the owner of any
multifamily building from placing identification signs on buildings as required
by the City of Fort Worth fire code.
      (2)   Parking.
         a.   One- and two-family residential development shall meet the
parking requirements for the selected district.
         b.   For nonresidential parking requirements see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
         c.   Multifamily development parking requirements shall be as follows:
            i.   No parking or driveways shall be provided between a building
and a public or private street. Parking shall be provided per §
6.201. Frontage on a controlled access highway shall not be considered a street
for purposes of this section.
 
Use                                Requirement
                                   1 space per bedroom plus 1 space per 250
                                   square feet of common areas, offices and
Multifamily Residential            recreation (less laundry rooms and storage);
                                   2 spaces may be tandem if assigned to the
                                   same unit and restricted from use for
                                   storage.
                                   Two spaces per dwelling unit, located within
                                   a garage of the individual unit, having
Multifamily Residential: Townhouse access to and from that unit, and not
configuration                      accessible or usable by other residential
                                   units. Plus 1 space per 250 square feet of
                                   common areas, offices and recreation (less
                                   laundry rooms and storage).
 
            ii.   On-street parking along the lot frontage may be applied
toward the minimum parking requirements only when located fully out of the
travel lanes as defined in the Master Thoroughfare Plan when there is parking
on both sides of the street. On-street parking that is applied toward minimum
parking requirements shall be counted towards the maximum parking limitations.
      (3)   Accessory uses in Multifamily Design developments. In addition to
other uses which qualify as accessory uses, the following shall be considered
as accessory uses to Multifamily Design development:
         a.   Recreation areas and spaces within buildings primarily for use of
the dwelling occupants;
         b.   Kindergarten and day care center primarily for the use of the
dwelling occupants;
         c.   Mechanical and storage buildings necessary for operation and
maintenance of the Multifamily Design development;
         d.   Manager's office; and
         e.   Garages, carports.
      (4)   Fences and gates.
         a.   One- and Two-Family residential development. Open Design fences
up to five feet high in front yard and projected front yard for one-family and
two-family residential dwellings per regulations in §
5.305(b)(2).
         b.   Multifamily development. Fences shall not be located in the area
between building facades and the property line. Frontage on a controlled access
highway shall not be considered a street for purposes of this section.
Perimeter security fencing is prohibited; however, security fencing is
permitted on interior property lines. Solid screening fences are required when
adjacent to a one or two family district unless adjacent to a public park or
controlled access highway when a solid screening fence is not permitted and an
open design fence shall be installed, if a fence is installed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8846.png]
         c.   Exterior security fences and gates that are located along public
streets, along a public access easement, or along publicly accessible open
space shall not extend beyond building facades.
         d.   All fences and railings shall be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
         e.   All walls shall be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         f.   For private residential patios and yards, a fence, railing, or
low wall may extend beyond the building facade if the following requirements
are met.
            i.   Fences, railings, and walls shall not exceed four feet (48")
in total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing
and/or the wall; however,
            ii.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence railing and/
or wall height shall not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8848.png]
      (5)   Façade and building orientation standards for multifamily
development. The following design standards apply:
         a.   Building orientation. Buildings located on public streets must
face the street with the longest length of the building placed parallel/
adjacent to the street. Where site constraints require, the building end
(shortest length of the building) may face a public street only when the same
exterior quality to the building facade is provided including architecture,
masonry and fenestration proportion on the side of other buildings facing the
public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8850.png]
         b.   Facade design standards.
            1.   Required drawings. To illustrate compliance with the following
standards, elevation drawings shall be submitted as part of the multifamily
design site plan review to the planning and development department for those
building facades that are oriented to:
               a.   Public streets.
               b.   Private streets and walkways that are publicly accessible
through a public use easement; or
               c.   Publicly accessible open space.
            2.   Facade variation.
               a.   Each new building facade oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open space shall incorporate each of the following scaling elements.
For building facades less than 50 feet in width, a minimum of two elements are
required. The following items and calculations shall be provided as part of the
multifamily design submittal for review:
                  1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
                     i.   Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
                     ii.   Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less
than one inch deep and six inches wide).
                     iii.   Foundation (water tables, rustication).
                  2.   At least two variations in wall plane not less than
three feet in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for
multi-story buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window
openings by utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window
elements, and/or more pronounced architectural features such as porches,
alcoves, and roof dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8852.png]
                  3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable
change in color or shade. Each change of material shall involve a minimum one
inch variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
               b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open spaces shall include differentiation between the first and
second level and the upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade, or
other architectural features.
               c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction shall contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in and/or other architectural features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8854.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8856.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8858.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8860.png]
            3.   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building
facades (not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible
streets or open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
               i.   Stone.
               ii.   Brick.
               iii.   Terra cotta.
               iv.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
               v.   Cement plaster stucco.
               vi.   Cement board siding.
               vii.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
      (6)   Landscaping.
         a.   Enhanced landscaping point system requirement. Enhanced
landscaping is required along all public rights-of-way, see Section (h)(4), and
shall earn a minimum set of points that are awarded for providing and
maintaining specific landscaping and design features. The points are
accumulated as follows:
ENHANCED LANDSCAPING SYSTEM
20 points required
10 of the required points shall come from the installation of street trees as
described below:
Public Feature              Requirement                          Points Awarded
                            Trees shall be planted within a
                            planting strip or flush with the
                            sidewalk surface; location and type
                            as approved by the City Forester if
                            within the right of way. If trees
                            cannot be installed within the right
                            of way, trees shall be installed in
                            a location where the tree canopy
                            affects the public sidewalk.
                            Required Spacing as specified below
Street Trees                or as approved by the City Forestry  10
                            Small/Medium Canopy = 25-30 ft. on
                            center
                            Large Canopy = 35-40 ft. on center
                            *Where necessary spacing exceptions
                            may be made to accommodate mature
                            trees, curb cuts, fire hydrants and
                            other infrastructure elements.
                            Street trees may be counted toward
                            the planting requirements for the
                            Urban Forestry required tree canopy
                            coverage.
                            *1 light post for every 60-70 ft.
                            (based on size of street tree) of
                            street frontage.
Pedestrian- Scaled Lighting Style to be approved by the          10
                            Transportation and Public Works
                            Department (TPW) and consistent with
                            other pedestrian lights on the same
                            block.
                            1 pt. for every additional foot of
Paved Walkway Enhancement   sidewalk width over the city         1- 11
                            standard (up to 15 ft. wide total).
                                                                
Private Feature             Requirement                          Points Awarded
Pool/Playground             5 percent (%) of net land area with  5 for each
                            minimum area not less than 1,000 sf.
                            Must provide recreational
Private Park/dog park       facilities/amenities. May include    5
                            open drainage area/easement/pond as
                            long as amenities are provided
Community Garden            1 pt. for every 250 sf. with minimum 5- 10
                            area not less than 1,250 sf.
Proximity to Public Park    Within 1,000 ft. as measured from    5
                            property line to property line
                            Xeriscaping, rain gardens, bio-
                            swales, landscaped bio retention
                            area.
                            See
                            Chapter 6, Table A  for a
                            recommended list of native plants
Sustainable Landscaping     for landscape use in North Central   5
                            Texas
                            Landscaped bio-retention areas are
                            encouraged for natural drainage
                            channels to reduce runoff and
                            increase infiltration of water into
                            the soil.
*If no pedestrian lights or street trees exist on the project's block face,
measure from the end of the block to determine spacing. For trees, begin 40
feet from the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement
requirement. If trees or lights exist, measure from existing trees or lights.
 
            i.   Points shall be awarded only one for each feature category,
per project.
            ii.   Submittal of site plan. The location and description of
decorative paving, sidewalk furniture or other decorative elements, if any,
shall be indicated on the site plan.
            iii.   All landscaped areas shall:
               1.   Be located outside the perimeter of the footprint of a
building or structure;
               2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas; and
               3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch or low maintenance
groundcover.
            iv.   In addition to required trees, all of the open space and
unpaved areas must be covered with grass, organic mulch, live groundcover, or
decorative paving.
         b.   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
            i.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and
parallel to a public street shall be screened from the public right-of-way with
landscaping, berms, fences, or walls up to four (4') feet in height.
Landscaping installed to comply with this section shall be shown on the site
plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8862.png]
            ii.   Landscape islands, linear landing strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens shall be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All parking
areas shall provide tree canopy coverage per the Urban Forestry Ordinance, §
6.302.
         c.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
follow §
6.302(g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
      (7)   General site plan requirements.
         a.   Location of buildings. All buildings and structures shall be
shown on the site plan with dimensions of the buildings and adequate dimensions
showing distance from property lines, easements, driveways, parking spaces and
other buildings.
         b.   Driveways and parking spaces. The location of all driveways and
parking spaces shall be shown on the site plan, including ingress-egress, and
all calculations for required parking.
         c.   Emergency access. Emergency access as required in accordance with
the Fire Code and addresses approved by the Fire Department shall be shown on
the multifamily design site plan.
         d.   Landscape and walkways. Show enhanced landscaping point chart,
landscape materials, required and proposed height of perimeter walls,
bufferyards and recreational facilities. Walkways shall be provided to connect
to all buildings, parking areas and recreational facilities and shall be shown
on the site plan. Walkways shall connect to public streets where street
frontage exceeds 500 feet and to adjacent public property, commercial areas,
and trails.
         e.   Garbage collection. Garbage collection locations shall be shown
on the site plan. Such locations shall not be placed within 20 feet of adjacent
one- or two-family districts. Dumpsters shall be visually screened, except from
the access side, and shall not be placed within the required open space. Access
shall face internally and not face upon adjacent properties or the public
street.
         f.   Open space and recreational facilities. All open space and
recreational facilities shall be identified on the site plan. Open space is the
ratio of open space to net land area (see Chapter 9, Definitions).
         g.   Open space shall be clustered in areas upon the site to provide
views and vistas for a given group of buildings. Open spaces and recreational
amenities shall be designed as functional space with appropriate distribution
on the total site plan. Any recreational facilities shall be used primarily by
the residents and their guests. No alcohol, beer or wine shall be sold on the
premises unless permitted in a district zoned for that use.
            i.   Except for required front yards, no space or area less than 25
feet in either dimension shall be counted as open space.
            ii.   Patios adjacent to dwelling units, unless enclosed, may be
included as part of the open space.
         h.   Miscellaneous requirements.
            i.   The developer shall submit a site plan which shows the zoning
of all adjacent properties.
            ii.   The submitted site plan shall include a location map, north
point, scale and date.
            iii.   The face of the site plan shall include a table showing net
land area, floor area, open space area, number of parking spaces, maximum units
per acre and maximum height.
            iv.   The developer shall prepare and submit a checklist to
accompany the submitted site plan which shall constitute an application and
include a listing of those basic requirements found in the zoning ordinance,
the subdivision ordinance and the plan commission rules and regulations.
      (8)   Site plan expiration. A multifamily development site plan submitted
to the planning and development department shall expire one year from the date
of site plan submittal if not approved. If approved, the site plan shall expire
two years from the date of approval unless a certificate of occupancy is issued
for a multifamily use building in accordance with the approved site plan.
      (9)   Certificate of occupancy requirements.
         a.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a multifamily
development until a final landscape plan has been approved by the development
services director or a designated representative and all landscaping required
by the plans has been installed.
         b.   During the construction phase where development regulations
contained herein have not been met, construction permits may be issued, and
construction may proceed, but no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
all regulations have been complied with. The city shall refuse any final
connection of utilities prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, §1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23495-12-2018, §2,
passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.712 HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY (“D”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the high density multifamily
("D") district to provide a specific zone for high density multifamily
development. In adopting multifamily design development regulations, it is also
the intent of the City Council to encourage the most appropriate uses of land;
to encourage higher quality design and materials; to provide safe and improved
access to the public walkways, to install street trees and enhanced landscaping
along the public walkways to improve the pedestrian environment; and to provide
criteria for development of land zoned for multifamily dwelling use.
   (b)   Uses. In the high density multifamily ("D") district, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration or revision
in a Multifamily Design development area unless there has been a site plan
approved by the development services director or an authorized representative
and a subdivision plat approved by the plan commission.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   All one-family and two-family residential development may be
developed under the property development standards of §§
4.705 through
4.709 for one-family or two-family use. See the selected district and also see
§
6.507 Single-Family Residential Design Standards.
      (2)   a.   All multifamily residential development (three or more
dwelling units) shall meet the property development standards of Multifamily
Development and the minimum dimension of lots and yards shall be as shown in
the accompanying table.
“D” District, Multifamily Design Development
“D” District, Multifamily Design Development
Open space                       35% minimum
Units per acre                   32 maximum
Front yard*                      20 feet minimum
Rear yard                        5 feet minimum
Side yard*                        
   Interior lot               5 feet minimum
   Corner lot**               10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
                                 Three feet for every one foot (3:1) as
                                 measured from slab to top of sill plate,
                                 or two feet for every one foot (2:1) in
                                 overall height when measured from lowest
Setback adjacent to one- or two- finished grade to the peak of the roof,
family residential district ***  whichever is greater; 30 feet minimum
                                 1:1 setback with a 10-foot minimum setback
                                 for one-story garages and carports
                                 20-foot minimum setback for dumpster
                                 enclosures and one-story accessory
                                 structures
                                 36 feet maximum, slab to top plate
                                 48 feet maximum, slab to top plate, beyond
Height                           250-foot setback to one- and two-family
                                 districts (refer to
                                 Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                 6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)). Paving shall not be permitted between the building face and
street and must remain as open space.
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements
(See Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d), Yards).
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be
placed on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see
§
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities,
waterways, railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a
public right-of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
         b.   Carports are not allowed between the front of the building face
and street, see §§
6.101(a) and
6.300(b).
      (3)   For all nonresidential uses in the high density multifamily ("D")
district, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
“D” District, Nonresidential Development
“D” District, Nonresidential Development
Lot width                              50 feet minimum
Front yard*                            20 feet minimum
Rear yard                              5 feet minimum
Side yard*                              
   Interior lot                     5 feet minimum
   Corner lot**                     10 feet minimum adjacent to side street
Setback adjacent to one- or two-family 20 feet minimum
residential district***
                                       35 feet maximum (refer to
Height                                 Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
                                       6.100, Height)
Notes:
*   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)). Paving shall not be permitted between the minimum yard setback line
and street and must remain as open space.
**   May be subject to other front, side and rear yard setback requirements
(see Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.101(d) Yards).
***   A five-foot bufferyard and minimum six-foot screen fence shall be placed
on the property line and should be landscaped per point system, see §
6.300 (b), (d), (f), (g). This regulation shall not be required when the
property in the one- or two-family district is used for utilities, waterways,
railroads or other nonresidential public use or separated by a public right-
of-way of at least 300 feet in width.
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the high density
multifamily ("D") district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards, including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Signs.
         a.   For non-multifamily development on-premises signs are subject to
the following:
            i.   An unilluminated nameplate bearing the family name of the
occupants residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area; and
            ii.   An unilluminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no
higher than six feet above grade and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet
behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of
drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
         b.   Identification signs for multifamily development shall be
permitted, subject to the following provisions:
            i.   Signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the
property upon which displayed.
            ii.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure on each dedicated street frontage of not more than one square
foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said street;
provided, however, at least one sign shall be allowed having an area of 12
square feet.
            iii.   Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not
be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing; revolving signs shall not
be permitted.
            iv.   Not more than 50% of the total allowable sign area may be
located in the required yard space along a dedicated street. However, no
individual sign in such required yard space shall exceed 20 square feet in sign
area.
            v.   Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building
structure and symbols and signs which are not visible or readable from the
public street shall not be limited by the above regulations.
            vi.   Nothing contained herein shall exempt the owner of any
multifamily building from placing identification signs on buildings as required
by the City of Fort Worth fire code.
      (2)   Parking.
         a.   One- and two-family residential development shall meet the
parking requirements for the selected district.
         b.   For nonresidential parking requirements see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
         c.   Multifamily development parking requirements shall be as follows:
            i.   No parking or driveways shall be provided between a building
and a public or private street. Parking shall be provided per §
6.201. Frontage on a controlled access highway shall not be considered a street
for purposes of this section.
 
Use                                Requirement
                                   1 space per bedroom plus 1 space per 250
                                   square feet of common areas, offices and
Multifamily Residential            recreation (less laundry rooms and storage);
                                   2 spaces may be tandem if assigned to the
                                   same unit and restricted from use for
                                   storage.
                                   Two spaces per dwelling unit, located within
                                   a garage of the individual unit, having
Multifamily Residential: Townhouse access to and from that unit, and not
configuration                      accessible or usable by other residential
                                   units. Plus 1 space per 250 square feet of
                                   common areas, offices and recreation (less
                                   laundry rooms and storage).
 
 
            ii.   On-street parking along the lot frontage may be applied
toward the minimum parking requirements only when located fully out of the
travel lanes as defined in the Master Thoroughfare Plan when there is parking
on both sides of the street. On-street parking that is applied toward minimum
parking requirements shall be counted towards the maximum parking limitations.
      (3)   Accessory uses in Multifamily Design developments. In addition to
other uses which qualify as accessory uses, the following shall be considered
as accessory uses to Multifamily Design development:
         a.   Recreation areas and spaces within buildings primarily for use of
the dwelling occupants;
         b.   Kindergarten and day care center primarily for the use of the
dwelling occupants;
         c.   Mechanical and storage buildings necessary for operation and
maintenance of the Multifamily Design development;
         d.   Manager's office; and
         e.   Garages, carports.
      (4)   Fences and gates.
         a.   One- and Two-Family residential development. Open Design fences
up to five feet high in front yard and projected front yard for one-family and
two-family residential dwellings per regulations in §
5.305(b)(2)
         b.   Multifamily development. Fences shall not be located in the area
between building facades and the property line. Frontage on a controlled access
highway shall not be considered a street for purposes of this section.
Perimeter security fencing is prohibited; however, security fencing is
permitted on interior property lines. Solid screening fences are required when
adjacent to a one or two family district unless adjacent to a public park or
controlled access highway when a solid screening fence is not permitted and an
open design fence shall be installed, if a fence is installed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8871.png]
         c.   Exterior security fences and gates that are located along public
streets, along a public access easement, or along publicly accessible open
space shall not extend beyond building facades.
         d.   All fences and railings shall be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
         e.   All walls shall be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         f.   For private residential patios and yards, a fence, railing, or
low wall may extend beyond the building facade if the following requirements
are met.
            i.   Fences, railings, and walls shall not exceed four feet (48")
in total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing
and/or the wall; however,
            ii.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence railing and/
or wall height shall not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8873.png]
      (5)   Façade and building orientation standards for multifamily
development. The following design standards apply:
         a.   Building Orientation. Buildings located on public streets must
face the street with the longest length of the building placed parallel/
adjacent to the street. Where site constraints require, the building end
(shortest length of the building) may face a public street only when the same
exterior quality to the building facade is provided including architecture,
masonry and fenestration proportion on the side of other buildings facing the
public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8875.png]
         b.   Facade design standards.
            1.   Required drawings. To illustrate compliance with the following
standards, elevation drawings shall be submitted as part of the multifamily
design site plan review to the planning and development department for those
building facades that are oriented to:
               a.   Public streets.
               b.   Private streets and walkways that are publicly accessible
through a public use easement; or
               c.   Publicly accessible open space.
            2.   Facade variation.
               a.   Each new building facade oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open space shall incorporate each of the following scaling elements.
For building facades less than 50 feet in width, a minimum of two elements are
required. The following items and calculations shall be provided as part of the
multifamily design submittal for review:
                  1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
                     i.   Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
                     ii.   Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less
than one inch deep and six inches wide).
                     iii.   Foundation (water tables, rustication).
                  2.   At least two variations in wall plane not less than
three feet in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for
multi-story buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window
openings by utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window
elements, and/or more pronounced architectural features such as porches,
alcoves, and roof dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8877.png]
                  3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable
change in color or shade. Each change of material shall involve a minimum one
inch variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
               b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible
street or open spaces shall include differentiation between the first and
second level and the upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade, or
other architectural features.
               c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction shall contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in and/or other architectural features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8879.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8881.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8883.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8885.png]
            3.   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building
facades (not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible
streets or open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
               i.   Stone.
               ii.   Brick.
               iii.   Terra cotta.
               iv.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
               v.   Cement plaster stucco.
               vi.   Cement board siding.
               vii.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
      (6)   Landscaping.
         a.   Enhanced landscaping point system requirement. Enhanced
landscaping is required along all public rights-of-way, see Section (h)(4), and
shall earn a minimum set of points that are awarded for providing and
maintaining specific landscaping and design features. The points are
accumulated as follows:
ENHANCED LANDSCAPING SYSTEM
20 points required
10 of the required points shall come from the installation of street trees as
described below:
Public Feature Requirement Points Awarded
ENHANCED LANDSCAPING SYSTEM
20 points required
10 of the required points shall come from the installation of street trees as
described below:
Public Feature              Requirement                          Points Awarded
                            Trees shall be planted within a
                            planting strip or flush with the
                            sidewalk surface; location and type
                            as approved by the City Forester if
                            within the right of way. If trees
                            cannot be installed within the right
                            of way, trees shall be installed in
                            a location where the tree canopy
                            affects the public sidewalk.
                            Required Spacing as specified below
Street Trees                or as approved by the City Forestry  10
                            Small/Medium Canopy = 25-30 ft. on
                            center
                            Large Canopy = 35-40 ft. on center
                            *Where necessary spacing exceptions
                            may be made to accommodate mature
                            trees, curb cuts, fire hydrants and
                            other infrastructure elements.
                            Street trees may be counted toward
                            the planting requirements for the
                            Urban Forestry required tree canopy
                            coverage.
                            *1 light post for every 60-70 ft.
                            (based on size of street tree) of
                            street frontage.
Pedestrian- Scaled Lighting Style to be approved by the          10
                            Transportation and Public Works
                            Department (TPW) and consistent with
                            other pedestrian lights on the same
                            block.
                            1 pt. for every additional foot of
Paved Walkway Enhancement   sidewalk width over the city         1- 11
                            standard (up to 15 ft. wide total).
                            
Private Feature             Requirement                          Points Awarded
Pool/Playground             5 percent (%) of net land area with  5 for each
                            minimum area not less than 1,000 sf.
                            Must provide recreational
Private Park/dog park       facilities/amenities. May include    5
                            open drainage area/easement/pond as
                            long as amenities are provided
Community Garden            1 pt. for every 250 sf. with minimum 5- 10
                            area not less than 1,250 sf.
Proximity to Public Park    Within 1,000 ft. as measured from    5
                            property line to property line
                            Xeriscaping, rain gardens, bio-
                            swales, landscaped bio retention
                            area.
                            See
                            Chapter 6, Table A for a recommended
Sustainable Landscaping     list of native plants for landscape  5
                            use in North Central Texas
                            Landscaped bio-retention areas are
                            encouraged for natural drainage
                            channels to reduce runoff and
                            increase infiltration of water into
                            the soil.
*If no pedestrian lights or street trees exist on the project's block face,
measure from the end of the block to determine spacing. For trees, begin 40
feet from the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement
requirement. If trees or lights exist, measure from existing trees or lights.
 
            i.   Points shall be awarded only one for each feature category,
per project.
            ii.   Submittal of site plan. The location and description of
decorative paving, sidewalk furniture or other decorative elements, if any,
shall be indicated on the site plan.
            iii.   All landscaped areas shall:
               1.   Be located outside the perimeter of the footprint of a
building or structure;
               2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas; and
               3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch or low maintenance
groundcover.
            iv.   In addition to required trees, all of the open space and
unpaved areas must be covered with grass, organic mulch, live groundcover, or
decorative paving.
         b.   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
            i.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and
parallel to a public street shall be screened from the public right- of-way
with landscaping, berms, fences, or walls up to four (4') feet in height.
Landscaping installed to comply with this section shall be shown on the site
plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8888.png]
            ii.   Landscape islands, linear landing strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens shall be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All parking
areas shall provide tree canopy coverage per the Urban Forestry Ordinance, §
6.302.
         c.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
follow §
6.302(g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
      (7)   General site plan requirements.
         a.   Location of buildings. All buildings and structures shall be
shown on the site plan with dimensions of the buildings and adequate dimensions
showing distance from property lines, easements, driveways, parking spaces and
other buildings.
         b.   Driveways and parking spaces. The location of all driveways and
parking spaces shall be shown on the site plan, including ingress-egress, and
all calculations for required parking.
         c.   Emergency access.  Emergency access as required in accordance
with the Fire Code and addresses approved by the Fire Department shall be shown
on the multifamily design site plan.
         d.   Landscape and walkways. Show enhanced landscaping point chart,
landscape materials, required and proposed height of perimeter walls,
bufferyards and recreational facilities. Walkways shall be provided to connect
to all buildings, parking areas and recreational facilities and shall be shown
on the site plan. Walkways shall connect to public streets where street
frontage exceeds 500 feet and to adjacent public property, commercial areas,
and trails.
         e.   Garbage collection. Garbage collection locations shall be shown
on the site plan. Such locations shall not be placed within 20 feet of adjacent
one- or two-family districts. Dumpsters shall be visually screened, except from
the access side, and shall not be placed within the required open space. Access
shall face internally and not face upon adjacent properties or the public
street.
         f.   Open space and recreational facilities. All open space and
recreational facilities shall be identified on the site plan. Open space is the
ratio of open space to net land area (see Chapter 9, Definitions).
         g.   Open space shall be clustered in areas upon the site to provide
views and vistas for a given group of buildings. Open spaces and recreational
amenities shall be designed as functional space with appropriate distribution
on the total site plan. Any recreational facilities shall be used primarily by
the residents and their guests. No alcohol, beer or wine shall be sold on the
premises unless permitted in a district zoned for that use.
            i.   Except for required front yards, no space or area less than 25
feet in either dimension shall be counted as open space.
            ii.   Patios adjacent to dwelling units, unless enclosed, may be
included as part of the open space.
         h.   Miscellaneous requirements.
            i.   The developer shall submit a site plan which shows the zoning
of all adjacent properties.
            ii.   The submitted site plan shall include a location map, north
point, scale and date.
            iii.   The face of the site plan shall include a table showing net
land area, floor area, open space area, number of parking spaces, maximum units
per acre and maximum height.
            iv.   The developer shall prepare and submit a checklist to
accompany the submitted site plan which shall constitute an application and
include a listing of those basic requirements found in the zoning ordinance,
the subdivision ordinance and the plan commission rules and regulations.
      (8)   Site plan expiration. A multifamily development site plan submitted
to the planning and development department shall expire one year from the date
of site plan submittal if not approved. If approved, the site plan shall expire
two years from the date of approval unless a certificate of occupancy is issued
for a multifamily use building in accordance with the approved site plan.
      (9)   Certificate of occupancy requirements.
         a.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a multifamily
development until a final landscape plan has been approved by the development
services director or a designated representative and all landscaping required
by the plans has been installed.
         b.   During the construction phase where development regulations
contained herein have not been met, construction permits may be issued, and
construction may proceed, but no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
all regulations have been complied with. The city shall refuse any final
connection of utilities prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23495-12-2018, § 3,
passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.713 URBAN RESIDENTIAL (“UR”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Urban Residential ("UR")
District to provide a residential density transition zone between low density
single-family neighborhoods and higher density commercial areas. An additional
purpose of the UR Districts is to encourage a range of housing choices within
walking distance of rail transit stations and mixed-use urban villages. The
goal is to ensure compatibility between one-and-two family districts and more
intense mixed-use districts and related uses. UR neighborhoods are
characterized by higher density residential structures in a highly walkable
urban environment. A mixture of housing types is present to provide
architectural diversity, while shallow setbacks frame the pedestrian
environment with engaging building facades, improve visibility and safety of
building entrances, and increase neighborhood vitality. In addition to the
purpose statements above, the intent of the UR District is to:
      (1)   Promote a pedestrian-oriented urban form. In contrast to
conventional zoning standards that place a primary emphasis on the regulation
of land uses, urban residential development standards and guidelines focus on
promoting a walkable, urban form of development, consistent with the
surrounding areas historic urban development patterns. The focus on form
promotes buildings that conform to tested urban design principles.
      (2)   Require excellence in design of the public realm and of buildings
that front public spaces. The most successful and memorable urban environments
are those in which walking down the street is appealing. Streets, plazas,
parks, and other public spaces should be comfortable and inviting, and
buildings fronting those spaces should be active and visually interesting at
the pedestrian level.
      (3)   Encourage creativity, architectural diversity, and exceptional
design. Urban residential is intended to promote high quality design, and the
development review process for mixed-use projects is intended to promote
flexibility. Standards, as well as the development review process, are intended
to support creativity and exceptional design while discouraging uniformity.
      (4)   Promote sustainable development that minimizes negative impacts on
natural resources. Creating walkable, higher density residential districts
surrounding urban residential districts supports sustainable development by
providing an alternative to low density development in peripheral areas. In
accordance with sustainable development principles, the urban residential
buildings and public spaces should be designed to minimize negative impacts on
air and water quality and promote innovation in environmental design.
      (5)   Promote walkability. Walkable communities are desirable places to
live, work, and play, while demonstrably improving health outcomes. Walkable
communities give higher priority to pedestrian activity by creating
streetscapes that are safe, comfortable, interesting, and that accommodate a
wide range of transportation modes and users. To foster walkability,
development patterns should promote a mix of land uses and density, have an
emphasis on the placement and orientation of buildings, have properly placed
parking, place a high value on the design of quality streetscapes, provide
access to transit, and provide unimpeded pedestrian connections to multiple
destinations and open space.
      (6)   Maximize connectivity and access, in order for people to feel
comfortable walking, pedestrian access and connectivity among uses and
amenities, including transit facilities, is essential. Connectivity and access
can be accomplished by creating smaller blocks or by providing access through
blocks via publicly accessible alleys, pathways, paseos, and pedestrian
boulevards. Sidewalks should form a continuous network connected by frequent,
safe street crossing.
      (7)   Promote affordable housing and mixed income communities. Design a
mix of housing based on geographic growth projections and the needs of current
and future residents to accommodate families, single occupants, the elderly and
those with disabilities. Access to transportation and services should be a key
factor in the future distribution and allocation of affordable housing.
   (b)   Review procedures for development.
      (1)   General requirements. Projects should conform to all urban
residential standards. Staff may also refer an administrative case or a case
that does not require waivers to the UDC for failure to meet the purpose and
intent of the ordinance.
      (2)   General rule allowing waiver or modification of standards.
         a.   Director or designee. The director or designee is authorized to
grant modifications to certain development standards with a maximum
modification up to 10% increase or decrease for the following development
standards:
            1.    Setbacks for additions to existing structures.
            2.   Bufferyard width.
            3.   Primary entrance separation.
         b.   Urban Design Commission. Unless otherwise limited by this
section, the Urban Design Commission (UDC), may waive or modify any individual
development standards through the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness,
if the UDC finds that the proposed development is consistent with the intent
statements of the UR District but does not conform to certain development
standards. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall expire if a building permit
is not issued within two years of the approval of the Certificate of
Appropriateness.
         c.   Board of Adjustment. Any waiver of basic property development
standards related to building heights, setbacks and bulk require a variance
from the Board of Adjustment after a recommendation from the Urban Design
Commission.
         d.   Zoning Commission/City Council. Any zoning proposal requesting a
Planned Development "PD" zoning district that uses the UR District as the base
zoning, inclusive of any waivers from UR design standards, must receive a
recommendation from the Urban Design Commission prior to a public hearing by
the Zoning Commission or the City Council.
      (3)    Conceptual site plan. To facilitate compliance with the UR
development standards, a conceptual site plan must be submitted to the director
or designee for review prior to submittal of permit applications. The
conceptual site plan must show the anticipated location of proposed streets,
sidewalks and walkways, building footprints, parking areas, landscaped areas
and features, and open space. A change of 5% or greater in land uses to an
approved conceptual site plan will require a new project review and approval
prior to permitting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9582.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9580.jpg]
 
   (c)   Uses. In the UR District, no building or land use shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor
shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance with the use
table in
Chapter 4, Article 6, and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5.
      (1)   Building types. The following non-exhaustive list of conceptual
building illustrations demonstrates the recommended building forms in the UR
District. Additional building types and configurations that comply with the
intent and regulations of the UR district are encouraged. All intent statements
are addressed through development standards set out in Section
4.713 (d) through (h).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9578.jpg]
 
         a.   Single-family detached. A single, detached residential dwelling
with the front of the building being placed on, or very close to, the front
property line. Parking for a single-family dwelling is allowed on the side or
rear of the building, but the preferred method is through traditional forms
with detached garages at the rear when possible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9576.jpg]
 
         b.   Single family attached (townhouse). A two- or three-story
building with three or more attached dwelling units consolidated into a single
structure. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recommended to
improve privacy. A townhouse form is regarded as an apartment/ condominium when
on one platted lot and not individually platted lots with ground floor separate
entrances to each unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9574.jpg]
 
         c.   Two-family attached (duplex). A building with two dwelling units
on an individual lot separated by a shared common wall. Dwelling units within a
building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other
dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9572.jpg]
 
         d.   Manor house. A building that has the appearance of a conventional
single-family dwelling with three to five attached dwelling units consolidated
in a single structure. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either
wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9570.jpg]
 
         e.   Garden apartment. A building that has the appearance of a
conventional single-family dwelling with three to eight dwelling units
vertically and horizontally integrated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9568.jpg]
 
         f.   Cottage court. A building type that accommodates five to nine
detached dwelling units organized around an internal shared courtyard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9566.jpg]
 
         g.    Apartments/condominiums. Multifamily residential development
type that often shares a common entrance. Primary entrances are prominent and
street-facing. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recommended to
improve privacy. Parking for an apartment/condominium building is allowed on
the side or rear of the building, but the preferred method is at the rear of
the building or within a parking structure. A townhouse form is regarded as
apartments/condominiums when not on individually platted lots with separate
ground floor entrances to each unit.
   (d)   Property development standards.
      (1)   General yard development standards. Development shall be exempt
from Chapter 6, Article 1, §§
6.101(b),
6.101(c),
6.101(d), and
6.101(f).
      (2)   Setbacks. The chart below represents the minimum and maximum
setbacks for buildings and structures within the UR District.
Requirement Distance
Requirement                                                                      Distance
1. Front yard (min./max.)                                                        0'/20'
2. Rear yard - primary structure (min.)                                          5'
   When adjacent to one- or two-family districts with an existing one or two- 20'
family structure (min.)
   Width of adjacent alley, driveway access lot or access easement may be     20'
counted towards minimum setback (min.)
3. Rear yard - accessory structure (min.)                                        5'
   If alley is provided (min.)                                                0'
4. Side yard (min./max.)                                                         0'/20'
5. *Side: common lot line (min.)                                                 0'
*Subject to building code spacing requirements
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9564.jpg]
 
      (3)   Single-family lot size: 5,000 sf. maximum.
      (4)   Maximum height: three stories with a maximum of 14 feet per floor,
as measured from the top of the finished slab at grade level to the top of the
highest wall top plate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9562.jpg]
 
   Note: Development in the UR District is exempt from Section
6.100. An unroofed and unenclosed roof top terrace, and the enclosed stairwell
or elevator that strictly provides access to the terrace, shall not be included
in the measurement of the total building height.
         a.   For sloped sites, average grade is determined by calculating the
average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or the improved grade
(whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the
primary street setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9560.jpg]
 
          b.   Where a lot slopes downward from the front property line, one
story that is additional to the specified maximum number of stories may be
built on the lower rear portion of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9558.jpg]
 
      (5)   Maximum residential units per acre:
 
Maximum Building Height and Use                     Maximum Units Per Acre
3 stories, single use                               40 units/acre
4 stories, single use with height bonus (structured 60 units/acre
parking or open space)
 
      (6)   Height bonus options. A height bonus is applicable for multifamily
buildings with eight units or more. Only one height bonus can be utilized in
the UR District and shall not allow for heights beyond a four-story maximum.
When adjacent to a one-or-two family district, all height bonuses must adhere
to the transitional height plane requirements, see subsection (f)(1)c.
         a.   Structured parking. The intent of allowing a height bonus for
structure parking is to locate and design surface parking lots, individual
garages, and large parking garages so as to reduce their visual impact or to
create public amenities or both (e.g. through aesthetic or environmental
features).
            1.   One additional story of height shall be permitted if providing
structured parking for 100% of all off-street parking for the height bonus.
            2.    One-and-two family residential garages shall not be included
in a determination of the applicability of the structured parking height bonus.
         b.   Open space. One additional story of height shall be permitted if
providing a publicly accessible pocket park that adheres to the following
standards.
         Note: Utilizing the open space height bonus does not exempt a
development from applicable park dedication fees.
            1.   Use criteria.
               (i)    Pocket parks must provide a community benefit such as:
play activity for children, relaxing spaces to enjoy lunch or meet friends,
interactive artwork, pet-friendly areas, or small event and garden space.
            2.   Location.
               (i)    Pocket parks must front public streets and be publicly
accessible.
            Note: Refer to subsection (h)(5), Development Standards Applicable
to Privately Owned Streets and Drives with Public Access Easements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9556.jpg]
 
            3.   Size.
               (i)   Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet minimum.
               (ii)   One (1) acre maximum.
            4.   Green space.
               (i)    Pocket parks shall provide a minimum of 20% ground level
green space. Additional ground area may be impervious provided the space is
structured for recreation, including but not limited to, sculpture gardens,
basketball courts, or tennis courts.
               (ii)   All pocket parks require tree planting. Tree planting
requirement may be waived for areas that are designed for structured active
recreation.
            5.   Seating.
               (i)   A minimum of one linear foot of seating shall be required
for every 300 square feet of gross open space.
            6.   Fencing.
               (i)    Pocket parks may be fenced but shall conform to
subsection (h)(2) and shall remain open to the public during daylight hours.
            7.   Maintenanc e.
               (i)    Pocket parks that are privately owned and maintained must
be publicly accessible; or
               (ii)    Must be dedicated in perpetuity as public open space
through the recording of a public use easement and have an established long-
term maintenance agreement with the park and recreational department.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9554.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9552.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9550.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9548.jpg]
 
    (e)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. The following table establishes the
required parking for the allowed building types in the UR District. All
applicable requirements and applicable nonresidential use requirements included
in
Chapter 6, Article 2 shall apply.
 
                                                   Proximity to Rail Station
Building Type/Use        Requirement               If the development is
                                                   within 1,320 feet of a rail
                                                   transit station:
                         2 spaces per dwelling
Single family detached   unit.                     No reduction
                         See subsection (e)(3) for
                         location requirements.
                         2 spaces per dwelling     1 space per dwelling unit.
Townhouse                unit.                     See subsection (e)(4) for
                         See subsection (e)(4) for location requirements.
                         location requirements.
                         2 spaces per dwelling     1 space per dwelling unit;
                         unit;                     Plus, 1 space per bedroom
                         Plus, 1 space per bedroom over three bedrooms per
Duplex & manor house (2+ over three bedrooms per   dwelling unit.
units)                   dwelling unit.            See subsection (e)(3) for
                         See subsection (e)(3) for location requirements for
                         location requirements for duplexes.
                         duplexes.
                         1 space required per      0.5 spaces required per
                         bedroom;                  bedroom;
Apartments/              Plus, 2 spaces per 500    Plus, 2 spaces per 500
condominiu ms            square feet of leasing    square feet of leasing
                         office and/or social      office and/or social rooms.
                         rooms.
*All partial spaces are rounded up
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9546.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9544.jpg]
 
      (2)   Other off-street parking and loading standards.
         a.   Surface parking shall not be permitted between a building front
and the street, provided however, angled, perpendicular, or parallel parking
that is designed to function as on-street parking shall be permitted if it
meets the following three conditions:
            1.   The city's traffic engineer determines that the parking does
not adversely affect public safety or circulation and satisfies the conditions
described in §
22-175d of the City Code.
            2.   Each parking space is located adjacent to and is directly
accessible from a public street or publicly accessible private street; and
            3.   Surface parking permitted between a building front and the
street (on-street parking) and the required pedestrian walkway shall be either
dedicated as public right-of-way or be included in a public access easement
recorded in the real property records of the county. The front yard setback
shall be measured from the curb instead of the property line, and the setback
shall be no greater than 20 feet.
         b.   The required off-street parking for any use may be located off-
site, on property within 500 feet of the subject site.
         c.   Adjacent on-street parking along the lot frontage may be applied
toward the minimum parking requirements only when located fully out of the
travel lanes.
         d.   Uses located in historically significant buildings shall be
exempt from off-street parking requirements pursuant to Section
6.201(b)(3). For the purpose of this exemption, historically significant
buildings shall include those determined by the Historic Preservation Officer
to be eligible, based on the applicable criteria, for:
            1.   Listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or
            2.   Local designation as either Historic and Cultural Landmark
("HC") or Highly Significant Endangered ("HSE").
      (3)   Parking location for one-family detached and two-family dwellings.
         a.   All parking shall be located behind the front building line.
         b.   Garage doors that face the street must be located a minimum of 20
feet behind any front wall plane of a structure facing a publicly accessible
ROW.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9542.jpg]
 
      (4)   Parking location for one-family attached (townhouse, rowhouse).
         a.   Garages must be placed entirely to the rear of the primary
structure and accessed through the use of a rear driveway or alley.
         b.   Garage doors must face the rear driveway or alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9540.jpg]
 
   (f)   Buffers, landscaping, and pedestrian lighting.
      (1)   Bufferyard and supplemental building setback.
         a.   A bufferyard is not required between the boundary of a one-or-two
family development within the UR District and an adjacent one-or-two family
district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9538.jpg]
 
         b.   Multi-family development adjacent to a one- or two-family
district shall have a five foot bufferyard. See §
6.300(d) through (i) for bufferyard requirements.
         c.   All uses adjacent to a one- or two-family district must apply a
transitional height plane of 45 degrees to portions of a building above three
stories or 38 feet whichever is less, as measured from the property line of the
one- or two-family district.
            1.   Any portion of a building above three stories must be set back
so that the building does not encroach beyond the transitional height plane.
            2.   These supplemental building setbacks and transitional height
plane requirements shall not apply to buildings adjacent to one-or two-family
districts that serve as public open space, such as parks and drainage ways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9536.jpg]
 
      (2)   Enhanced landscaping and pedestrian lighting. Street trees and
pedestrian-scaled lighting are required along all public rights-of-way in the
UR district, see subsection (h)(5). Adherence to the landscape ordinance, §
6.301 is encouraged, except as here-in provided.
         a.   The Director or their designee may administratively approve any
modifications to streetscape requirements caused by mature trees, utility
conflicts, fire hydrants, shallow underground utilities, curb cuts or any other
obvious impediment which would prevent the planting of a tree.
         b.   Street trees.
            1.   Trees must be planted within a planting strip or flush with
the sidewalk surface using tree grates as follows:
               (i)   Tree grates must be adjustable to allow for tree growth
and securely attached. Inner rings must be easily removed with an Allen wrench.
               (ii)   Tree grate openings shall not exceed 3/8 of an inch.
            2.   Exceptions.
               (i)   In the event that infrastructure prevents the use of at-
grade planting, a raised planter or crushed stone may be used if approved by
the Director or designee.
               (ii)    Other techniques to provide the street trees will be
considered on a case-by-case basis and may be approved by the Director or their
designee, or the Director or designee may send the matter to the Urban Design
Commission for consideration and decision.
            3.   Spacing.
 
Canopy Size         Spacing (on center)
Small/medium canopy 25 - 30 ft.
Large canopy        35 - 40 ft.
 
            4.   If there are no street trees existing on the project's block
face, then spacing is measured from the end of the block beginning 40 feet from
the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement requirements.
         c.   Pedestrian-scaled lighting.
            1.   New public and private development must provide pedestrian
lights within the roadside's street tree/furniture zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9534.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9532.jpg]
 
            2.   Required spacing. Pedestrian lights must be located
approximately at the midpoint between two trees and spaced a maximum of 60 feet
apart.
            3.    Pedestrian-scaled lighting style must be approved by the
Transportation and Public Works Department (TPW) and be consistent with other
pedestrian lights on the same block.
            4.   If there are no pedestrian lights existing on the project's
block face, then the spacing is measured from the end of the block. If
pedestrian-scaled lights exist, then the spacing is measured from existing
lights.
         d.   Section
6.301(h) "Landscape Area Required" does not apply to developments in the UR
District provided; however, the following are applicable in UR:
            1.   Section
6.301.H.l.b;
            2.   Section
6.301.H.l.d;
            3.   When there is a front yard setback of at least five feet,
front yard landscaping is required for areas outside the ground level patios,
parkways, and pedestrian walkways. Front yard landscaping must adhere to the
shrub and native plants as listed in Table A of §
6.301(h), as well as other applicable regulations described or referenced
within the UR regulations.
         e.   Irrigation. An irrigation system must be installed to provide
total water coverage to all plant materials installed pursuant to §
6.301 (i) Irrigation.
      (3)   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
      Intent: The UR district is intended to create a public environment in
which pedestrian safety, comfort, and interest are paramount. Therefore,
parking areas that front public streets and pedestrian pathways must be
screened to minimize pedestrians' view of parked vehicles and the impact of
vehicle headlights.
         a.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and parallel
to a public street must be screened from the public right-of-way with
landscaping, fences, or walls a minimum of three feet in height measured from
parking lot grade to a maximum of four feet in height.
         b.   Landscape islands, linear landscaping strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens shall be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All landscape
islands and strips must have at least one tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9530.jpg]
 
          c.   Every parking space is required to be not more than 60 feet from
a large canopy tree or 40 feet from a medium canopy tree, planted within a
median, strip or island, measured from the trunk at planting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9528.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9526.jpg]
 
         d.   Required size of landscape islands and linear landscaping strips
containing trees:
            1.   Within parking lots with non-porous surfaces: 130 square feet;
eight feet minimum width.
            2.   Planted in structured soil: 64 square feet; eight feet minimum
width. The use of approved structural soil shall be limited to landscape
islands and adjacent walkways and parking area necessary for proper tree
growth. Structural soils must not be used for fire lanes in parking lots.
            3.   Within parking lots with approved porous surfaces for parking
areas excluding fire lanes: 16 square feet. Tree trunks should be protected by
wheel stops or other physical barriers excluding curbs.
            4.   Linear landscaping strips are encouraged in lieu of
landscaping islands where possible.
      (4)   Urban forestry.
         a.   Five percent (5%) site canopy coverage must be provided through
either preservation or planting.
         b.   Developments with surface parking lots must provide 40% canopy
coverage over new, expanded, or reconstructed surface parking. The surface
parking canopy coverage counts towards the site canopy coverage requirement.
         c.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
follow §
6.302(g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
   (g)   Facade design standards.
      (1)   Parking structure facades.
         a.   Facade design. All parking structure facades that face a public
space must be designed to incorporate architectural elements and materials that
complement the adjacent building or buildings in the area.
         b.   Ground level screening. Screening must be incorporated to
minimize the visual impact of garages and parked cars at the pedestrian level.
Landscaping (including trees and shrubs) may be utilized for screening purposes
but must screen at least 50% of pedestrian level parking garage facades
immediately upon installation, with species selected to eventually provide full
100% screening.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9524.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9522.jpg]
 
          c.   Parking structure openings shall not exceed 20 feet per
entrance.
            1.   For multifamily buildings less than 150 feet in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 50% of the ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
habitable space.
            2.   For multifamily buildings 150 feet or more in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 25% of ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
habitable space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9520.jpg]
 
          d.   The property owner is responsible for maintaining all required
landscaping in good health and condition and the removal of any litter that has
accumulated in landscaped areas. Any dead, unhealthy, damaged or missing
landscaping and screening must be replaced with landscaping and screening that
conforms to this subsection within 90 days (or within 180 days where seasonal
concerns would jeopardize the health of plant materials).
      (2)   Facade variation.
         a.   Each new building facade that is greater than 50 feet in width
and is oriented to a publicly accessible street or open space must incorporate
each of the following scaling elements. For building facades less than 50 feet
in width, a minimum of two elements are required.
            1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
               (i)    Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
               (ii)    Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less than
one inch deep and six inches wide).
               (iii)    Foundation (water tables, rustication).
            2.   At least two variation in wall plane not less than three feet
in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for multi-story
buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window openings by
utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window elements, and/or
more pronounced architectural features such as porches, alcoves, and roof
dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9518.jpg]
 
            3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable change in
color or shade. Each change of material shall involve a minimum one-inch
variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
         b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible street or
open space must include differentiation between the first and the upper levels
with a canopy, balcony, arcade, or other architectural features.
         c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction must contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in subsection (g)(2)a above and/or other
architectural features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9516.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9514.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9512.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9510.jpg]
 
       (3)   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building facades
(not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible streets or
open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
         a.   Stone.
         b.   Brick.
         c.   Terra cotta.
         d.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
         e.   Cement plaster stucco.
         f.   Cement board siding.
         g.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
      (4)   Building entries.
      Intent: The intent of building entries is to create a pedestrian-oriented
development in which buildings are oriented towards publicly accessible streets
and sidewalks.
         a.   The principle building must have its main entrance from a public
sidewalk or plaza, or from a private sidewalk or plaza that is publicly
accessible through a public use easement.
         b.   Primary entrances must not be from a parking lot.
         c.   Secondary entrances from parking lots are permitted.
         d.   All building entrances for primary entrances for residential
units must incorporate arcades, roofs, porches, alcoves, or awnings that
protect pedestrians from the sun and rain.
         e.   Residential entries.
            1.    Apartments, condominiums, and manor houses with street level
units must provide individual street-oriented entries for each unit along the
primary street frontage.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9508.jpg]
Example:
Facade total: 200 x 20 = 4,000 sf.
A   Door and window area: 500 sf.
   Required masonry: 4,000 - 500 x .70 = 2,450 sf.
B   Approved masonry material: 2,450 sf.
C   Non-approved masonry material: 1,550 sf.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9506.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9504.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9502.jpg]
 
            2.    Apartments and condominiu ms must provide primary entrances
at intervals not to exceed 125 linear feet of street-oriented building
frontage. Entrance spacing is measured from the edge of door to the edge of the
next door.
            3.    Townhouses must have individual street- oriented entries for
each unit.
            4.   Manor houses must have a single primary entrance.
            5.   A duplex may have one primary entrance for each unit. Each
primary entrance into a duplex must be provided under a shared porch or one of
the entrances must be accessed from a side facade of the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9500.jpg]
 
   (h)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Signs. In addition to the development standards in
Chapter 6, Article 4, the following provisions apply:
         a.   On premise signs on one-family dwellings, manor houses with two
dwelling units, and townhouses are limited to one unilluminated nameplate per
unit not to exceed one square foot in area.
         b.   For apartments, condominiums and manor houses containing more
than two dwelling units, attached identification signs shall be permitted,
subject to the following provisions;
            1.   Attached signs shall be permitted to identify the name of the
property upon which displayed.
            2.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure on each dedicated street frontage of not more than one square
foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said street;
provided, however, at least one sign shall be allowed having an area of 12
square feet.
            3.   Signs may not be illuminated.
         c.   An illuminated sign for those uses permitted that are not
residential is not allowed. The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area,
shall be no higher than six feet above grade, and shall be placed a minimum of
ten feet behind the property line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet
of drives providing ingress and egress to the property.
      (2)   Fences, gates, and walls.
         a.   Complexes with perimeter security fencing along public streets
are prohibited.
         b.   Fences shall not be located in the area between the front
building facade and the public street frontage or public open spaces.
         c.   Exterior fences and gates that are located along public streets,
along private streets or walkways that are publicly accessible through a public
use easement, or along publicly accessible open space shall not extend beyond
building facades.
         d.   All fences and walls along public street frontage or public open
spaces that are taller than 4 feet must be open design.
         e.   All fences and railings must be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high-quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9498.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9496.jpg]
 
          f.   All walls must be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high- quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         g.   For private residential patios and yards, a front yard fence,
railing, or low wall may extend beyond the building facade if the following
requirements are met:
            1.   Fences, railings, and walls must not exceed four feet (48") in
total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing, and/
or the wall however;
            2.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence, railing and/
or wall height must not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9494.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9492.jpg]
 
       (3)   Service areas screening.
         a.   Trash and recycling collection, and other similar service areas,
must be located to the side or rear of buildings and behind the primary
structures on street frontages.
         b.   All refuse and recycling collection containers for apartments/
condominiums must be located on a concrete pad and shall be screened on three
sides by an opaque fence or wall. The fourth side must be an opaque gate.
         c.   The design, colors, and materials of screening elements shall be
architecturally compatible with the character of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9490.jpg]
 
      (4)   Mechanical equipment screening.
 
               Fully Screen from Permitted Screening Materials
Alternative    Public Right-of-                                Architectural
               Way               Landscaping Opaque Wall/Fence Screening
               (Alleys excluded)                               Elements
Wall-mounted   •               •         •2
Roof-mounted   •1                                            •
Ground-mounted •               •         •2
1 Must be screened from abutting properties and the public street.
2 If an opaque wall or fence is provided, it shall be compatible with the
principal building in terms of texture, quality, material, and color.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9488.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9486.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9484.jpg]
 
      (5)   Privately owned streets and drives with public access easements.
Private streets and drives with public access easements shall be considered
public streets or right-of- way for the purpose of review for compliance with
setbacks, pocket parks, parking, screening, enhanced landscaping, facade
variations, fenestration, and other UR design requirements normally based on
street.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 22809-08-2017, § 1
(Exh. A), passed 8-1- 2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23309-08-2018, §§ 1–2, passed
8-7-2018; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25190-11-2021, § 1,
passed 11-9-2021, eff. 12-16-2021)
ARTICLE 8: NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE
§ 4.800 ALLOWED USES.
   The table on the following pages sets forth the uses permitted within the
nonresidential districts.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.801 KEY TO TABLE DESIGNATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” in a cell indicates that a use is allowed by
right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all
other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. A “P*” in any cell means
that supplemental use standards apply. (Refer to Supplemental Use Standards,
Chapter 5, Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses.) The specific section number
of the standard is noted in the right-hand column, titled “Supplemental
Standards.”
   (b)   Special exception uses (SE). An “SE” in a cell indicates that a use is
allowed only if reviewed and approved as a special exception use, in accordance
with the review procedures of
Chapter 3, Article 3. An “SE*” in any cell means that supplemental use
standards apply. (Refer to Supplemental Use Standards,
Chapter 5, Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses.) The specific section number
of the standard is noted in the right-hand column, titled “Supplemental
Standards.”
   (c)   Conditional use permit (CUP). A "CUP" in a cell indicates that the use
is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a conditional use permit, in
accordance with the review procedures in Chapter 4, Article 4. A CUP* in any
cell means that supplemental use standards apply.
   (d)   Uses not allowed. An empty cell indicates that a use is not allowed in
the respective zoning district. Provided however, an application for a
conditional use permit may be made for any land use not permitted in any
district in accordance with the review procedures in Chapter 4, Article 4.
   (e)   Supplemental use standards (*). The numbers contained in the right-
hand column of the table are references to additional standards and
requirements (refer to Supplemental Use Standards, Chapter 5, Article 1,
Standards for Selected Uses) that may apply to the use listed. Standards
referenced in this column apply only in zoning districts where the designation
includes a “*.”
   (f)   Use also included on residential district use table (<<). The “<<“
symbol in the second column from the right indicates this use can also be found
in the Residential District Use Table in Article 6.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 3,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 4.802 UNLISTED USES.
   Additional uses have been interpreted as part of or similar to many of the
uses listed in the table. The full list of such uses is included in
Appendix C, Use Index. If a use is not listed, then the zoning administrative
official shall, upon request of any interested party, make a determination
within which district, if any, a proposed use should be allowed.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23110-02-2018, § 5,
passed 2-6-2018)
§ 4.803 NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE.
Note: To view 4.803 Uses Table in PDF, click 4.803 TABLE
4.803 Uses      4.803 Nonresidential District Use Table
Nonresidential                                             In    Supplemental
Uses            Commercial    Industrial Special Districts Res.  Standards
                                                           Table
                ER E FR F G H I J K      AG Cf O-1 O-2 PD/
                                                       CUP
4.803 Uses                        4.803 Nonresidential District Use Table
Nonresidential                                                                                          In
Uses                              Commercial                    Industrial     Special Districts        Res.  Supplemental Standards
                                                                                                        Table
                                  ER   E    FR   F    G    H    I    J    K    AG   Cf   O-1  O-2  PD/
                                                                                                   CUP
Household      One-family                                             P*                   <<    4.200 (AG) lots not >
Living         detached dwelling                                                                              10,000 sq. ft.
               One-family
              attached                               P                                    <<     
               (townhouse,
               rowhouse)
              Multifamily                            P                                    <<     
               dwelling apartment
               One dwelling unit
               when part of a
              business (also             P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               considered
               residence for
               security purposes)
               Boarding home      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                             5.153
               facility
               Community home                                             P*               <<    5.115 
               Group home I                                               P*               <<    5.115 
Group Living   Group home II                                              P*               <<    5.115 
               Halfway house                                                          CUP  <<    5.147
                                                                                                   *
               Shelter                                                                CUP  <<    5.155
                                                                                                   *
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
               College or                 P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                      
               university
               Day care center    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                <<     
              (child or adult)
Education      School, elementary
               or secondary       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                <<     
               (public or
               private)
               Animal shelter                                     P                              
               Correctional                               P    P    P                              
               facility
               Government
               maintenance                                P    P    P    P    P                      
               facility
              Government office  P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                <<     
              facility
Government     Governmental
               vehicle storage/                               P    P                              
               junkyard
               Museum, library or P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                <<     
               fine art center
               Probation or               P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.127 
               parole office
               Ambulance dispatch P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                <<     
               station
               Assisted living        P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
               facility
               Blood bank                 P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
               Care facility      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
              Health services
              facility,
              including doctor's P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
Health Care    office or medical
Facilities     clinic
               Hospice            P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                <<     
               Hospital           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
               Massage therapy        P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                <<     
               and spa
               Nursing home (with
               full medical           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                <<     
               services)
               Center, community
               recreation or      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        <<     
               welfare
               Center, community
               recreation or      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        <<     
               welfare, private
              or non-profit
              Country club       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    CUP  CUP      <<     
              (private)
Recreation     Country club       P                                        P    CUP  CUP            
               (public)
               Golf course            P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P    P    P        <<     
               Golf driving range         P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P    P    P              
               Park or playground
               (public or             P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    CUP  P    P    P*       <<    4.204(d)
               private)
Religious      Place of worship   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                <<     
               Electric power     CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  P    P    P    CUP  CUP  CUP  PD   <<     
               substation
               Gas lift                                                                                       Ch. 15, Gas city code,
               compressor         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.140 
               stations
              Gas line                                                                                       Ch. 15, Gas city code,
              compressor                                 P*   P*   P*                   PD        5.140 
Utilities      stations
              Power plant or
              central station                                P    P    P    SE                     
              light
              Stealth
               telecommunications SE*  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*      <<    5.137 
               towers
               Telecommunications
               antenna (on        P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   SE*  SE*      <<    5.136 
               structure)
               Telecommunications SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  P*       P*   P*   P*   SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*      <<    5.137 
               tower
               Utility
               transmission or    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*       <<    5.140 
               distribution line
Utilities      Wastewater
               (sewage) treatment                         P    P    P        CUP                    
               facility
               Water supply,
               treatment or       CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  P    P    P    P    P            PD   <<     
               storage facility
               Amusement, indoor      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Amusement, outdoor         P    P    P    P    P    P    P                CUP            
               Baseball/softball
               facility; other                            P    P    P                              
               ball fields
               (commercial)
               Bowling alley              P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Bar, tavern,
               cocktail lounge,               P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               club, private or
               teen, dance hall
               Circus                                         P    P                CUP            
               Club, commercial           P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               or business
               Drive-in
               restaurant or      CUP  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.112 
               business
               Event center or        P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               rental hall
              Gambling facility                                                      CUP*       
              (including bingo)
              Game rooms                                                                      5.105
              Health or          P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              recreation club
              Indoor recreation          P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              Lodge or civic         P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        CUP                    
              club
              Massage parlor                 P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              Museum/cultural    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
              facility
Entertainment  Racing, horse, dog                                                     CUP*      5.148
and Eating     or automotive
               Restaurant, café, CUP  P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                CUP           Chap 9, Rest
               cafeteria
               Sexually oriented                          P*   P*   P*                            Art. 2
               business
               Shooting or
               weapons firing                                                         CUP*       
               range
               Stable,
               commercial,                                P*   P*   P*               CUP*          5.132 
               riding, boarding
               or rodeo arena
               Swimming pool,         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*               CUP*          5.135 
               commercial
               Theater, drive-in      CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  P    P    P                SE             
               Theater, movie
               theater or             P*   P    P    P    P    P    P    P                             5.138 
               auditorium
               Vender, food,      CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP       CUP                 CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP
               mobile vendor food *    *    *    *    P*   *    P*   P*   P*   *    *    *    *             5.406
               court
               Bed and breakfast  P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                        <<     
               inn
               Hotel, motel or            P*   P*   P*   P    P*   P*   P*                            5.116 
Lodging        inn
               Recreational               P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*               CUP           5.129 
               vehicle park                                                                   *
               Short term home    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               rental
               Bank, financial    P or
Office         institution        CUP  P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                             CUP if drive-thru , 5.112
                                  *
               Offices            P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                CUP            
               Antique shop       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Appliance, sales,  P    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               supply or repair
               Bakery                 P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Barber or beauty   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               shop
               Boat rental or             P    P    P    P    P    P    P            P    P              
               sales
               Book, stationary   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               stores or newstand
               Burglar alarm      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               sales and service
               Business college
               or commercial          P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               school
               Caterer or wedding P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               service
               Clothing/wearing   P    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               apparel sales, new
               Clothing/wearing
              apparel sales,     P    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
              used
              Convenience store      P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              Copy store or
              commercial print   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              without off-set
              printing
              Dance studio           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              Dressmaking,
              custom; millinery  P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              shop
              Duplicating        P    P    P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P    P                             5.126 
              services
              Farmers’ market      P*   P    P    P    P                                         5.145
              Feed store, no         P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              processing/milling
Retail Sales   Firewood sales         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P    P                             5.113 
and Service    Furniture sales,
               new and used
               (office and            P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               residential) in a
               building
               Furniture
               upholstery,                P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               refinishing or
               resale
               General                P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               merchandise store
               Greenhouse or      CUP* P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P    CUP      P    P        <<    5.114,
               plant nursery                                                                                  5.134 
               Grocery store,         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               meat market
               Gunsmithing,               P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               repairs or sales
               Home improvement   P    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               store
               Interior           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               decorating
               Kennel                                     P*   P*   P*                            5.117 
               Large retail store     P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               Laundry or dry
               cleaning           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               collection office
               Laundry, dry
               cleaning or            P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               washeteria
               Leather goods shop P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Liquor or package      P        P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               store
               Locksmith          P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Medical supplies/
               equipment sales or P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P        P                      
               rental
               Mini-warehouses                                P    P                    PD        5.143 
               Mortuary or            P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               funeral home
              Newspaper
              distribution               P*   P*   P*   P    P    P    P                             5.124 
              center
              Optician           P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              Pawn shop                  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.125,
                                                                                                             5.134 
              Pharmacy (drug     P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              store)
              Photograph,
              portrait/camera    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
              shop or photo
Retail Sales   finishing
and Service    Recording studio       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                             5.128 
               Retail sales,          P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.134 
               general
               Retail smoke shop              P    P    P    P    P    P                             5.152
               Saddle or harness,         P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               repair or sales
               Shoe shine shop    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Small box discount                                                     P          
               store
               Studio, art or     P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               photography
               Tailor, clothing   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               or apparel shop
               Tattoo parlor              P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Taxidermist shop       P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Veterinary clinic      P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P                             5.142 
               w/indoor kennels
               Veterinary clinic                          P*   P*   P*                            5.142 
               w/outdoor kennels
               Auto parts supply,         P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               retail
               Automotive repair;
               paint and body             P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.104 
               shop
               Car wash;                                                                        
                  Self-service                         P*   P*   P*                            5.108
                  Automated-       CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* P*   P*   P*                            5.108
               service
                  Full-service     CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* P*   P*   P*                            5.108
               Gasoline sales         P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Mobile home or
              manufactured                               P    P    P                              
              housing sales
              Parking area or
              garage, storage    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*       P*       CUP*     <<    6.202 
              commercial or
              auxiliary
              Recreational
              vehicle (RV)                               P    P    P                              
Vehicle Sales  sales/service
and Service    Service station            P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P    P                              
              Towing yard with                           P    P    P                              
               office
               Truck stop w/fuel
               and accessory                              P    P    P                              
               services
               Vehicle junkyard                               CUP* CUP*                          5.141 
               Vehicle sales or
               rental; including
               automobiles,               P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               motorcycles, boats
               or trailors
               Vehicle steam                              P    P    P                              
               cleaning
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
               Assaying                                   P*   P*   P                             5.103 
               Assembly of pre-
               manufactured
               parts, except for
               vehicles,                                  P    P    P                              
               trailers,
               airplanes or
               mobile homes
               Blacksmithing or                           P    P    P                              
               wagon shop
              Bottling works,
              milk or soft                               P    P    P                              
              drinks
              Carpet and rug                             P    P    P                              
Light          cleaning
Industrial     Chicken battery or                             P    P                              
Services       brooder
               Coal, coke or wood                         P    P    P                              
               yard
               Crematorium                                P    P    P                              
               Data center                                P    P    P                              
               Electroplating                             P    P    P                              
               Fabricating or
               manufactured                               P    P    P                              
               housing, temporary
               or office building
               Food processing                            P    P    P                              
               (no slaughtering)
               Furniture or
               cabinet repair or                          P    P    P                              
               construction
               Furniture sales,
               with outside                               P    P    P                              
               storage/display
               (new/used)
               Galvanizing, small                         P    P    P                              
               utensils
               Machine shops                              P*   P    P                             5.120 
               Manufacture of
               artificial
               flowers,
               ornaments,
               awnings, tents,
               bags, cleaning/
               polishing
               preparations,
               boats under 28 ft.                         P*   P    P                             5.120 
               in length, brooms
               or brushes,
               buttons and
               novelties, canvas
               products,
               clothing, suits,
              coats or dresses
              for wholesale
              trade
              Manufacture of
              aluminum, brass or
              other metals or                            P*   P    P                             5.120 
              from bone, paper,
              rubber, leather
              and plastics
              Manufactured home/                         P    P    P                              
              RV repair
              Monument/marble
              works, finishing                           P    P    P                              
              and carving only
              Monument works,                            P    P    P                              
              stone
Light          Outdoor sales and
Industrial     storage including
Services       yards,
               contractors,                               P*   P*   P*               CUP*          5.133  CUP if no primary
               lumber or storage,                                                                             use
               automobiles,
               storage yards,
               building materials
               Paint mixing or                            P    P    P                              
               spraying
               Paper box                                  P    P    P                              
               manufacture
               Pattern shop                               P    P    P                              
               Printing,
               lithographing,
               book-binding,                          P    P    P    P                              
               newspapers or
               publishing
               Rubber stamping,                           P    P    P                              
               shearing/punching
               Rubber stamp                           P    P    P    P                              
               manufacture
               Sheet metal shop                           P*   P*   P                             5.131 
               Warehouse or bulk                          P*   P*   P*                            5.143 
               storage
               Welding shop,
               custom work (not                           P    P    P                              
               structural)
MEDIUM AND HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
               Animal by-products                             P    P                              
               processing
               Batch plant,
               concrete or                                CUP* CUP* CUP*                          5.156
               asphalt
               (permanent)
               Brewery,
               distillery or                                  P    P                              
               winery
               Brick, clay,
               glass, shale, tile
               or terra cotta                                 P    P                              
               products
               manufacture
               Cement products                                P    P                              
               plant
               Cement, lime,
               gypsum or plaster                                                                
               of Paris
               manufacture
               Cotton gin, cotton
               oil mill, bailing                                  P                              
               or compress
               Creosite,
              treatment/                                                                       
              manufacture
              Egg cracking or                                    P                              
              processing
              Furnace, blast,
              forge plant,                                       P                              
              boiler works
              manufacture
              Galvanizing, sheet
              or structural                                      P                              
              shapes
              Gas (natural or
              artificial)                                        P                              
              manufacture
              processing/storage
              Glue manufacture                                   P                              
              Grain elevator                                 P    P                              
              Magnesium casting,
Heavy          machining or                                       P                              
Industrial     fabricating
Manufacturing  Manufacture of
              acetylene or
               oxygen gas.
               alcohol, computers
               and related
               electronic
               products,
               airplanes,
               automobiles,
               trucks and
               tractors
               (including
               assembly plants),                                  P                              
               ball or roller
               bearings, steel
               tanks, candles and
               celluloid, cash
               registers,
               cutlery,
               disinfectants,
               dextrin, dyestuff,
               electrical
               machinery, farm
               tools, type
               writers and
               vinegar
               Manufacture of
               basket material,
               bicycles, boots,                               P    P                              
               boxes other than
               paper, caskets,
               shoes
               Manufacture of
               dyes, cores, die-                              P    P                              
               casting molds
               Manufacture,
               processing/
               production of                                                          CUP        
               hazardous
               chemicals
               Metal casting                                  P*   P*                            5.121 
               Metal foundry
               plant or                                           P*                            5.122 
               fabrication plant
               Metal smelting,
               reclamation or ore                                                     CUP        
               reduction
              Metal stamping,
              dying, shearing or                             P*   P                             5.123 
              punching
              Mill, feed or                                      P                              
              flour
              Mining quarry,
              dredging or
              excavation of
              rock, dirt,                                                            CUP*      5.150
              gravel, sand,
              stone including
              rock and cement
              crushers
Heavy          Packing plant                                                          CUP        
Industrial     Paper or pulp                                                          CUP        
Manufacturing  manufacture
               Petroleum,
               refining or                                                            CUP        
               wholesale storage
               Planing mill or                                P    P                              
               woodworking shop
               Poultry killing or                             P    P                              
               dressing
               Rolling mill                                                           CUP        
               Soap manufacture                                   P                              
               Soda or compound                                   P                              
               manufacture
               Stoneyard,
               building stone,                                    P                              
               cutting, sawing or
               storage
               Tar distillation/                                  P                              
               manufacturing
               Tobacco (chewing)
               manufacture or                                     P                              
               treatment
               Welding shop                                       P                              
               Airport, aviation
               field, helistop or                                                     PD         
               landing area
               Passenger station          P    P    P    P    P    P    P                              
               Railroad freight
              or classification                              P    P                              
              yard
              Railroad
              roundhouse or RR                           P    P    P                              
Transportation car repair shop
               Railroad tracks;
               team, spur,                                P    P    P                              
               loading or storage
               Terminal, truck,
               freight, rail or                           P*   P    P                             5.139 
               water
               Landfill, waste
               transfer station,
               government                                                             PD*       5.149
               recycling drop off
               center
               Pet cemetery                                                           CUP        
               Recycling
               collection             SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  P*   P*   P*                            5.130 
               facility/box
               Recycling center
               with outdoor
              processing and
Waste Related  stockpiling,                                                                    5.149
               household
               hazardous waste or
               waste tire
               facility
               Recycling center,
               indoor only with
               no outdoor sorting                         P    P    P                              
               or storage
               activity
               Salvage yard
               (other than                                                            CUP        
               automotive)
               Wholesale: bakery,
Wholesale      produce market or                          P    P    P                              
Trade          wholesale house
               Wholesale office                       P    P    P    P                              
               or sample room
OTHER USES
               Agricultural uses                                      P*       P*   P*            5.307 
               Stockyards or
              feeding pens                                       P*                            5.307 
              (commercial)
              Fresh water
              fracture ponds and                         P*   P*   P*   P*                        Ch. 15 Gas city code
              production
              Gas drilling and   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*               <<    Ch. 15, Gas city code
              production
Agriculture    Oil drilling and                                                       PD*       Ch. 15, Gas city code
               production
               Urban agriculture      P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.146
               Community garden       P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                            5.146
               Accessory use or                                       P*                        5.302 
               building
               Satellite antenna  P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P    P    P    P*           CUP* <<     
              (dish)
Accessory Uses Stable, stockyards
               or feeding pens                                        P*                        5.307 
               (noncommercial)
               Storage or display     P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P    P    P                             5.306 
               outside
               Amusement, outdoor CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* P    P    P    P    CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* <<    5.400 
               (temporary)
               Batch plant,
               concrete or        CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* P    P    P    CUP* CUP*         CUP* <<    5.401 
               asphalt
               (temporary)
               Mobile vendor,         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*            5.406
               fresh market
               Trailer, portable;
               sales,             P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P                <<     
               construction or
               storage
               Vendor, food, non-
Temporary Uses potentially        P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.406 
               hazardous food
               Vendor, food,
               potentially                P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.406 
               hazardous food
               Vendor,                                    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.406 
               merchandise
               Vendor, transient                          P*   P*   P*   P*   P*               <<    9.101 
               Vendor, transient,
               non-potentially    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.406 
               hazardous food
               Vendor, transient,
               potentially                P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                    5.406
               hazardous food
 
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20510-12-2012, § 3,
passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-11-2012; Ord. 20666-03-2013, § 1, passed 3-19-2013,
eff. 4-9-2013; Ord. 20999-10-2013, § 3, passed 10-15-2013; Ord. 21499-10-2014,
§ 3, passed 10-14-2014, eff. 10-23-2014; Ord. 21715-04-2015; § 2, passed 4-7-
2015, eff. 4-25-2015; Ord. 22154-04-2016, § 4, passed 4-5-2016, eff. 4-21-2016;
Ord. 22335-08- 2016, §§ 2 and 5, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 23110-02-2018, § 3,
passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 3, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 23971-12-2019,
§ 3, passed 12-3-2019, eff. 12-11-2019; Ord. 25514-05-2022, § 2, passed 5-10-
2022, eff. 5-18-2022; Ord. 25955-01- 2023, § 2, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 1-20-
2023; Ord. 26358-08-2023, § 3, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 26652-12-2023, § 2, passed
12-12-2023, eff. 1-9-2024; Ord. 27030-06-2024, § 1, passed 6-25-2024, eff. 7-
23-2024; Ord. 27381-12-2024, § 3, passed 12-10-2024, eff. 12-20-2024)
ARTICLE 9: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 4.900 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL RESTRICTED (“ER”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the neighborhood commercial
restricted (“ER”) district is to provide areas for neighborhood serving limited
commercial, institutional and office uses. Alcoholic beverage sales are
prohibited.
   (b)   Uses.
      (1)   Generally. In the neighborhood commercial restricted (“ER”)
district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of
occupancy be issued, except in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
      (2)   Limitations on commercial development in “ER” district.
         a.   The sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted in the
“ER” district.
         b.   All business shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building.
         c.   No drive-in or curb services shall be permitted unless approved
through special exception.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the neighborhood commercial restricted
(“ER”) district, shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
Neighborhood Commercial Restricted (“ER”) District
Neighborhood Commercial Restricted (“ER”) District
                                     5,000 square feet maximum gross floor area per tenant; exterior entrances
Business/tenant size                 are required for each tenant; special exception required for each business
                                     in excess of 5,000 square feet.
Building size                        10,000 square feet maximum gross floor area; special exception required
                                     for building in excess of 10,000 square feet.
Building lot coverage                30% maximum
Front yard*                          20 feet minimum
Rear yard*
   Adjacent to A or B residential 5 feet minimum, however where a residential supplemental setback applies
district                             and the building exceeds 20 feet in height, the building setback must
                                     equal the height of the building
   Adjacent to all other districts5 feet minimum
Side yard*                           Interior lot
                                     5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot; none otherwise; if
   Adjacent to A or B residential provided, side yard must be 3 feet minimum; however where the building
district                             exceeds 20 feet in height and a residential supplemental setback applies,
                                     the building setback must equal to the height of the building
   Adjacent to all other districts5 feet minimum
Corner lot**                         None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
                                     35 feet maximum; for any part of a building that exceeds 20 feet in height
Height                               and a residential supplemental setback applies per §
                                     6.300, the building setback must equal the height of the building; see §
                                     6.100
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required (see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.300, Bufferyard and Supplemental Building Setback).
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the neighborhood
commercial restricted (“ER”) district may be subject to a variety of general
development standards in
Chapter 6, and the following provisions.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. For further details, other uses and
loading areas see
Chapter 6 Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
         a.   Limited to passenger automobiles only.
         b.   The restrictions in §
6.202(f) shall apply to all auxiliary parking.
            1.   Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard
(setback) if the required front yard of the building faces any portion of a
required front yard of an “A” or “B” residential district or the front yard of
the building is adjacent to the front yard of an “A” or “B” residential
district. The remainder of the yard must be landscaped.
            2.   Retail buildings require one space per 250 square feet. Office
or professional buildings require one space per 400 square feet. A curb or
bumper shall be placed along the perimeter of the parking area to prevent
vehicles from extending into the required front yard, into an abutting alley,
beyond the property line or from damaging the walls or shrubs screening it from
residential property. The required front yard shall not be graveled or hard-
surfaced, but shall be maintained as open or landscaped green space. A sidewalk
shall be constructed to City specifications abutting the front line of the
parking lot and between the lot and the property line of the nearest
intersecting commercial street.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers adjacent to “A” or “B” residential zoning
district.
         a.   Screening trees must be provided within the buffer area along the
property line adjacent to an “A” or “B” district. Trees must be spaced no more
than 25 feet apart. Fifty percent of these trees must be evergreen.
         b.   A minimum six-foot screening fence is required along the property
line adjacent to an “A” or “B” district. Allowed screening fence materials are
limited to masonry or wrought iron fence with landscape screening; smooth
concrete, wood, vinyl or metal fences are not permissible types. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400 Signs.
         a.   No freestanding or roof signs are permitted.
         b.   Signs shall be fastened flat against the wall.
         c.   No sign shall be illuminated.
         d.   The sign shall cover no more than 15% of the area of the wall or
facade, including doors and windows, on which the sign is placed, and shall not
extend above the roof line or parapet wall of the building.
      (4)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal walls of the front and any
sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with metal
cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with exposed
fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal siding
shall have at least two exterior architectural features for articulation, such
as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding materials. Each
metal siding shall not be considered an architectural feature. These features
shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.901 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (“E”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the neighborhood commercial (“E”)
district is to provide areas for neighborhood-serving commercial, institutional
and office uses.
   (b)   Uses.
      (1)   Generally. In the neighborhood commercial (“E”) district, no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be
issued, except in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
      (2)   Limitations on commercial development in “E” district. Retail
stores with a footprint exceeding 60,000 square feet are prohibited.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the neighborhood commercial (“E”) district
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
Neighborhood Commercial, “E” District
Neighborhood Commercial, “E” District
Front yard*     20 feet minimum; 0 feet minimum when fronting an arterial
                street**
Rear yard*      10 feet minimum unless adjacent to residential district, where
                15 feet minimum required
Side yard*
   Interior l5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none
                otherwise. If provided, side yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner lotNone required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
                3 stories or 45 feet maximum provided, however, stealth
Height          telecommunication towers are permitted to a height of 60 feet;
                telecommunication towers are permitted to a height of 45 feet
                as a special exception approved by the board of adjustment
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required see
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.300, Bufferyard and Supplemental Building Setback.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the neighborhood
commercial (“E”) district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards, including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Commercial buildings require one
space per 250 square feet. Office or professional buildings require one space
per 400 square feet. Restaurants require one space per 100 square feet of gross
floor area. For further details, other uses and loading areas see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. Generally, 10% of net site area. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400 Signs.
      (4)   Outdoor storage or display. Limited outdoor storage or display may
be permitted. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.306, Storage or Display in Commercial Districts, Outdoor.
      (5)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal walls of the front and any
sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with metal
cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with exposed
fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal siding
shall have at least two exterior architectural features for articulation, such
as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding materials. Exterior
metal siding shall not be considered an architectural feature. These provisions
shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20983-10-2013, § 1,
passed 9-17-2013; eff. 10-4-2013)
§ 4.902 GENERAL COMMERCIAL RESTRICTED (“FR”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the general commercial restricted
(“FR”) district is to provide for commercial uses intended to serve the entire
community. Alcoholic beverage sales are prohibited.
   (b)   Uses. In the general commercial restricted (“FR”) district, no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be
issued, except in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted in the “FR”
district.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the general commercial restricted (“FR”)
district, shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
General Commercial Restricted (“FR”) District
General Commercial Restricted (“FR”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum unless adjacent to residential district, where 15 feet minimum
               required
Side yard*
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise; if provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner loNone required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
               3 stories or 45 feet maximum provided, however, stealth telecommunication towers are
Height         permitted to a height of 60 feet; the urban design commission must approve the design
               of all stealth telecommunication towers; telecommunication towers are permitted to a
               height of 45 feet as a special exception approved by the board of adjustment
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the general commercial
restricted (“FR”) district may be subject to a variety of general development
standards, including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Commercial buildings require one
space per 250 square feet. Office or professional buildings require one space
per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Restaurants require one space per 100
square feet of gross floor area. For further details, other uses and loading
areas see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. Generally, 10% of net site area. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400 Signs.
      (4)   Outdoor storage or display. Limited outdoor storage or display may
be permitted. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.306, Storage or Display in Commercial Districts, Outdoor.
      (5)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal walls of the front and any
sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with metal
cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with exposed
fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal siding
shall have at least two exterior architectural features for articulation, such
as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding materials. Exterior
metal siding shall not be considered an architectural feature. These provisions
shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.903 GENERAL COMMERCIAL (“F”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the general commercial (“F”)
district is to provide for commercial uses intended to serve the entire
community.
   (b)   Uses. In the general commercial (“F”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the general commercial (“F”) district,
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
General Commercial (“F”) District
General Commercial (“F”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum unless adjacent to residential district, where 15 feet minimum
               required
Side yard*
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise; if provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner   None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
lot**
               3 stories or 45 feet maximum provided, however, stealth telecommunication towers are
Height         permitted to a height of 60 feet; the urban design commission must approve the design
               of all stealth telecommunication towers; telecommunication towers are permitted to a
               height of 45 feet as a special exception approved by the board of adjustment
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the general commercial
(“F”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to, the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Commercial buildings require one
space per 250 square feet office or professional buildings require one space
per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Restaurants require one space per 100
square feet of gross floor area. For further details, other uses and loading
areas see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. Generally, 10% of net site area. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400 Signs.
      (4)   Outdoor storage or display. Limited outdoor storage or display may
be permitted. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.306, Storage or Display in Commercial Districts, Outdoor.
      (5)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal building walls of the front and
any sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with
metal cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with
exposed fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal
siding shall have at least two exterior architectural features for
articulation, such as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding
materials. Exterior metal siding shall not be considered an architectural
feature. These provisions shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.904 INTENSIVE COMMERCIAL (“G”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the intensive commercial (“G”)
district is to provide for a wide range of intensive commercial, institutional
and office uses intended to serve the entire community.
   (b)   Uses. In the intensive commercial (“G”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the intensive commercial (“G”) district,
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
Intensive Commercial (“G”) District
Intensive Commercial (“G”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum
Side yard*
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residential district, none otherwise; if provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner   None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
lot**
               12 stories or 120 feet maximum provided, however, stealth telecommunication towers are
Height         restricted to a height of 75 feet; the urban design commission must approve the design
               of all stealth telecommunication towers; telecommunication towers are restricted to a
               height of 60 feet
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the intensive commercial
(“G”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Commercial buildings require one
space per 250 square feet. Office or professional buildings require one space
per 400 square feet. Restaurants require one space per 100 square feet of gross
floor area. For further details, other uses and loading areas see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. Generally, 10% of net site area. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400, Signs.
      (4)   Outdoor storage or display. Limited outdoor storage or display may
be permitted. Refer to
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.306, Storage or Display in Commercial Districts, Outdoor.
      (5)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal building walls of the front and
any sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with
metal cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with
exposed fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal
siding shall have at least two exterior architectural features for
articulation, such as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding
materials. Exterior metal siding shall not be considered an architectural
feature. These provisions shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.905 CENTRAL BUSINESS (“H”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the central business (“H”)
district to provide a specific central business district zone for the more
intense use of all commercial uses permitted in previous commercial districts;
providing less restrictive height and area regulations; and such uses accessory
thereto.
   (b)   Uses. In the central business (“H”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the central business (“H”) district, shall be as shown in the accompanying
table. Development in this district shall be exempt from all subsections,
except for §
6.101(a), Yards of
Chapter 6, Development Standards. Access for one-family attached (townhouse,
rowhouse) units shall be provided to each principal building by:
         a.   A public street or alley; or
         b.   A private common access easement that is not less than 20 feet in
width.
      (2)   This district may only be applied to that area known as the central
business district of Fort Worth bounded on the east by I-35W; on the south by a
line one-half block south of Vickery Boulevard and extending west to the
centerline of I-30; on the west by a line extending north and south with the
east property line of the City of Fort Worth water treatment plant to West 10th
Street and along West 10th Street to Clear Fork of the Trinity River and along
the Clear Fork to the Trinity River; on the north by the center of the Trinity
River to the extension of Jones Street and thereafter by Bluff Street, as shown
in Exhibit B.15.
 
Central Business (“H”) District
Front yard         None required
Rear yard          None required
Units per acre     No restriction
Units per building No restriction
Side yard          5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none
                   otherwise; if provided, side yard must be 3 feet minimum
Height             No restriction
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the central business (“H”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. None required.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400, Signs.
      (4)   Outdoor storage or display. Limited outdoor storage or display may
be permitted. See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, §
5.306, Storage or Display in Commercial Districts, Outdoor.
      (5)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal building walls of the front and
any sides of a building facing a public street that will be constructed with
metal cladding as the primary siding material shall not be constructed with
exposed fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal
siding shall have at least two exterior architectural features for
articulation, such as front porches, gables, awnings or other exterior siding
materials. Exterior metal siding shall not be considered an architectural
feature. These provisions shall not apply to large retail stores.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE 10: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 4.1000 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (“I”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the light industrial (“I”) district
is to provide for a limited range of low-intensity industrial uses, provided
the uses are not noxious or offensive due to odors, smoke, dust, noise, fumes
or vibrations. This district is intended to serve the entire community.
   (b)   Uses. In the light industrial (“I”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the light industrial (“I”) district, shall
be as shown in the accompanying table.
Light Industrial (“I”) District
Light Industrial (“I”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise
Side yard*      
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise. If provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner   None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
lot**
               3 stories or 55 feet maximum provided, however, stealth telecommunication towers are
Height         permitted to a height of 75 feet. The urban design commission must approve the design
               of all stealth telecommunication towers. Telecommunication towers are permitted to a
               height of 75 feet
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f)).
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the light industrial (“I”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Industrial buildings require one
space per 500 square feet of gross floor area or one space per three employees,
whichever is greater. Warehouse buildings require one space per four employees,
with a four-space minimum. For further details, other uses and loading areas
see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. For industrial uses, generally, 4% of net
site area or a landscape area of 30-foot depth along all public rights-of-way.
See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400, Signs.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23587-03-2019, § 1,
passed 3-5-2019)
§§ 4.1001, 4.1002 RESERVED.
§ 4.1003 MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL (“J”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the medium industrial (“J”)
district is to provide for a range of moderate-intensity industrial uses
provided they are not noxious or offensive due to odors, smoke, dust, noise,
fumes or vibrations. This district is intended to serve the entire community.
   (b)   Uses. In the medium industrial (“J”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the medium industrial (“J”) district,
shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
Medium Industrial (“J”) District
Medium Industrial (“J”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise
Side yard*
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise; if provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum.
   Corner   None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
lot**
Height         12 stories or 120 feet maximum
Notes:
*   Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300.
**   May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the medium industrial
(“J”) district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Industrial buildings require one
space per 500 square feet of gross floor area or one space per three employees,
whichever is greater. Warehouse buildings require one space per four employees,
with a four-space minimum. For further details, other uses and loading areas
see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. For industrial uses, generally, 4% of net
site area or a landscape area of 30-foot depth along all public rights-of-way.
See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400, Signs for the requirements.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.1004 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (“K”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the heavy industrial (“K”) district
is to provide for heavy industrial uses that may be noxious or offensive due to
odors, smoke, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations. This district is intended to
serve the entire community.
   (b)   Uses. In the heavy industrial (“K”) district, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8 and the supplemental use standards of
Chapter 5.
   (c)   Property development standards. The minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings in the heavy industrial (“K”) district, shall
be as shown in the accompanying table.
Heavy Industrial (“K”) District
Heavy Industrial (“K”) District
               None required if entire block frontage is zoned “FR” through “K;” if the block
Front yard*    frontage contains a residential district or the “ER” or “E” district, the most
               restrictive district standards apply
Rear yard*     10 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise
Side yard*
   Interior 5 feet minimum adjacent to residentially zoned lot, none otherwise; if provided, side
lot            yard must be 3 feet minimum
   Corner   None required unless through lot, then 10 feet minimum required
lot**
Height         12 stories or 120 feet maximum
Notes:
* Additional setback may be required by §§
6.101(c) or 6.300.
**May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the heavy industrial (“K”)
district may be subject to a variety of general development standards,
including, but not limited to the following.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading. Industrial buildings require one
space per 500 square feet of gross floor area or one space per three employees,
whichever is greater. Warehouse buildings require one space per four employees,
with a four-space minimum. For further details, other uses and loading areas
see
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, §
6.200.
      (2)   Landscaping and buffers. For industrial uses, generally 4% of net
site area or a landscape area of 30-foot depth along all public rights-of-way.
See
Chapter 6, Development Standards,
Article 3, Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry, §
6.300.
      (3)   Signs. See
Chapter 6, Development Standards, §
6.400, Signs for the requirements.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE 11: INACTIVE DISTRICTS
§ 4.1100 MULTIFAMILY HIGHRISE (“D-HR1”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the “D-HR1” multifamily high-rise
district to provide a specific zone for high density high-rise multifamily
development, the construction and maintenance thereof as required by this
ordinance, approved under given guidelines to assure compatibility with
surrounding properties, and those uses accessory thereto, but excluding home
occupations and individual tenant accessory buildings unless clustered as a
group and approved under the given guidelines of this ordinance.
   (b)   Use regulation. In the “D-HR1” multifamily high-rise district no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged except for the following uses:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “D” multifamily district; and
      (2)   Special exception uses which may be authorized by the board of
adjustment under the provisions of
Chapter 3, Article 3, Accessory Uses and Buildings.
   (c)   Special exception uses.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast home; and
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn.
   (d)   Height and area regulations.
      (1)   Except for residential uses, all construction of buildings or
structures for those uses specified in subsection (a) above shall conform to
the following regulations:
         a.   Height. Maximum of 144 feet, except in accordance with the
provisions of §
6.100;
         b.   Front yard. A minimum of 20 feet;
         c.   Rear yard. A minimum of five feet;
         d.   Side yard.
            1.   Interior lot. Minimum of five feet; and
            2.   Corner lot. A minimum of ten feet adjacent to side street
unless front yard setback is required.
         e.   Setbacks. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, no portion of a building over 35 feet in height shall be located
closer than one-half of its height from the nearest property line of any
property zoned “A” one-family, “AR” residential, “B” two-family or “R1”
residential; further, all buildings over 35 feet in height shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from all property lines;
         f.   Width of lot. A minimum of 50 feet;
         g.   Lot area. Minimum of 5,000 square feet; and
         h.   Lot coverage. Maximum of 0.50 or 50%.
      (2)   Multifamily residential development shall conform to the provisions
outlined in §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712 and those for the “D” district.
      (3)   One- and two-family dwelling units must meet the regulations of the
“A,” “AR,” “B,” “R1" or “R2" districts.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 12,
passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 4.1101 MULTIFAMILY HIGHRISE (“D-HR2”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the “D-HR2” multifamily high-rise
district to provide a specific zone for high density high-rise multifamily
development, the construction and maintenance thereof as required by this
ordinance, approved under given guidelines to assure compatibility with
surrounding properties, and those uses accessory thereto, but excluding home
occupations and individual tenant accessory buildings unless clustered as a
group and approved under the given guidelines of this ordinance.
   (b)   Use regulations. In the “D-HR2” multifamily high-rise district no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged except for one or more of the following
uses:
      (1)   Any uses permitted in the “D-HR1” multifamily high-rise district;
      (2)   Special exception uses when authorized by the board of adjustment
under the provisions of
Chapter 3, Article 3; and
      (3)   Accessory uses and buildings.
   (c)   Special exception uses.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast home; and
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn.
   (d)   Height and area regulations.
      (1)   Except for residential uses, all construction of buildings or
structures for those uses specified in subsection (a) above shall conform to
the following regulations:
         a.   Height. Maximum of 240 feet, except in accordance with the
provisions of §
6.100;
         b.   Front yard. A minimum of 20 feet;
         c.   Rear yard. A minimum of five feet;
         d.   Side yard.
            1.   Interior lot. Minimum of five feet; and
            2.   Corner lot. Minimum of ten feet adjacent to side street unless
front yard setback is required.
         e.   Setbacks. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, no portion of a building over 35 feet in height shall be located
closer than one-half of its height from the nearest property line of any
property zoned “A” one-family, “AR” residential, “B” two-family or “R1”
residential; further, all buildings over 35 feet in height shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from all property lines;
         f.   Width of lot. Minimum of 50 feet;
         g.   Lot area. Minimum of 5,000 square feet; and
         h.   Lot coverage. Maximum of 0.50 or 50%.
      (2)   Multifamily residential development shall conform to the provisions
outlined in §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712 and those for the “D” district.
      (3)   One- and two-family dwelling units must meet the regulations of the
“A,” “AR,” “B,” “R1" or “R2" districts.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 13,
passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 4.1102 OFFICE MIDRISE (“O-M”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the “O-M” office-midrise district to
provide a specific zone for the development of offices as the primary use and
other limited commercial uses as ancillary uses, allowing for greater height of
such structures, subject to specific development controls.
   (b)   Use regulations. In the “O-M” office- midrise district, the primary
use of any building or land shall be for office purposes, provided that any of
the following may be located in the “O-M” district as accessory uses to an
office building:
      (1)   Any uses permitted in the “ER” restricted commercial district;
      (2)   Bakeries, provided that the floor area does not exceed 3,000 square
feet;
      (3)   Banks;
      (4)   Blueprinting or photostatting;
      (5)   Business colleges, or private schools operated as a commercial
enterprise;
      (6)   Caterer or wedding service;
      (7)   Cigar or tobacco stores;
      (8)   Confectionery stores;
      (9)   Delicatessen shops;
      (10)   Department stores;
      (11)   Drug stores;
      (12)   Dry goods and notions stores;
      (13)   Duplicating service, by mimeographing, multigraphing and offset
printing, provided that the floor area does not exceed 2,000 square feet;
      (14)   Florist or gift shops;
      (15)   Jewelry stores, optical goods;
      (16)   Liquor or package stores;
      (17)   Offices;
      (18)   Restaurants, cafés, cafeterias: including restaurants and cafés
legally authorized (by duly issued permits from the city and state) to sell
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The terms restaurants,
cafés, used herein, refers to places which are regularly open in a bona fide
manner; which are used and kept open for the service of food to customers for
compensation; which have suitable seating for guests; which have suitable
facilities for preparation and service of an assortment of foods commonly
ordered at various hours of the day or night and the serving of food is the
primary business of such places, and which may, as an ancillary use, provide
patrons with space for dancing or permit patrons to dance;
      (19)   Shoeshine parlors;
      (20)   Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shops;
      (21)   Variety stores; and
      (22)   Special exception uses when authorized by the board of adjustment
under the provisions of
Chapter 3, Article 3.
   (c)   Height and area regulations. In the “O-M” office-midrise district the
height of buildings and structures and the minimum dimensions of yards shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Height. Maximum of six stories, not to exceed 80 feet;
      (2)   Front yard. Minimum of 20 feet;
      (3)   Rear yard. Minimum of five feet;
      (4)   Side yard.
         a.   Interior lot, minimum of five feet; and
         b.   Corner lot, minimum of ten feet adjacent to the side street
unless front yard setback is required.
      (5)   Setbacks. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, all buildings shall be set back from the nearest property line of any
property zoned “A” one-family, “AR” residential, “B” two-family, “R1”
residential or “R2” residential, a distance of one foot for each foot in height
of the building.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.1103 PLANNED COMMERCIAL (“E-P”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Use regulations. In the “E-P” planned commercial district, no building
or land shall be used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected,
reconstructed, altered or enlarged unless otherwise provided in this ordinance
except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Any uses permitted in the “ER” restricted commercial district;
      (2)   Banks;
      (3)   Bird stores and pet shops;
      (4)   Cigar or tobacco stores;
      (5)   Confectionery stores;
      (6)   Delicatessen shops;
      (7)   Department stores;
      (8)   Drug stores;
      (9)   Dry goods and notions stores;
      (10)   Filling stations;
      (11)   Florist or gift shops;
      (12)   Hardware, paint and wallpaper stores;
      (13)   Household furniture stores limited to the sale of new merchandise;
      (14)   Jewelry stores;
      (15)   Liquor or package stores;
      (16)   Offices;
      (17)   Piano stores, musical instruments and supplies;
      (18)   Radio and television sales and servicing;
      (19)   Restaurants, tearooms, cafeterias or cafés;
      (20)   Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shops; and
      (21)   Variety stores.
   (b)   Height and area regulations.
      (1)   In “E-P” planned commercial district, the height of buildings and
structures, the minimum dimensions of yards, the lot area, off-street parking
and plan approvals shall be as follows:
         a.   Height. The maximum permitted height in the “E-P” planned
commercial district shall be four stories but not to exceed 45 feet;
         b.   Yards. There shall be a yard of not less than 25 feet between any
street or alley or property line of adjacent property in separate ownership,
and the main wall of the building;
         c.   Lot area. An “E-P” planned commercial district shall have a
minimum land area of not less than 120,000 square feet, which shall be under
unified control;
         d.   Off-street parking. Paved parking and maneuvering areas for motor
passenger vehicles shall be furnished on the site in a ratio of not less than
four square feet of parking and maneuvering area for each one square foot of
gross floor area; and
         e.   Approval of plans. A permit for construction, reconstruction,
additions to, change of size or layout, or change of height of buildings on an
“E-P” district, under unified control, shall not be issued unless and until a
complete site plan, showing that the layout shall conform to the above
requirements, has been submitted to the city traffic engineer, the plan
commission, recommended to the zoning commission, and further recommended by
the zoning commission to the city council.
      (2)   In the event of failure to construct the installation in accordance
with plans submitted, within a period not to exceed three years from the date
of final approval by the city council, the zoning commission shall set a public
hearing and after such public hearing may recommend to the city council that
the said district “E-P” be reclassified to a more restricted district to be
specified by the zoning commission.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.1104 INDUSTRIAL PARK (“IP”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is declared that the public policy of the City of Fort Worth and
the regulations set forth in the “IP” district are intended to encourage
orderly development of a high character in attractive landscaped surroundings
by the use of development standards so controlled as to make the permitted uses
more compatible with other uses in the vicinity or within the district and to
preserve property values and protect the health and welfare of the inhabitants
of the City of Fort Worth.
      (2)   It is the intent of the city council in adopting these regulations
to: promote well planned industrial development which is more nearly compatible
with non-industrial uses; establish high standards of development; encourage a
better environment for the population working in industry; encourage high
quality development of property which has limited value for residential or
commercial use; establish a buffer district to separate non-compatible
industrial uses from commercial and residential uses.
   (b)   Use regulations. All uses permitted in this district shall be carried
on entirely within the building (except outside storage lot). No use shall be
permitted which will be injurious or offensive to the occupants of the adjacent
premises or area by reason of fire; radioactivity or electrical disturbance;
noise; vibration; smoke; odor; fly ash; dust; fumes; vapors; gases; and other
forms of air pollution; glare; liquid or solid waste; standards or limitations
on such nuisances are as provided in the performance standards section of this
ordinance. In the “IP” industrial park district, no building or land shall be
used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, constructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except for one or
more of the following uses:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “H” business district, provided however
that residential structures shall not be permitted in the “IP” district and
further provided that no special exception use shall be permitted except for
those uses listed in subsection (b)(20) below;
      (2)   Assaying (other than gold and silver);
      (3)   Carpet and rug cleaning;
      (4)   Cleaning, dyeing, pressing works, laundry and washeteria;
      (5)   Dog and cat hospitals and kennels, provided that no outside pens or
stables are constructed or animals are otherwise detained outside an enclosed
building;
      (6)   Electroplating;
      (7)   Enterprise dealing with the assembly or fabrication of pre-
manufactured parts or materials into a finished or semi-finished product for
resale or distribution, provided that the assembly of vehicles, trailers,
airplanes, manufactured homes and similar items are prohibited;
      (8)   Furniture and cabinet repair and construction;
      (9)   Galvanizing small utensils;
      (10)   Ice plants and storage houses;
      (11)   Lumber yards (retail only);
      (12)   Manufacture of products from aluminum, brass, bronze, copper,
steel, bone, leather, paper, shell, wire or wood, of any kind other than those
permitted in districts “J” or “K;”
      (13)   Manufacture of artificial flowers; ornaments; awnings; tents;
bags; blacking, cleaning or polishing preparations; brooms or brushes; buttons
and novelties; canvas products; clothing; suits, coats or dresses for wholesale
trade; food products, syrups, fruit juices, extracts, drugs or medicine, except
products permitted in districts “J” or “K;” furniture, gas or electric
fixtures; ice cream; mattresses; peanut and pecan products; potato chips; radio
and television sets; and signs not exceeding four feet by eight feet;
      (14)   Outside storage yard: Outside storage of any new product,
merchandise, machinery or objects provided that junk or used products,
merchandise, machinery or objects shall be prohibited; provided further that a
solid fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained permanently around such
storage, and shall comply with the following:
         a.   Every portion of such fence or wall shall have a height of one
foot above the height of those items stored, provided however, a minimum height
of six feet shall be required in all instances;
         b.   A fence or wall shall not be permitted in any portion of the
front, rear and side yards; and
         c.   Openings in the fence shall be provided with a gate which will
block the view of those items stored in the area contained within the fence or
wall, provided that such openings shall not be located so as to be viewed from
any residential land use or residential district.
      (15)   Paper box manufacture;
      (16)   Pattern shop;
      (17)   Warehouse;
      (18)   Wholesale establishment;
      (19)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above;
and
      (20)   The following special exception uses may be established only when
authorized by the:
         a.   Board of adjustment under the provision of
Chapter 3, Article 3;
         b.   Temporary construction, sales, storage, fabrication and office
buildings;
         c.   Water supply, treatment and storage facilities;
         d.   Towers, as defined in §
5.136;
         e.   Riding stable, riding hall, horse track; and
         f.   Electric power substation.
   (c)   Height and area regulations. In the “IP” district the height of
buildings and structures and minimum dimension of yards shall be as follows,
provided that the yard areas shall be used only for landscaping, except that
driveways permitting access to parking and loading facilities, and sidewalks
leading to the buildings are permitted in yard areas:
      (1)   Height. No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height;
      (2)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 15 feet;
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be determined as
follows:
         a.   When adjacent to the “I,” “J” or “K” district, no rear yard shall
be required;
         b.   When adjacent to the “ER,” “E-P,” “E,” “FR” or “F,” “G” or “H”
district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet;
         c.   When adjacent to the “AG,” “CF,” “MH,” “A,” “AR,” “B,” “CR,” “C,”
“D,” “D-HR1” or “D-HR2” district, there shall be a rear yard of 20 feet; and
         d.   When adjacent to more than one district the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
      (4)   Side yard. There shall be a side yard which shall be determined as
follows:
         a.   When adjacent to the “I,” “J” or “K” district, no side yard shall
be required;
         b.   When adjacent to the “ER,” “E-P,” “E,” “FR,” “F,” “G” or “H”
district, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet;
         c.   When adjacent to the “AG,” “CF,” “MH,” “A,” “AR,” “B,” “CR,” “C,”
“D,” “D-HR1” or “D-HR2” district, there shall be a side yard of not less than
20 feet; and
         d.   When adjacent to more than one district the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
   (d)   Landscaping. Landscaping is required in the front, side and rear yards
and shall conform to the following:
      (1)   The physical elements composing the landscape shall be permanent in
form and nature, and perpetually maintained;
      (2)   The form and nature of the physical elements shall consist
primarily of trees, shrubs, ground covers and ornamental annuals, biennials and
perennials; (rocks, gravel and similar elements shall be secondary); and
      (3)   The physical elements composing the landscape shall be located and
maintained so as not to obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians at
alley, street or drive intersections.
   (e)   Screening fence.
      (1)   Screening fences shall be provided, adjacent and parallel to the
interior rear and side yard lines except as provided in subsection (e)(2)c.
below, and when adjacent to any zoning district except “I,” or “J” or “K.”
      (2)   When a solid fence or wall is required it shall be constructed and
maintained permanently, and shall comply with the following:
         a.   Every portion of such fence or wall shall have a minimum height
of six feet;
         b.   A fence or wall shall not be permitted in any portion of the
front, rear or side yard;
         c.   A building wall may take the place of a screening fence, provided
however that no openings shall be permitted in said building wall; and
         d.   No such screening fence shall be erected so as to obstruct the
vision of motorists or pedestrians at alley, street or drive intersections.
   (f)   Signs. Advertising signs or symbols may be constructed or placed in
this district, provided however that every sign or signs shall pertain only to
the use of the property on which located, shall face the principal or fronting
street, shall be attached flat against the wall of the building and shall not
project above the roof line; where lighted, signs shall not be flashing or
animated, nor have any exposed neon.
   (g)   Parking and loading space. The off-street parking and loading
regulations of
Chapter 6, Article 2 shall apply to all uses established in the “IP” district
except as follows:
      (1)   Parking and loading areas are not permitted in the front, side and
rear yards;
      (2)   All loading spaces and associated loading docks shall be screened
from the public right-of-way provided further that driveways providing access
to loading spaces shall not be parallel and in the same plane to any loading
space or spaces; no loading dock shall take direct access to a public street;
and
      (3)   Permanent off-street parking of motor passenger vehicles shall be
provided for all uses permitted in this district. The number of spaces shall be
determined by the requirements contained in
Chapter 6, Article 2 except as follows:
         a.   For outside storage yards: one space for each 2,000 square feet
contained in the storage yard shall be provided;
         b.   For warehousing uses, one space for each 1,000 square feet of
floor area contained in the warehousing area of the building; additionally, one
space for each 200 square feet of office, sales and/or display space contained
in the warehouse building or on the site shall be provided; and
         c.   Industrial uses shall provide one space for each 500 square feet
of floor area contained in the industrial operating area of the building;
additionally, one space for each 200 square feet of office, sales and/or
display space contained in the industrial building or on the site shall be
provided.
   (h)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Compliance required. No land or building in the “IP” district shall
be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard, noise or
vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold,
dampness, electrical or other substance, condition or element (referred to
herein as “dangerous or objectionable elements”) in such a manner or in such
amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjacent premises;
provided that any use permitted by this section may be undertaken and
maintained if it conforms to the regulations of this section limiting dangerous
and objectionable elements at the point of determination of their existence.
      (2)   Enforcement provisions. Even though compliance with performance
standards procedure in obtaining a certificate of occupancy is not required for
a particular use, initial and continued compliance with performance standards
shall be enforced by the building inspector against any use if there are
reasonable grounds to believe that performance standards are being violated by
such use.
      (3)   Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of
performance standards. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and
objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the
same and at any point or points where the existence of such elements may be
more apparent (herein referred to as “at any point”).
   (i)   Performance standard regulations. The following provisions, standards
and specifications shall apply.
      (1)   Fire and explosion hazards All activities involving and all storage
of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided at any point with
adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the
industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires shall be prohibited at any
point. The relevant provisions of state and local laws and regulations shall
also apply.
      (2)   Radioactivity or electric disturbance. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or electrical
disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment
other than that of the creator of such a disturbance.
      (3)   Noise. At the points of measurement which shall be at the property
line, the sound pressure level of noise radiated from a facility at nighttime
shall not exceed 40 decibels or the average sound level of the street traffic
noise nearest the noise generator, whichever is the higher, in any octave band
of frequency above 300 cycles per second. The sound pressure level shall be
measured with a sound level meter, and an octave band analyzer that conforms to
the specifications published by the American Standards Association. Noise shall
be so muffled or otherwise controlled, as not to become objectionable, due to
intermittence, beat frequency, impulsive character (hammering, etc.), periodic
character (humming, screeching, etc.) or shrillness. For facilities which
radiate noise only during a normal daytime working shift, the allowable decibel
sound pressure level maximum given above may be increased 25 decibels, or ten
decibels above the average sound level of the street traffic noise nearest the
noise generator, whichever is the higher. Sirens, whistles, bells, etc., which
are maintained and utilized solely to serve a public purpose (such as fire and
air raid warning sirens) are excluded from the above regulations.
      (4)   Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible
without instruments at the property line.
      (5)   Smoke. No emissions shall be permitted, at the point of discharge
from any chimney or otherwise, of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or
darker than No. 2 on the Power’s Micro-Ringlemann Chart, published by McGraw-
Hill Publishing Company, Inc. and copyrighted 1954 (being a direct facsimile
reduction of the standard Ringlemann Chart as issued by the United States
Bureau of Mines), except that visible gray smoke of a shade equal to No. 2 on
said chart may be emitted for four minutes in any 30 minutes. These provisions
applicable to visible gray smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a
different color but with an apparently equivalent capacity.
      (6)   Odor. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the property line. Any
process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be
provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained
should the primary safeguard system fail. There is hereby established as a
guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors, Table III, “Odor
Thresholds,” in Chapter 5, “Air Pollution Abatement Manual,” copyright 1951 by
Manufacturing Chemists’ Assn., Inc., Washington, D.C.
      (7)   Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air
pollution. No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health,
to animals, vegetation, other forms of property, or which can cause any
excessive soiling, at any point; and in no event shall any emission, from any
chimney or otherwise, of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations
exceeding 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas at any point, be
permitted. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of
500°F and 50% excess air.
      (8)   Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare from high-temperature
processes, such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at
the property line, shall be permitted. This restriction shall not apply to
signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this section.
      (9)   Liquid or solid waste. No discharge shall be permitted at any point
into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the
ground, except in accordance with standards approved by the department of
health of the State of Texas or standards equivalent to those approved by such
department for similar uses; nor shall the discharge of any materials of such
nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause
the emission of dangerous or offensive elements be permitted.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
ARTICLE 12: FORM-BASED CODE DISTRICT USE TABLE
§ 4.1200 ALLOWED USES.
   The table on the following pages sets forth the uses permitted within the
form based/mixed use districts.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012)
§ 4.1201 KEY TO TABLE DESIGNATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” in a cell indicates that a use is allowed by
right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all
other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. A “P*” in any cell means
that supplemental use standards apply. (See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards,
Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses.) The specific section number of the
standard is noted in the right-hand column, titled “Supplemental Standards.”
   (b)   Special exception uses (SE). An “SE” in a cell indicates that a use is
allowed only if reviewed and approved as a special exception use, in accordance
with the review procedures of
Chapter 3, Article 3. An “SE*” in any cell means that supplemental use
standards apply. (See
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards,
Article 1, Standards for Selected Uses.) The specific section number of the
standard is noted in the right-hand column, titled “Supplemental Standards.”
   (c)   Conditional use permit (CUP). A "CUP" in a cell indicates that the use
is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a conditional use permit, in
accordance with the review procedures in Chapter 4, Article 4. A CUP* in any
cell means that supplemental use standards apply.
   (d)   Uses not allowed. An empty cell indicates that a use is not allowed in
the respective zoning district. Provided however, an application for a
conditional use permit may be made for any land use not permitted in any
district in accordance with the review procedures in Chapter 4, Article 4.
   (e)   Supplemental use standards (*). The numbers contained in the right-
hand column of the table are references to additional standards and
requirements (refer to Supplemental Use Standards, Chapter 5, Article 1,
Standards for Selected Uses) that may apply to the use listed. Standards
referenced in this column apply only in zoning districts where the designation
includes a “*.”
   (f)   Use also included on residential district use table (<<). The “<<“
symbol in the second column from the right indicates this use can also be found
in the Residential District Use Table in Article 6.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 4,
passed 3-19-2019)
§ 4.1202 UNLISTED USES.
   Additional uses have been interpreted as part of or similar to many of the
uses listed in the table. The full list of such uses is included in
Appendix C, Use Index. If a use is not listed, then the zoning administrative
official shall, upon the request of any interested party, make a determination
within which district, if any, a proposed use should be allowed.
(Ord. 23110-02-2018, §§ 4, 5, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 4.1203 DISTRICT USE TABLE.
Note: To view 4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE Table in PDF, click
4.1203 TABLE
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES             4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                           CB/   CB/   CB/                                                               PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES     MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU-  BU-  BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                        1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA   RX   CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                           North South
           One-family                                                                                                                              4.200 lots
           detached                 P   P   P   P*                                                     P   P   P                                   not > 10,000
           dwelling                                                                                                                                sq. ft.
           One-family
           detached
           dwelling
           with                                                                                                P*
           secondary
           dwelling
           unit
           Two-family                                                                                          P
           detached
           Duplex/two-
           family                                                                                              P
           attached
           dwelling
                                                                                                                                                   CBRC
                                                                                                                                                   guidelines-
           One-family                                                                                                                              Res. not
Household  attached     P   P   P   P   P   P   P                          P*              P           P   P*  P    P    P       P                 permitted in
Living     (townhouse,                                                                                                                             60+ dnl
           rowhouse)                                                                                                                               Max. of 4
                                                                                                                                                   units in a
                                                                                                                                                   lot
           Multifamily
           dwelling     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
           apartment
           Multifamily
           dwelling (up                                                                                        P    P    P   P   P
           to 8 units)
           Multifamily
           dwelling (9+                                                                                             P    P   P   P
           units)
           One dwelling
           unit when
           part of a
           business or  P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P                 P   P   P   P             5.404
           civic use;
           security
           residence
           Community    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                             P*   P*   P*  P*  P*                5.110 
           home
           Group home I P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                             P*   P*   P*  P*                    5.115 
           Group home   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                  P*   P*  P*                    5.115 
           II
           Halfway
           house
           Shelter
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
           College or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P               P   P                             P
           university
           Day care
           center       P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P       P   P   P   P       CUP* CUP* P   P   P   P             5.111
           (child or
           adult)
           School,
           elementary
           or secondary P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
           (public or
           private)
Education  School,
           elementary                                                                                          P    P    P       P   P
           or secondary
           (public)
           School,
           elementary                                                                                                    P       P   P
           or secondary
           (private)
           Business
           college or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P               P   P                     P   P   P
           commercial
           school
           Animal
Government shelter
           Correctional
           facility
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES             4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                           CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES     MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                        1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                           North South
           Government
           maintenance                             P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P
           facility
           Government
           office       P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P           P   P   P           P   P   P   P   P
           facility
           Governmental
           vehicle
           storage/
           junkyard
           Museum,
           library or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P*  P               P   P                   P   P   P   P
           fine art
           center
           Probation or
           parole           P*  P*          P*  P*                                                                     P*  P*                    5.127 
           office
           Ambulance
           dispatch     P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                                                      P       P   P
           station
           Assisted
           living       P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                              P   P   P               P
           facility
           Blood bank   P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                              P   P                   P   P   P
           Care         P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P               P   P   P               P
           facility
           Health
           services
Health     facility,
Care       including    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P               P   P               P   P   P   P
Facilities doctor's
           office or
           medical
           clinic
           Hospice      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P           P       P                   P   P   P
           Hospital     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P                   P                           P   P
           Massage
           therapy and  P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
           spa
           Nursing home
           (with full   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P               P   P                   P   P   P
           medical
           services)
           Center,
           community    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P       P   P                   P   P   P
           recreation
           or welfare
           Center,
           community
           recreation   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P       P   P                   P   P   P
           or welfare,
Recreation private or
           non-profit
           Country club P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P
           (private)
           Country club                            P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P
           (public)
           Golf course  P   P   P   P   P   P      P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P
           Golf driving     P               P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P
           range
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                  4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                                        CB/   CB/   CB/                                                              PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES          MU-1 MU-2 NS/  NS-  NS-  NS/  PI   CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU-  BU- Special   Supplemental
                                       T4R  T4   T4N  T5        HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX   CIV Districts Standards
                                                                        North South
          Park or playground
         (public or         P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P
          private)
          Place of worship   P    P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    P
Religious Place of worship   CUP  P    P    P    P    P    P    P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P       P   P           P   P   P   P   P    P
          auxiliary use
          Electric power     CUP  P    CUP  CUP  CUP  P    P                                                                    CUP P   P   P    P
          substation
          Gas lift                                                                                                                                             Ch. 15, Gas
          compressor         P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                                                                                                  city code,
          stations                                                                                                                                             5.140 
          Gas line                                                                                                                                             Ch. 15, Gas
          compressor         CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP*                                                                                      CUP*      city code,
          stations                                                                                                                                             5.140 
          Power plant or
          central station                                                                                                                   CUP*
          light
          Stealth
          telecommunications P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P                               SE* SE* SE* SE*  SE*           5.137 
          towers
Utilities Telecommunications                                                                                                                                   5.136
          antenna (on        P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P*      P*  P*              P*  P*  P*  P*   P*            See Table
          structure)                                                                                                                                           5.2 TLDC
          Telecommunications                                                                                                                                   5.137 
          tower              SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  SE*  P*                                       P*      P*  P*              SE* SE* SE* SE*  SE*           See Table
                                                                                                                                                               5.2 TLDC
          Utility
          transmission or    P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*   P*                                                               P*  P*  P*  P*  P*   P*            5.140 
          distribution line
          Wastewater
          (sewage) treatment
          facility
          Water supply,
          treatment or       CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP  CUP                                                                  CUP CUP CUP CUP  CUP
          storage facility
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                      4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                                        CB/   CB/   CB/                                                              PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES              MU-1 MU-2 NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/  CB/  RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/T TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                                           T4R T4  T4N T5     HC   RG   C-    C-    MU  IA  WB       BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                                        North South
              Amusement, indoor  P    P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P        P   P   P   P                   P   P   P
              Amusement, outdoor      P                    P  CUP                   CUP CUP CUP      P   P   P   P
              Baseball/softball
              facility                P    P   P   P   P   P
              (commercial)
              Bowling alley           P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P        P   P   P   P
              Bar, tavern,
              cocktail lounge;        CUP*     P   P   P   P  P                                      P   P   P   P                   P   P   P
              club, private or
              teen, dance hall
              Circus
              Club, commercial        P    P   P   P   P   P  P                                      P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P
              or business
              Drive-in                                                                                                                                         5.112 
              restaurant or      P*   P*   P*  P*  P*  P*     P    P    P     P     P   P   P   P    P*          P*  P*              P*                        See Table
              business                                                                                                                                         5.2 TLDC
              Event center or    P    P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P   P    P   P   P   P               P   P   P   P   P
              rental hall
              Bingo parlor                                    P    P    P     P     P   P   P        P   P   P   P
              Gambling facility
              (including bingo)
Entertainment Game room                                                                                                                                        5.105
and Eating    Health or          P    P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P        P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P
              recreation club
              Indoor recreation       P    P   P   P   P      P    P    P     P     P   P   P        P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P
              Lodge or civic     P    P    P   P   P   P      P    P    P     P     P   P   P   P    P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P
              club
              Massage parlor          P                                                              P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
              Mobile vendor food CUP* P*       P*      P*     CUP* CUP* CUP*  CUP*  P*  P*  P*  CUP* P   P   P   P   P               P*  P*                    5.406
              court                                    /**
              Museum/cultural    P    P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P                                        P   P   P
              facility
              Racing; horse, dog
              or automotive
              Restaurant, café, P    P    P   P   P   P   P  P    P    P     P     P   P   P   P    P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
              cafeteria
              Sexually oriented
              business
              Shooting or
              weapons firing
              range
              Stable,
              commercial,
              riding, boarding
              or rodeo arena
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES          4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                         CB/   CB/   CB/                                                               PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES  MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI  CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU-  BU-  BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                     1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5      HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA   RX   CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                         North South
        Swimming
        pool,        P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*      P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P       P   P                                               5.135 
        commercial
        Theater,     CUP         CUP CUP CUP CUP                                                 P
        drive-in
        Theater,
        movie        P*  P   P*  P*  P*  P*  P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P   P   P   P                     P*  P*  P*                5.138 
        theater or
        auditorium
        Bed and
        breakfast                                                                                            CUP* CUP* P*  P*  P*                5.106
        home
        Bed and
        breakfast    P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                                       P   P             P   P   P
Lodging inn
        Hotel, motel     P               P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P                     P   P   P                 5.116 
        or inn
        Recreational
        vehicle park
        Short term   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P                P    P   P   P   P
        home rental
        Bank,
Office  financial    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P                 P   P   P
        institution
        Offices      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        Antique shop P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        Appliance,
        sales,       P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P                                       P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P                 5.134 
        supply or
        repair
        Bakery       P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        Barber or    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        beauty shop
        Boat rental      P               P   P
        or sales
        Book,
        stationary   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        stores or
        newsstand
        Burglar
        alarm sales      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
Retail  and service
Sales   Caterer or
and     wedding      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
Service service
        Clothing/
        wearing      P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P                 5.134 
        apparel
        sales, new
        Clothing/
        wearing      P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P                 5.134 
        apparel
        sales, used
        Convenience  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        store
        Copy store
        or
        commercial   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
        print
        without off-
        set printing
        Dance studio P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P            P    P   P   P
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES          4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                        CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES  MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                     1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                        North South
        Dressmaking,
        custom;      P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
        millinery
        shop
        Duplicating  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P                 5.126 
        services
        Farmers’   P*                         P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P                 less than 1 acre 
        market                                                                                                                                5.145
        Feed store,
        no                   P   P   P   P   P                                                                  P   P   P   P
        processing/
        milling
        Firewood     P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                     P*  P*  P*                5.113 
        sales
        Furniture
        sales, new
        and used
        (office and  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P                 5.134 
        residential)
        in a
       building
       Furniture
       upholstery,  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
       refinishing
       or resale
       General
       merchandise  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P                 5.134 
       store
       Greenhouse                                                                                                                            5.114,
       or plant     P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P       P   P   P               P   P   P                 5.134 
       nursery
       Grocery
       store, meat  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P           P               P   P   P   P                 5.134 
Retail  market
Sales   Gunsmithing,
and     repairs or       P               P   P                                                                      P   P   P
Service sales
        Home
        improvement  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P                                      P           P               P   P   P   P                 5.134
        store
        Interior     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
        decorating
        Kennel
        Large retail P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P       P   P                   P   P   P                 5.134
        store
        Laundry or
        dry cleaning P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
        collection
        office
        Laundry, dry
        cleaning or  P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P                                   P   P   P
        washeteria
        Leather      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
        goods shop
        Liquor or
        package      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P                                       P   P   P
        store
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
 Locksmith     P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 Medical
 supplies/
 equipment     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 sales or
 rental
 Mini-                                 P                                                                  P   P   P   P
 warehouses
 Mortuary or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
 funeral home
 Newspaper
 distribution      P               P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P
 center
 Optician      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 Pawn shop         P*              P*  P*                                     P   P   P   P   P               P*  P*                    5.125,
                                                                                                                                        5.134 
 Pharmacy      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 (drug store)
 Photograph,
 portrait/
 camera shop   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 or photo
 finishing
 Recording     P   P   P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P   P   P   P   P           P*  P*  P*  P*
 studio
 Retail sales, P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P* P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P                 5.134 
 general
 Retail smoke      P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P               P   P   P   P   P   P         5.152
 shop
 Saddle or
 harness,      P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                      P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 repair or
 sales
 Shoe shine    P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 shop
 Small box
 discount                                                                                                                     P
 store
 Studio, art
 or            P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P                               P   P   P   P
 photography
 Tailor,
 clothing or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P           P   P   P   P
 apparel shop
 Tattoo parlor     P       P       P   P                                                                      P   P   P
 Taxidermist   P   P   P   P   P   P   P                                                                      P   P   P
 shop
 Veterinary
 clinic w/     P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P* P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P       P   P   P               P*  P*  P*                5.142 
 indoor
 kennels
 Veterinary
 clinic w/
 outdoor
 kennels
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES             4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                           CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES     MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                        1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                           North South
           Auto parts                                                                                                                            See Table
           supply,      P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P*          P*  P*              P   P                     5.2 TLDC
           retail
           Automotive                                                                                                                            5.104 
           repair;          P*      P       P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P*          P*  P*              P*                        See Table
           paint and                                                                                                                             5.2 TLDC
           body shop
           Car wash,                                                                                                                             5.108 
           full or self                     P*  P* P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P*          P*  P*                                        See Table
           service                                                                                                                               5.2 TLDC
           Gasoline     P   P   P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P   P*  P   P   P*              CUP                       See Table
           sales                                                                                                                                 5.2 TLDC
           Mobile home
           or
           manufactured
           housing
           sales
           Parking area
           or garage,                                                                                                                            6.202 
           storage      P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P*  P   P   P*                                        See Table
           commercial                                                                                                                            5.2 TLDC
           or auxiliary
Vehicle    Recreational
Sales and  vehicle (RV)     P               P
Service    sales/
           service
           Service          P               P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P       P*          P*  P*              CUP                       See Table
           station                                                                                                                               5.2 TLDC
           Towing yard
           with office
           Truck stop
           w/fuel and
           accessory
           services
           Vehicle
           junkyard
           Vehicle
           sales or
           rental;
           including            P   P   P   P      P   P   P     P     P   P   P
           automobiles,
           motorcycles,
           boats or
           trailers
           Vehicle
           steam                            P   P
           cleaning
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
           Assaying         P*              P   P                                                                                                5.103
           Assembly of
           pre-
Light      manufactured
Industrial parts,                                                                                                                                See Table
Services   except for       P       P   P   P   P                                                  P*                                            5.2 TLDC
           vehicles,
           trailers,
           airplanes or
           mobile homes
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES               4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                             CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES       MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                          1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                             North South
           Blacksmithing
           or wagon shop
           Bottling
           works, milk or     P               P   P
           soft drinks
           Brewery,
           distillery or                                                                                                 P   P
           winery
           Carpet and rug     P               P   P
           cleaning
           Chicken
           battery or
           brooder
           Coal, coke or
           wood yard
           Cottage
           manufacturing              P                            P     P   P   P                                   P   P   P
           uses
           Crematorium                        P
           Electroplating                     P
           Fabricating or
           manufactured
           housing,
           temporary or
           office
Light      building
Industrial Food
Services   processing (no     P               P   P                                                                      P   P
           slaughtering)
           Furniture or
           cabinet repair     P       P   P   P   P                                                  P*                                            See Table
           or                                                                                                                                      5.2 TLDC
           construction
           Furniture
           sales, with
           outside                                                                                   P*                                            See Table
           storage/                                                                                                                                5.2 TLDC
           display (new/
           used)
           Galvanizing,
           small utensils
           Machine shops                      P*                             P   P                                                                 5.120 
           Manufacture of
           artificial
           flowers,
           ornaments,
           awnings,                                                                                                                                5.120 
           tents, bags,       P       P   P   P*  P*                                                 P*                                            See Table
           cleaning/                                                                                                                               5.2 TLDC
           polishing
           preparations,
           boats under 28
           ft.
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES               4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                             CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES       MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                          1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                             North South
           Manufacture of
           aluminum,
           brass or other
           metals or from     P       P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                                               5.120 
           bone, paper,
           rubber,
           leather
           Manufactured
           home/RV repair
                                                                                                                                                   Uses
                                                                                                                                                   restricted
                                                                                                                                                   within 100
           Mini-                                                         P   P                                                                     feet of Camp
           warehouse                                                                                                                               Bowie
                                                                                                                                                   Boulevard in
                                                                                                                                                   the CB/GC-
                                                                                                                                                   MU district
           Monument/
           marble works,      P               P   P                                                  P*                  P   P                     See Table
           finishing and                                                                                                                           5.2 TLDC
           carving only
Light      Monument           P               P   P                                                  P*                  P   P                     See Table
Industrial works, stone                                                                                                                            5.2 TLDC
Services   Outdoor sales              P   P   P
           and storage
           Paint mixing                       P                                                      P*                                            See Table
           or spraying                                                                                                                             5.2 TLDC
           Paper box          P               P   P                                                  P*                                            See Table
           manufacture                                                                                                                             5.2 TLDC
           Pattern shop       P               P   P                                                  P*                                            See Table
                                                                                                                                                   5.2 TLDC
           Printing,
           lithographing,                                                                                                                          See Table
           book-binding,      P               P   P  P   P   P     P     P   P   P                   P*                  P   P   P                 5.2 TLDC
           newspapers or
           publishing
           Rubber
           stamping,          P               P   P                                                  P*                                            See Table
           shearing/                                                                                                                               5.2 TLDC
           punching
           Rubber stamp       P               P   P
           manufacture
           Sheet metal                                                                                                                             5.131 
           shop               P*              P*  P*                                                 P*                                            See Table
                                                                                                                                                   5.2 TLDC
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                              CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES        MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                              North South
              Welding
              shop, custom     P       P   P   P   P                                                  P*                  P   P                     See Table
              work (not                                                                                                                             5.2 TLDC
              structural)
              Yards,
Light         contractors,
Industrial    lumber or
Services      storage,
              automobiles,
              storage
              yards,
              building
              materials
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
              Animal by-
              products
              processing
              Batch plant,
              concrete or                                                                                                                           5.156
              asphalt
              (permanent)
              Brewery,                                                                                                                              See Table
              distillery       P               P                                                      P*                                            5.2 TLDC
              or winery
              Brick, clay,
              glass,
              shale, tile
              or terra
              cotta
              products
              manufacture
              Cement
              products
              plant
              Cement,
Heavy         lime, gypsum
Industrial    or plaster
Manufacturing of Paris
              manufacture
              Cotton gin,
              cotton oil
              mill,
              bailing or
              compress
              Creosite,
              treatment/
              manufacture
              Egg cracking
              or
              processing
              Furnace,
              blast; forge
              plant,
              boiler works
              manufacture
              Galvanizing,
              sheet or
              structural
              shapes
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                  4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                                CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES          MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                             1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                                North South
              Gas (natural
              or artificial)
              manufacture
              processing/
              storage
              Glue
              manufacture
              Grain elevator
              Magnesium
              casting,
              machining or
              fabricating
              Manufacture of
              acetylene or
              oxygen gas,
              alcohol,
              computers and
              related
              electronic
              products,
              airplanes,
              automobiles,
              trucks and
              tractors
              (including
              assembly
              plants), ball
              or roller                                                         P   P
              bearings,
              steel tanks,
              candles and
Heavy         celluloid,
Industrial    cash
Manufacturing registers,
              cutlery
              disinfectants,
              dextrin,
              dyestuff,
              electrical
              machinery,
              farm tools,
              type writers
              and vinegar
              Manufacture of
              basket
              material,
              bicycles,
              boots, boxes
              other than
              paper,
              caskets, shoes
              Manufacture of
              dyes, cores,
              die-casting
              molds
              Manufacture,
              processing/
              production of
              hazardous
              chemicals
              Metal casting
              Metal foundry
              plant or
              fabrication
              plant
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                 4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                               CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES         MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                            1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                               North South
              Metal
              smelting,
              reclamation
              or ore
              reduction
              Metal
              stamping,
              dying,
              shearing or
              punching
              Mill, feed or
              flour
              Mining
              quarry,
              dredging or
              excavation of
              rock, dirt,
              gravel, sand,
              stone
              Packing plant
              Paper or pulp
              manufacture
              Petroleum,
              refining or
              wholesale
              storage
              Planing mill
              or
              woodworking
              shop
              Poultry
              killing or
              dressing
              Rock cement
              crushers and
              stone quarry
Heavy         Rolling mill
Industrial    Soap
Manufacturing manufacture
              Soda or
              compound
              manufacture
              Stoneyard,
              building
              stone,
              cutting,
              sawing or
              storage
              Tar
              distillation/
              manufacturing
              Tobacco
              (chewing)
              manufacture
              or treatment
              Welding shop
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES                   4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                                 CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES           MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                              1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                                 North South
               Airport,
               aviation
               field,         CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP                        P   P   P
               helistop or
               landing area
               Passenger      P   P       P   P   P                          P   P   P           P                           P
               station
               Railroad
               freight or                                                    P   P   P
               classification
               yard
Transportation Railroad
               roundhouse or      P
               RR car repair
               shop
               Railroad
               tracks, team,
               spur, loading
               or storage
               Terminal;
               truck,                                                        P   P   P
               freight, rail
               or water
               Landfill,
               recycling
               center,
               household
               hazardous
               waste or waste
Waste Related  tire facility
               Pet cemetery
               Recycling
               collection     SE* P*  SE  SE* SE* P*                                                                         SE*                       5.130 
               facility
               Salvage yard
               (other than
               automotive)
               Wholesale
               bakery,                                                                                                                                 See Table
               produce market     P               P   P                      P   P   P                   P*                                            5.2 TLDC
Wholesale      or wholesale
Trade          house
               Wholesale                                                                                                                               See Table
               office or          P       P   P   P   P                      P   P   P                   P*                                            5.2 TLDC
               sample room
OTHER USES
               Agricultural
               uses
               Community      P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P* P*  P*  P*    P*    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P   P   P   P   P   P             5.146
Agricultures   garden
               Stockyards or
               feeding pens
               (commercial)
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES               4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                             CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL USES       MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
                          1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                             North South
          Fresh water
          fracture ponds
          and production
          Gas drilling    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                     P   P   P   P   P   P   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*            Ch. 15, Gas
          and production                                                                                                                           city code
          Oil drilling
          and production
          Urban           P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P* P*  P*  P*    P*    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P   P   P   P   P   P             5.146
          agriculture
          Accessory use           P   P   P   P                                                          P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
          or building
          Home occupation                                                                                        P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                5.116A
          Incidental                                 P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P** P** P** P** P**         P*  P*  P*  P*
          outdoor display
          Satellite       P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P                                      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
          antenna (dish)
          Stable,
          stockyards or
          feeding pens
          (noncommercial)
          Storage or      P*  P   P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                                                   5.306 
Accessory display outside
Uses      Solar energy                               P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P** P** P** P** P** P** P   P   P   P   P   P
          equipment                                                                      *   *   *   *   *   *
          Wind energy                                P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P** P** P** P** P** P** P   P   P   P   P   P
          equipment                                                                      *   *   *   *   *   *
          Rain water                                                                     P** P** P** P** P** P**
          harvesting                                                                     *   *   *   *   *   *   P   P   P   P   P   P
          equipment
          Utility
          equipment
          (includes                                                                      P** P** P** P** P** P**
          electrical                                                                     *   *   *   *   *   *   P   P   P   P   P   P
          transformers,
          gas meters,
          etc.)
          Amusement,
          outdoor         CUP P   SE* SE* SE* SE*                                        P   P   P   P               SE* SE* SE* SE* SE*           5.400 
          (temporary)
          Batch plant,
          concrete or     SE* SE*                                                        P   P   P   P                                             5.401 
          asphalt
          (temporary)
Temporary Garage or other                                                                                        P*  P*  P   P   P                 5.402
Uses      occasional sale
          Mobile vendor,  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*     P*  P*  P*    P*    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                    5.406
          fresh market
          Special event
          (subject to
          city's special                             P   P   P     P     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
          events
          ordinance)
 
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding.
NS = Near Southside, PI = Panther Island, CB = Camp Bowie, TL = Trinity Lakes,
BU = Berry/University
(** = permitted accessory use; *** = permitted accessory use with criteria in
Table 5.2, Trinity Lakes Development Code (TLDC))
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
4.1203 USES    4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                                  CB/   CB/   CB/                                                             PD/CUP
NONRESIDENTIAL MU- MU- NS/ NS- NS- NS/ PI CB/ CB/ RUV   RUV   GC- CB/ CB/ CB/ TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- TL- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- BU- Special   Supplemental
USES           1   2   T4R T4  T4N T5     HC  RG  C-    C-    MU  IA  WB  T   BM  HM  VM  CC  TR  NB  RA  RX  CX  SH  IX  CIV Districts Standards
                                                  North South
 Trailer,
 portable,
 sales,        P   P   P   P   P   P                                          P   P   P   P
 construction
 or storage
 Vendor, food,
 non-
 potentially   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                         P   P   P   P                                             5.406 
 hazardous
 food
 Vendor, food,
 potentially       P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                         P   P   P   P                                             5.406 
 hazardous
 food
 Vendor,           P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                         P*  P*                    5.406 
 merchandise
 Vendor,               P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                         P*  P*                    9.101 
 transient
 Vendor,
 transient,
 non-          P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                                                   5.406 
 potentially
 hazardous
 food
 Vendor,
 transient,
 potentially   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*                                                                                                   5.406
 hazardous
 food
                                                                                                                                        (for food
                                                                                                                                        vendors
 Sales from                                                                                                                             other city
 kiosks                                       P   P     P     P   P   P   P                                                             ordinances
                                                                                                                                        apply, not
                                                                                                                                        within
                                                                                                                                        public ROW)
 
ALL developments within a form-based code district MUST refer to the
development guidelines of that district before proceeding
SY = Stockyards
P - Permitted P* - Permitted must also meet supplemental use standards SE -
Special Exception Required
SE* - Special Exception required and must also meet supplemental use standards
Blank - Not Permitted
4.1203 4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
USES
       SY-                                                         Supplemental
       HSH SY-HCO SY-TMC SY-TNF SY-TNX SY-TNE SY-TSA SY-ENX SY-ECC Use
                                                                   Standards
4.1203 USES                       4.1200 FORM BASED CODE DISTRICTS USE TABLE
                                  SY- SY- SY- SY- SY- SY- SY- SY- SY- Supplemental
                                  HSH HCO TMC TNF TNX TNE TSA ENX ECC Use
                                                                      Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
               One-family                                     
               detached dwelling
               Two-family                                     
               detached
               Duplex/two-family                              
               attached dwelling
Household      One-family
Living         attached                 P      P   P   P   P   P    
               (townhouse,
               rowhouse)
               Multifamily        P*     P      P*     P*  P   P   Sec._6.2.1
               dwelling
               One dwelling unit
               (when part of a    P      P      P   P   P   P   P    
               business)
               Boarding home      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   5.153
               facility
               Lodging house                                  
                                                                      §
               Community home                 P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.110
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
                                                                      §
Group Living   Group home I                   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.115
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
                                                                      §
               Group home II                  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.115
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Halfway house                                  
               Shelter                                        
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
               College or                                     
               university
                                                                      §
               Day care center                P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.111
               (child or adult)                                       (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               School, elementary
Education      or secondary                      P   P   P       
               (public)
               School, elementary
               or secondary                      P   P   P       
               (private)
               Business college
               or commercial      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               school
               Animal shelter                                 
               Correctional                                   
               facility
               Government
               maintenance                                    
               facility
               Government office  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Government     facility
               Governmental
               vehicle storage/                               
               junkyard
               Museum, library or P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               fine art center
               Probation or                               P    
               parole office
               Ambulance dispatch                         P    
               station
               Assisted living                P   P   P   P   P    
               facility
               Blood bank                                 P    
               Care facility                  P   P   P   P   P    
               Health services
Health Care    facility,                      P   P   P   P   P    
Facilities     including doctor's
               or medical office
               Hospice                        P   P   P   P   P    
               Hospital                                       
               Massage therapy    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               and spa
               Nursing home (with
               full medical                   P   P   P   P   P    
               services)
               Center, community
               recreation or                  P   P   P   P   P    
               welfare
               Center, community
               recreation or                  P   P   P   P   P    
               welfare (private
               or non-profit)
Recreation     Country club                                   
               (private)
               Country club                                   
               (public)
               Golf course                                    
               Golf driving range                             
               Park or playground
               (public or         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               private)
               Place of worship   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Religious      Place of worship   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               auxiliary use
               Electric power                 SE  SE  SE  SE  SE   
               substation
               Gas lift                                               Ch. 15, Gas
               compressor                     SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  City Code
               stations
               Gas line                                               Ch. 15, Gas
               compressor                     SE  SE  SE  SE  SE  City Code
               stations
               Power plant or
               central station                                
               light
               Stealth                                                §
               telecommunications             SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.137
               towers                                                 (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Telecommunications                                     §
Utilities      antenna (on           SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.133
               structure)                                             (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
                                                                      §
               Telecommunications             SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.137
               tower                                                  (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Utility                                                §
               transmission or    SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.140
               distribution line                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Wastewater
               (sewage) treatment                             
               facility
               Water supply,
               treatment or                   SE  SE  SE  SE  SE   
               storage facility
COMMERCIAL USES
               Amusement, indoor  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Amusement, outdoor                             
               Baseball, softball
               facility                                       
               (commercial)
               Bar, tavern,
               cocktail lounge;   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               club, private or
               teen, dance hall
               Brewpub            P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Circus                      P      P   P          
               Club, commercial   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               or business
               Drive-in
               restaurant or                              P*  Sec. 6.22
               business
               Event center or    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               rental hall
               Health or          P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               recreation club
               Indoor recreation  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Entertainment  Lodge or civic     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
and Eating     club
               Museum/cultural    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               facility
               Racing; horse, dog                             
               or automotive
               Restaurant, café, P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Chap. 9,
               cafeteria                                              Restaurants
               Sexually oriented                              
               business
               Shooting or
               weapons firing                                 
               range
               Stable,
               commercial,        P   P   P   P      P   P          
               riding, boarding
               or rodeo arena
               Swimming pool,                                 
               commercial
               Theater, drive-in                              
               Theater, movie                                         §
               theater or         P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.138
               auditorium                                             (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Bed and breakfast                              
               home
               Bed and breakfast  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               inn
Lodging        Hotel, motel or    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               inn
               Recreational             P*  P*     P*  P*         
               vehicle park
               Short term home    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               rental
               Bank, financial    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Office         institution
               Offices            P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Antique shop       P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Appliance, sales,  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               supply or repair
               Bakery             P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Barber or beauty   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               shop
               Book, stationary
               stores or          P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               newsstand
               Burglar alarm      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               sales and service
               Caterer or wedding P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               service
               Clothing/wearing   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               apparel sales, new
               Clothing/wearing
               apparel sales,     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               used
               Convenience store  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Copy store or
               commercial print   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               without off-set
               printing
               Dance studio       P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Dressmaking,
               custom; millinery  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               shop
               Duplicating        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               services
               Farmers’ market  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Feed store, no     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               processing/milling
                                                                      §
               Firewood sales     P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.113
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Furniture sales in
               a building (new/   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               used)
               Furniture sales
               with outside          P   P   P      P         P    
               storage/display
               (new/used)
               Furniture
               upholstery,        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               refinishing or
               resale
               General            P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               merchandise store
               Greenhouse or                  P   P   P   P   P    
               plant nursery
               Grocery store,     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Retail Sales   meat market
and Service    Gunsmithing,       P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               repairs or sales
               Home improvement   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               store
               Interior           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               decorating
               Laundry or dry
               cleaning                       P   P   P   P   P    
               collection office
               Laundry, dry
               cleaning or                    P   P   P   P   P    
               washeteria
               Leather goods shop P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Liquor or package  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               store
               Livestock auction  P   P   P   P      P   P          
               Locksmith          P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Medical supplies/  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               equipment sales
               Mini-warehouses                                
               Mortuary or        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               funeral home
               Newspaper
               distribution                                   
               center
               Optician           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Pawn shop                                  P    
               Pharmacy (drug     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               store)
               Photograph,
               portrait/camera    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               shop or photo
               finishing
                                                                      §
               Recording studio   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.128
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Retail sales,      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               general
               Saddle or harness, P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               repair or sales
               Shoe shine shop    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Studio, art or     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               photography
               Tailor, clothing   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               or apparel shop
               Tattoo parlor      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Taxidermist shop   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
                                                                      §
               Veterinary clinic     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P*  5.142
               w/ indoor kennels                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Veterinary clinic     P   P   P      P   P      P    
               w/ outdoor kennels
               Auto parts supply,                         P    
               retail
               Automotive repair;
               paint and body                                 
               shop
               Car wash, full or                          P    
               self service
               Gasoline sales                             P    
               Mobile home or
               manufactured                                   
               housing sales
               Recreational
               vehicle (RV)                                   
               sales/service
Vehicle Sales  Service station                                
and Service    Towing yard with                               
               office
               Truck stop w/ fuel
               and accessory                                  
               services
               Vehicle junkyard                               
               Vehicle sales or
               rental showrooms
               or kiosks;
               including                P   P      P   P      P    
               automobiles,
               motorcycles, boats
               or trailers
               Vehicle steam                              P    
               cleaning
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES
               Assaying                                       
               Assembly of pre-
               manufactured
               parts, except for
               vehicles,                                      
               trailers,
               airplanes or
               mobile homes
               Blacksmithing or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               wagon shop
               Bottling works,
               milk or soft                                   
               drinks
               Brewery,
               distillery or      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               winery
               Carpet and rug                                 
               cleaning
               Chicken battery or                             
               brooder
               Coal, coke or wood                             
               yard
               Cottage            P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               manufacturing uses
               Crematorium                                    
               Electroplating                                 
               Fabricating or
               manufactured                                   
               housing, temporary
               or office building
               Food processing    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               (no slaughtering)
               Galvanizing, small                             
               utensils
               Machine shops                                  
               Manufacture of
               artificial
               flowers,
               ornaments,
               awnings, tents,                                
               bags, cleaning/
               polishing
Light          preparations,
Industrial     boats under 28 ft.
Services       Manufacture of
               aluminum, brass or
               other metals or                                
               from bone, paper,
               rubber, leather
               Manufacture of
               basket material,
               bicycles, boots/      P   P   P      P   P      P    
               shoes, boxes,
               caskets
               Manufactured home/                             
               RV repair
               Monument/marble
               works, finishing      P   P   P      P   P      P    
               and carving only
               Monument works,       P   P   P      P   P      P    
               stone
               Paint mixing or                                
               spraying
               Paper box                                      
               manufacture
               Pattern shop          P   P   P      P   P      P    
               Printing,
               lithographing,
               book-binding,         P   P   P      P   P      P    
               newspapers or
               publishing
               Rubber stamping,      P   P   P      P   P      P    
               shearing/punching
               Rubber stamp                                   
               manufacture
               Sheet metal shop                               
               Warehouse or bulk  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               storage
               Welding shop,
               custom work (not      P   P   P      P   P      P    
               structural)
               Yards,
               contractors,
               lumber or storage,                             
               automobiles,
               storage yards,
               building materials
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USES
               Airport, aviation
               field, helistop or                             
               landing area
               Passenger station     P   P   P      P   P          
               Railroad freight
               or classification                              
               yard
Transportation Railroad
               roundhouse or RR      P      P                   
               car repair shop
               Railroad tracks,
               team, spur, or        P   P   P      P   P          
               storage
               Terminal; truck,
               freight, rail or                               
               water
               Landfill,
               recycling center,
               household                                      
               hazardous waste or
               waste tire
               facility
Waste Related  Pet cemetery                                   
               Recycling                                              §
               collection                                 SE* 5.130
               facility                                               (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Salvage yard
               (other than                                    
               automotive)
               Wholesale bakery,
Wholesale      produce market or  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Trade          wholesale house
               Wholesale office                           P    
               or sample room
OTHER USES
               Agricultural uses     P   P   P      P   P          
               Community garden         P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               Stockyards or
               feeding pens          P   P   P      P   P          
               (commercial/
               noncommercial)
Agricultures   Fresh water
               fracture ponds and                             
               production
               Gas drilling and         P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Ch. 15, Gas
               production                                             City Code
               Oil drilling and                               
               production
               Accessory use or   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               building
                                                                      §
               Home occupation    P*     P*     P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  5.116A
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Outdoor display    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 7.5.2
               Limited outdoor    P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 7.5.3
               storage
               General outdoor                               Sec. 7.5.4
               storage
               Satellite antenna  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
Accessory Uses (dish)
               Solar energy       P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               equipment
               Wind energy        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               equipment
               Rain water
               harvesting         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               equipment
               Utility equipment
               (includes
               electrical         P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               transformers, gas
               meters, etc.)
                                                                      §
               Amusement, outdoor SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.400
                                                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Batch plant,
               concrete or                                   5.401
               asphalt
               Garage or other    P      P      P   P   P   P   P    
               occasional sale
               Model home                                     
                                                                      §
               Residence for      SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* SE* 5.404
               security purposes                                      (Zoning
                                                                      Code)
               Special event
Temporary Uses (subject to city's P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               special events
               ordinance)
               Temporary
               construction
               offices, storage   P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 6.2.3
               sheds, trailers,
               barricades, fences
               Trailer, portable, P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
               sales or storage
               Vendor, food,      P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 6.2.4
               mobile food court
               Vendor,            P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 6.2.4
               merchandise
               Vendor, transient  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  P*  Sec. 6.2.4
               Sales from kiosks  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P    
 
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20510-12-2012, § 3,
passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-11-2012; Ord. 20511-12-2012, § 2, passed 12-4-2012,
eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 20666-03-2013, § 1, passed 3-19-2013, eff. 4-9-2013; Ord.
20999-10-2013, § 4, passed 10-15-2013; Ord. 22154-04-2016, § 5, passed 4-5-
2016, eff. 4-21-2016; Ord. 22335-08-2016, §§ 3, 6, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 22336-
08-2016, § 1, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 22337-08-2016, § 2, passed 8-2-2016; Ord.
22593-02-2017, § 2, passed 2-7-2017; Ord. 22703-05-2017, §§ 2, 3, passed 5-2-
2017; Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 4, passed 8-1-2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23110-02-
2018, § 4, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 23586-03-2019, § 2, passed 3-5-2019; Ord.
23609-03-2019, § 4, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 23648-05-2019, § 12, passed 5-7-
2019; Ord. 23971-12-2019, § 3, passed 12-3-2019, eff. 12-11-2019; Ord. 25911-
12-2022, § 2, passed 12-13-2022, eff. 1-4-2023; Ord. 25955-01-2023, § 3, passed
1-10-2023, eff. 1-20-2023; Ord. 26358-08-2023, § 4, passed 8-8-2023; Ord.
26445-09-2023, § 1, passed 9-12-2023, eff. 9-26-2023; Ord. 27030-06-2024, §§ 2,
3, passed 6-25-2024, eff. 7-23-2024; Ord. 27381-12-2024, § 4, passed 12-10-
2024, eff. 12-20-2024; Ord. 27822-06-2025, § 1, passed 6-24-2025, eff. 8-20-
2025)
ARTICLE 13: FORM-BASED DISTRICTS
§ 4.1300 LOW INTENSITY MIXED-USE (“MU-1”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the Low Intensity
Mixed-Use (MU-1) District to provide areas in which a variety of housing types
exist among neighborhood-serving commercial and institutional uses. The MU-
1 District is designed to accommodate and encourage compact, walkable
development forms that are more land-efficient, cost-effective, and revenue
positive for the City than low density, single-use developments. In addition to
the purpose statements above, the intent of the MU-1 District is to:
      (1)   Promote a pedestrian-oriented urban form. In contrast to
conventional zoning standards that place a primary emphasis on the regulation
of land uses, mixed-use development standards and guidelines focus on promoting
a walkable, urban form of development, consistent with the surrounding areas
historic urban development patterns. The focus on form promotes buildings that
conform to tested urban design principles.
      (2)   Require excellence in design of the public realm and of buildings
that front public spaces. The most successful and memorable urban environments
are those in which walking down the street is appealing. Streets, plazas,
parks, and other public spaces should be comfortable and inviting, and
buildings fronting those spaces should be active and visually interesting at
the pedestrian level.
      (3)   Encourage creativity, architectural diversity, and exceptional
design. Mixed-use is intended to promote high quality design, and the
development review process for mixed-use projects is intended to promote
flexibility. Standards, as well as the development review process, are intended
to support creativity and exceptional design while discouraging uniformity.
      (4)   Promote sustainable development that minimizes negative impacts on
natural resources. Creating walkable, higher density residential districts
surrounding mixed-use districts supports sustainable development by providing
an alternative to low density development in peripheral areas. In accordance
with sustainable development principles, the mixed-use buildings and public
spaces should be designed to minimize negative impacts on air and water quality
and promote innovation in environmental design.
      (5)   Promote walkability. Walkable communities are desirable places to
live, work, and play. Walkable communities give higher priority to pedestrian
activity by creating streetscapes that are safe, comfortable, interesting, and
that accommodate a wide range of transportation modes and users. To foster
walkability, development patterns should promote a mix of land uses and
density, have an emphasis on the placement and orientation of buildings, have
properly placed parking, place a high value on the design of quality
streetscapes, provide access to transit, and provide unimpeded pedestrian
connections to multiple destinations and open space.
      (6)   Maximize connectivity and access. In order for people to feel
comfortable walking, pedestrian access and connectivity among uses and
amenities, including transit facilities, is essential. Connectivity and access
can be accomplished by creating smaller blocks or by providing access through
blocks via publicly accessible alleys, pathways, paseos, and pedestrian
boulevards. Sidewalks should form a continuous network connected by frequent,
safe street crossing.
      (7)   Promote affordable housing and mixed income communities. Design a
mix of housing based on geographic growth projections and the needs of current
and future residents to accommodate families, single occupants, the elderly and
those with disabilities. Access to transportation and services should be a key
factor in the future distribution and allocation of affordable housing.
   (b)   Review procedures for development.
      (1)   General requirements. Projects should conform to all mixed-use
standards. Staff may also refer an administrative case or a case that does not
require waivers to the UDC for failure to meet the Purpose and Intent of the
ordinance.
      (2)   General rule allowing waiver or modification of standards.
         a.   Director or designee. The Director or designee is authorized to
grant modifications to certain development standards with a maximum
modification up to 10% increase or decrease for the following development
standards:
            1.   Setbacks for additions to existing structures.
            2.   Bufferyard width.
            3.   Primary entrance separation.
            4.    Fenestration.
         b.   Urban Design Commission. Unless otherwise limited by this
section, the Urban Design Commission (UDC), may waive or modify any individual
development standards through the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness,
if the UDC finds that the proposed development is consistent with the intent
statements of the MU-1 District but does not conform to certain development
standards. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall expire if a building permit
is not received within two years of the approval of the Certificate of
Appropriateness.
         c.   Board of Adjustment. Any waiver of basic property development
related to building heights, setbacks and bulk require a variance to the Board
of Adjustment after a recommendation from the Urban Design Commission.
         d.   Zoning Commission/City Council. Any zoning proposal requesting a
Planned Development "PD" zoning district that uses the MU-1 District as the
base zoning, inclusive of any waivers from MU-1 design standards, must receive
a recommendation from the Urban Design Commission prior to a public hearing by
the Zoning Commission or the City Council.
      (3)   Conceptual Land Use Plan. To facilitate compliance with the MU-
1 District regulations, a conceptual land use plan must be submitted to the
Director of designee for review and approval prior to submitting permit
applications. The conceptual land use plan must include the following:
         a.   The anticipated location of proposed streets, sidewalks and
walkways, building footprints, parking areas, landscaped areas and features,
and open space. A change of 5% or greater in land uses to an approved
conceptual land use plan will require a new project review and approval prior
to permitting.
         b.   The conceptual land use plan shall illustrate the proposed
location of land uses on the site, using the following land use categories:
            1.   All residential (single-family, one-or-two-family attached,
multi-family, etc.) Leasing offices in multifamily developments shall count
towards residential use calculations.
            2.    Commercial/industrial.
            3.    Institutional/dedicated public parks (e.g. hospitals,
schools, churches, government buildings, dedicated public parks and the likes).
            4.   Mixed-use buildings (a mix of residential and non-residential
within the same building, meeting the percentage requirements defined in
subsection (d)(7)a.
         c.   Parking facilities and private open spaces shall be classified
the same as the primary land use they serve.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9696.jpg]
 
      (4)   Proximity test. Developments that are 90% or greater residential
uses must perform a proximity test to ensure a mix of uses in the surrounding
area. No development that comprises 90% or greater residential uses shall be
permitted unless the Director, determines one of the following:
         a.   The residential land use category within a 1,320-foot radius of
the proposed project site boundary, shall not occupy greater than 70% of the
total land area. The proposed development shall be included in the calculation
of this percentage. The land use area percentages shall be based on the current
land uses and calculated using land use information obtained from the
applicable tax appraisal district, site visits, or property research; or
         b.   There are demonstratable unique site conditions (e.g. adjacency
to natural features, freight yards, etc.) make compliance with the conditions
of section i above impractical in certain areas of the development site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9694.jpg]
 
   (c)   Uses. In the MU-1 District, no building or land use shall be used and
no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor
shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued, except in accordance with the use
table in
Chapter 4, Article 12, and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5. Residential, commercial, and institutional uses may occupy the same
building lot.
      (1)   Building types. The following non-exhaustive list of conceptual
building illustrations demonstrate the recommended building forms for the MU-
1 District. Additional building types and configurations that comply with the
intent and regulations of the MU-1 district are encouraged. All intent
statements are addressed through development standards set out in §
4.1300 (d) through (h).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9692.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9690.jpg]
 
         a.   General commercial. A development type with nonresidential uses.
Ground story spaces are flexible enough to accommodate a variety of
nonresidential uses. Upper stories are used for offices and/or other types of
compatible nonresidential uses.
         b.   Mixed-use shopfront. A development type with ground-story retail
and upper-story residential and/or office uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9688.jpg]
 
         c.    Apartment/condominium. Multifamily residential development type
that often shares a common entrance. Primary entrances are prominent and
street-facing. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recommended to
improve privacy. Parking for an apartment/condominium building is allowed on
the side or rear of the building, but the preferred method is at the rear of
the building or within a parking structure. A townhouse form shall be
considered an apartment/condominium when the homes are on one platted lot and
not on individually platted lots with ground floor separate entrances to each
unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9686.jpg]
 
         d.   One-family attached (townhouse). A two- or three-story building
with two or more attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure
and platted into individual lots. An elevated ground floor for residential uses
is recommended to improve privacy. A townhouse form is regarded as an
apartment/condominium when on one platted lot and not individually platted lots
with ground floor separate entrances to each unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9684.jpg]
 
         e.   Manor house. A building that has the appearance of a conventional
single-family dwelling with three to five attached dwelling units consolidated
in a single structure. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either
wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9682.jpg]
 
         f.   Two-family attached (duplex). A building with two dwelling units
on an individual lot separated by a shared common wall. Dwelling units within a
building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other
dwelling units.
   (d)   Development standards.
      (1)   General yard development standards. Development shall be exempt
from Chapter 6, Article 1, §§
6.101(b),
6.101(c),
6.101(d), and
6.101(f).
      (2)   Setbacks. The chart below represents the minimum and maximum
setbacks for buildings and structures within a MU-1 District.
 
Requirement                   Distance
1. Primary street (min./max.) 0'/20'
2. Side street (min./max.)    0'/20'
3. Rear yard (min.)           5'
4. *Common lot line (min.)    0'
*Subject to building code spacing requirements
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9680.jpg]
 
         a.   Buildings on corner lots shall not exceed the maximum front yard
setback on primary and side streets.
         b.   Buildings may exceed the maximum 20-foot setback if angled,
perpendicular, or parallel parking on private property meets the conditions of
subsection (e)(3)a. In these situations, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the curb instead of the property line, and the setback shall be
no greater than 20 feet.
         c.   Campus developments. Interior buildings constructed as part of a
campus development may be set back from the property line more than 20 feet if
at least 50% of the public street frontage on each block face within the
development contains buildings within the maximum setback of 20 feet. Interior
buildings setback farther than 20 feet may not be constructed until the 50%
requirement has been satisfied.
         Note: A campus development is defined as a unified group of buildings
and/or facilities located on a contiguous parcel and operated as a place of
worship, school, or hospital.
      (3)   Minimum height single-use. One (1) story at a minimum of 18 feet
total as measured from the top of the finished slab at grade level to the top
of the highest wall facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9678.jpg]
 
      Note: Development in the MU-1 District is exempt from §
6.100. An unroofed and unenclosed roof top terrace, and the enclosed stairwell
or elevator that strictly provides access to the terrace, shall not be included
in the measurement of the total building height. Refer to §§
5.136 and
5.137 Telecommunication Antenna and Towers.
         a.   For sloped sites, average grade is determined by calculating the
average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or the improved grade
(whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the
primary street setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9676.jpg]
 
         b.   Where a lot of slopes downward from the front property line, one
story that is additional to the specified maximum number of stories may be
built on the lower rear portion of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9674.jpg]
 
      (4)   Maximum height general.
 
 
Building Floor                       Maximum Height in Feet
Ground floor                         20 feet
Additional floors above ground floor 15 feet per floor
Apartment/condominiums top floor     20 feet
 
      (5)   Maximum height single- use. Three stories as measured from the top
of the finished slab at grade level to the top of the highest wall top plate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9672.jpg]
 
      (6)   Minimum residential units per acre. None, except when a residential
mixed-use project is located within 1,320 feet of an entrance to an existing or
approved passenger rail station or stop: 20.   
      (7)   Maximum residential units per acre.
 
Maximum Building Height and Use                        Maximum Units Per Acre
3 stories, single use with surface parking             40 units/acre
3 stories, single use with structure parking           50 units/acre
4 stories, single use, with height bonus (structured   60 units/acre
parking or open space)
4 stories, single use, with height bonuses (structured 70 units/acre
parking and open space)
5 stories, single use, with height bonuses (structured 70 units/acre
parking and open space)
5 stories, mixed-use                                   80 units/acre
 
      (8)   Height bonus options. Height bonuses can be utilized cumulatively
but shall not allow for heights beyond the established five story maximum. When
adjacent to a one-or-two family district, all height bonuses must adhere to the
transitional height plane requirements, see subsection (f)(1)d.
         a.   Mixed-use building. A maximum of five stories provided that;
            1.   Residential uses account for no less than 20% of a building's
gross floor area, and;
            2.   Office, eating and entertainment, and/or retail sales and
service use account for no less than 10% of the building's gross floor area.
            3.   Live/work units may count toward the mixed-use requirement
however, only the commercial square footage and its required restroom space of
the unit shall count toward the calculation. All live/work units require a
commercial certificate of occupancy (CO).
               (i)   Not exceed 3,000 square feet.
               (ii)    Maintain between 10% and 50% commercial space.
               (iii)   Not exceed five onsite employees who do not live in the
unit.
               (iv)    Maintain adjacency between commercial and exterior
entry.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9670.jpg]
 
         b.   Structured parking. The intent of allowing a height bonus of
structured parking is to locate and design surface parking lots, individual
garages, and large parking garages so as to reduce their visual impact or to
create public amenities or both (e.g., through aesthetic or environmental
features).
            1.   One additional story of height shall be permitted if providing
structured parking for the project. Structured parking is intended to provide
100% of all off-street parking for the height bonus.
            2.    One-and-two family residential garages shall not be included
in a determination of the applicability of the structured parking height bonus.
         c.   Open space. One additional story of height shall be permitted if
providing a publicly accessible pocket park that adhere to the following
standards.
         Note: Utilizing the open space height bonus does not exempt a
development from applicable park dedication fees.
            1.   Use criteria.
               (i)    Pocket parks must provide a community benefit such as:
play activity for children, relaxing spaces to enjoy lunch or meet friends,
interactive artwork, pet-friendly areas, or small event and garden space.
            2.   Location.
               (i)    Pocket parks must front public streets and be publicly
accessible.
            Note: Refer to subsection (h)(5), Development Standards Applicable
to Privately Owned Streets and Drives with Public Access Easements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9668.jpg]
 
            3.   Size.
               (i)   Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet minimum.
               (ii)   One (1) acre maximum.
            4.   Green space.
               (i)    Pocket parks shall provide a minimum of 20% ground level
green space. Additional ground area may be impervious provided the space is
structured for recreation, including, but not limited to sculpture gardens,
basketball courts, or tennis courts.
               (ii)   All pocket parks require tree planting. Tree planting
requirement may be waived for areas that are designed for structured
recreation.
            5.   Seating.
               (i)   A minimum of one linear foot of seating shall be required
for every 300 square feet of gross open space.
            6.   Fencing.
               (i)    Fencing for pocket parks must conform to subsection (h)
(2) and must remain open to the public during daylight hours.
            7.   Maintenance.
               (i)    Pocket parks that are privately owned and maintained must
be publicly accessible or:
               (ii)    Must be dedicated in perpetuity as public open space
through the recording of a public use easement and have an established long-
term maintenance agreement with the Park and Recreation Department.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9666.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9660.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9662.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9664.jpg]
 
      (9)   Applicability. Where existing buildings are affected by a rezoning
to a Mixed-Use district, certain MU-1 standards will apply to subsequent or
redevelopment of the building, depending on the extent of the improvement. The
following table describes changes in intensity based on the uses as defined by
the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) trip generation and changes that
increase the structure footprint or usable area. Usable area includes a change
of use of any outdoor area from what was not a usable, occupiable area prior to
the change.
 
               0% to 15% Increase   >15% but <30%        >30% Increase
                                    Increase
               Required if existing Required if existing Required if existing
Sidewalk       sidewalks are        sidewalks are        sidewalks are
               substandard as       substandard as       substandard as
               determined by TPW    determined by TPW    determined by TPW
               Does Not Apply;      Applies; Street      Applies; Street
Enhanced       Street Trees shall   Trees shall be       Trees shall be
Landscaping    be installed if not  installed as part of installed as part of
               existing             the total points if  the total points if
                                    not existing         not existing
Setbacks       Does Not Apply       Applies in new       Applies in new
                                    footprint            footprint
                                    Applies in new       Applies in new
                                    footprint or any     footprint or any
Fenestration   Does Not Apply       areas of the         areas of the
                                    existing building    existing building
                                    being modified       being modified
Entrances      Does Not Apply       Applies in new       Applies in new
                                    footprint            footprint
               Does Not Apply       Applies in new       Applies in new
Urban Forestry unless new or        footprint including  footprint including
               expanded parking     any new or expanded  any new or expanded
               lots are provided    parking lots         parking lots
 
   (e)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   Commercial and mixed-use parking.
 
                                         Requirement as a Percentage of Parking
Location                                 Requirement Listed in Section
                                         6.201(B)
                                         Minimum Maximum**
Project not located within 250 feet of a None*   100%
one- or two-family zoned property
Project located within 250 feet of a     75%     100%
one- or two- family zoned property
Project located within 1,320 feet of an
existing or approved passenger rail      50%     100%
station or stop
*Residential uses as part of a mixed-use building shall provide required
parking as listed in the residential parking table
**For mixed-use buildings and projects, the maximum parking requirement shall
be the sum of the individual requirements for all uses.
 
      (2)   Residential parking.
 
                                                   Proximity to Rail Station
Building Type/Use       Requirement                If the Development is
                                                   Within 1,320 feet of a
                                                   Rail Transit Station:
                        2 spaces per dwelling      1 space per dwelling unit.
Townhouse               unit.                      See subsection (e)(5) for
                        See subsection (e)(5) for  location requirements.
                        location requirements.
                        2 spaces per dwelling      1 space per dwelling unit;
                        unit; Plus, 1 space per    Plus, 1 space per bedroom
                        bedroom over three         over three bedrooms per
Duplex and Manor House  bedrooms per dwelling      dwelling unit.
(2+ units)              unit.                      See subsection (e)(4) for
                        See subsection (e)(4) for  location requirements for
                        location requirements for  duplexes.
                        duplexes.
                        *0.75 to 1 space required  *0.5 to 1 space required
                        per bedroom;               per bedroom;
Apartment/              Plus, 2 spaces per 500     Plus, 2 spaces per 500
Condominium             square feet of leasing     square feet of leasing
                        office and/or social rooms office and/or social
                                                   rooms.
*All partial spaces are rounded up.
 
      (3)   Other off-street parking and loading standards.
      Note: These requirements supersede the parking requirements of §
6.201(b). All other requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2 apply.
         a.   Surface parking shall not be permitted between a building front
and the street, provided however, angled, perpendicular or parallel parking
that is designed to function as on-street parking shall be permitted if it
meets the following three conditions:
            1.   The city's Traffic Engineer determines that the parking does
not adversely affect public safety or circulation and satisfies the conditions
described in §
22-175d of the City Code.
            2.   Each parking space is located adjacent to and is directly
accessible from a public street or publicly accessible private street, and
            3.   Surface parking permitted between a building front and the
street (on-street parking) and the required pedestrian walkway shall be either
dedicated as public right-of-way or be included in a public access easement
recorded in the real property records of the county. The front yard setback
shall be measured from the curb instead of the property line, and the setback
shall be no greater than 20 feet.
         b.   The required off-street parking for any use may be located off-
site, on property within 500 feet of the subject site.
         c.   Adjacent on-street parking may be applied toward the minimum
parking requirements only when it is located completely out of the travel
lanes, provided; however, this shall not reduce the pertinent maximum parking
limitations.
         d.   Joint use parking facilities may be used to meet minimum parking
requirements in accordance with the following:
            1.   The total number of spaces shall not exceed the sum of the
maximum spaces allowed for all individual uses sharing the facility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9658.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9656.jpg]
 
            2.   There must be two or more uses on the same site, or on
separate sites that are able to share the same parking spaces because their
parking demands occur at different times.
            3.   The following documentation must be submitted in writing as
part of the building permit application or site plan review:
               (i)   The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or
tenants that are sharing the parking;
               (ii)   The location and number of parking spaces that are being
shared;
               (iii)   An analysis showing that the peak parking demands for
the different uses occur at different times, and that the parking area will
supply at least the minimum number of required spaces for each use during its
respective peak parking times; and,
               (iv)   A legal instrument such as an easement or deed
restriction that guarantees access to the joint parking for all uses.
         e.   Uses located in historically significant buildings shall be
exempt from off-street parking requirements pursuant to §
6.201(b)(3). For the purpose of this exemption, historically significant
buildings shall include those determined by the Historic Preservation Officer
to be eligible, based on the applicable criteria, for:
            1.   Listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or
            2.   Local designation as either Historic and Cultural Landmark
("HC") or Highly Significant Endangered ("HSE").
         f.   Maximum surface parking lot frontage.
         Intent: The intent of enforcing a maximum surface parking lot frontage
is to establish a prominent and continuous street wall that promotes a
multimodal, pedestrian-friendly environment while reducing the visual dominance
and negative pedestrian impacts of large, street-facing surface parking lots.
            1.   The percentage of parking lot frontage along any street shall
not exceed the following maximums:
               (i)    Forty percent (40%) of the development site's total
frontage length along a project's primary streets; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9654.jpg]
 
               (ii)    Seventy percent (70%) of the development site's total
frontage length along a project's side streets.
            2.   Parking lot frontage measurements shall include the combined
frontage length of any paved and/or drivable surface that functions as part of
a parking lot's circulation, such as, but not limited to, drive aisles and
parking spaces.
      (4)   Parking location for two-family dwellings.
         a.   All parking shall be located behind the front building line.
         b.   Garage doors that face the street must be located a minimum of 20
feet behind any front wall plane of a structure facing a publicly accessible
ROW.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9652.jpg]
 
      (5)   Parking location for one-family attached (townhouse, rowhouse).
         a.   Garages must be placed entirely to the rear of the primary
structure and accessed through the use of a rear driveway or alley.
         b.   Garage doors must face the rear driveway or alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9650.jpg]
 
      (6)   Bicycle parking. Must comply with §
6.204 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (f)   Buffers, landscaping, and pedestrian lighting.
      (1)   Bufferyard and supplemental building setback.
         a.   For the purpose of this section, the MU-1 District shall be
considered a nonresidential district.
         b.   When building a two-unit attached dwelling (duplex) within the
MU-1 District, a bufferyard and supplemental setback is not required when
adjacent to a one-or-two family district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9648.jpg]
 
         c.   All uses within the MU-1 district adjacent to a one- or two-
family district, other than the uses listed in item b. above, must conform to
the supplemental building setback and bufferyard width standards required for
the Neighborhood Commercial ("E") District, as described in §
6.300(c) Area Requirements. See §
6.300(d) through (i) for bufferyard requirements.
         d.   All uses within the MU-1 district adjacent to a one-or two-family
district must use a transitional height plane of 45 degrees to portions of a
building above three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less starting from the
property line of the one-or-two-family district.
            1.   Any portion of a building three stories must be set back so
that the building does not encroach beyond the transitional height plane.
            2.   These supplemental building setbacks and transitional height
plane requirements shall not apply to buildings adjacent to one-or-two-family
districts that serve as public open space, such as parks and drainage ways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9646.jpg]
 
      (2)   Enhanced landscaping and pedestrian lighting. Street trees and
pedestrian-scaled lighting are required along all public rights-of-way in the
MU-1 district, see subsection (h)(5). Adherence to the landscape ordinance, §
6.301 is encouraged, except as here-in provided.
         a.   The Director, or their designee, may administratively approve any
modifications to streetscape requirements caused by mature trees, utility
conflicts, fire hydrants, shallow underground utilities, curb cuts or any other
obvious impediment, which could prevent the planting of a tree.
         b.   Street trees.
            1.   Trees must be planted within a planting strip or flush with
the sidewalk surface using tree grates as follows:
               (i)    Tree grates must be adjustable to allow for tree growth
and securely attached. Inner rings must be easily removed with an Allen wrench.
               (ii)    Tree grate openings shall not exceed 3/8 of an inch.
            2.   Exceptions.
               (i)   In the event that infrastructure prevents the use of at-
grade planting, a raised planter or crushed stone may be used if approved by
the Director or designee.
               (ii)    Other techniques to provide the street trees will be
considered on a case-by-case basis and may be approved by the Director or their
designee, or the Director or designee may send the matter to the Urban Design
Commission for consideration and decision.
            3.   Spacing.
 
CANOPY SIZE         SPACING (ON CENTER)
Small/Medium Canopy 25-30 ft.
Large Canopy        35-40 ft.
 
            4.   If there are no street trees existing on the project's block
face, then spacing is measured from the end of the block beginning 40 feet from
the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement requirements.
         c.   Pedestrian-scaled lighting.
            1.   New public and private development must provide pedestrian
lights within the roadside's street tree/furniture zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9644.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9642.jpg]
 
            2.   Required spacing. Pedestrian lights must be located
approximately at the midpoint between two trees and spaced a maximum of 60 feet
apart.
            3.    Pedestrian-scaled lighting style must be approved by the
Transportation and Public Works Department (TPW) and be consistent with other
pedestrian lights on the same block.
            4.   If there are no pedestrian lights existing on the project's
block face, then the spacing is measured from the end of the block. If
pedestrian-scaled lights exist, then spacing is measured from existing lights.
         d.   Section
6.301(h) "Landscape Area Required" does not apply to developments in the MU-
l district provided however, the following are applicable in MU-1:
            1.   All landscaped areas must be located outside the perimeter of
the footprint of a building or structure;
            2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas;
            3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch, live ground cover,
decorative paving, sidewalk furniture or other decorative elements;
            4.   Landscaped bioretention areas are encouraged for natural
drainage channels to reduce runoff and increase infiltration;
            5.   When there is a front yard setback of at least five feet,
front yard landscaping is required for areas outside the ground level patios,
parkways, and pedestrian walkways. Front yard landscaping must adhere to the
shrub and native plans as listed in Table A of §
6.301(h), as well as other applicable regulations described or referenced
within the MU-1 regulations.
         e.   Irrigation. An irrigation system must be installed to provide
total water coverage to all plant materials installed pursuant to §
6.301 (i) Irrigation.
      (3)   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
      Intent: The MU-1 district is intended to create a public environment in
which pedestrian safety, interest, and comfort are paramount. Therefore,
parking areas that front public streets and pedestrian pathways shall be
screened to minimize pedestrians' view of parked vehicles and the impact of
vehicle headlights.
         a.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and parallel
to a public street must be screened from the public right-of-way with
landscaping, berms, fences, or walls a minimum of 3 feet in height measured
from parking lot grade to a maximum of four feet in height.
         b.   Landscape islands, linear landscaping strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens must be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All landscape
islands and strips shall have at least one tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9640.jpg]
 
         c.   Every parking space is required to be not more than 60 feet from
a large canopy tree or 40 feet from a medium canopy tree, planted within a
median, strip or island, measured from the trunk at planting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9638.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9636.jpg]
 
         d.   Required size of landscape islands and linear landscaping strips
containing trees:
            1.   Within parking lots with non-porous surfaces: 130 square feet;
eight feet minimum width.
            2.   Planted in structured soil: 64 square feet; eight feet minimum
width. The use of approved structural soil shall be limited to landscape
islands and adjacent walkways and parking area necessary for proper tree
growth. Structural soils must not be used for fire lanes in parking lots.
            3.   Within parking lots with approved porous surfaces for parking
areas excluding fire lanes: 16 square feet. Tree trunks should be protected by
wheel stops or other physical barriers excluding curbs.
         e.   Linear landscaping strips are encouraged in lieu of landscaping
islands where possible.
      (4)   Urban forestry.
         a.   Developments with surface parking lots must provide 40% canopy
coverage over new, expanded, or reconstructed surface parking.
         b.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
comply with §
6.302 (g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
   (g)   Facade design standards.
      (1)   Parking structure facades.
         a.   Facade design. All parking structure facades that face a public
space must be designed to incorporate architectural elements and materials that
complement the adjacent building or buildings in the area.
         b.   Ground level screening. Screening must be incorporated to
minimize the visual impact of garages and parked cars at the pedestrian level.
Landscaping, including trees and shrubs, may be utilized for screening purposes
but must screen at least 50% of pedestrian level parking garage facades
immediately upon installation, with species selected to eventually provide a
full 100% screening.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9634.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9632.jpg]
 
         c.   Parking structure openings. Parking structure vehicle access
facing public and private streets, excluding alleys, shall not exceed 25 feet
along the same frontage.
            1.   For multifamily buildings less than 150 feet in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 50% of the ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
occupiable space.
            2.   For multifamily buildings 150 feet or more in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 25% of ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
occupiable space.
         d.   The property owner is responsible for maintaining all required
landscaping in good health and condition and the removal of any litter that has
accumulated in landscaped areas. Any dead, unhealthy, damaged or missing
landscaping and screening must be replaced with landscaping and screening that
conforms to this subsection within 90 days (or within 180 days where weather
concerns would jeopardize the health of plant materials).
      (2)   Facade variation.
         a.   Each new building facade that is greater than 50 feet in width
and is oriented to a publicly accessible street or open space must incorporate
each of the following scaling elements. For building facades less than 50 feet
in width, a minimum of two elements are required.
            1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
               (i)    Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
               (ii)    Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less than
one inch deep and six inches wide).
               (iii)    Foundation (water tables, rustication).
            2.   At least two variation in wall plane not less than three feet
in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for multi-story
buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window openings by
utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window elements, and/or
more pronounced architectural features such as porches, alcoves, and roof
dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9628.jpg]
 
            3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable change in
color or shade. Each change of material shall involve a minimum one-inch
variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9626.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9624.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9622.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9620.jpg]
 
         b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible street or
open space must include differentiation between the first and the upper levels
with a canopy, balcony, arcade, or other architectural features.
         c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction must contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in subsection (g)(3)a above and/or other
architectural features.
      (3)   Fenestration.
      Intent: Providing fenestration encourages interaction between the
pedestrian and the ground-story space. The intent of requiring clear
fenestration is to allow pedestrians to view activities inside the building or
displays related to those activities.
         a.   New single use commercial and mixed-use building facades fronting
publicly accessible street or open space shall meet the following requirements:
Project Type Fenestration Requirement
             Primary and Secondary Street
Project Type                         Fenestration Requirement
                                     Primary and Secondary Street
Mixed-Use and Commercial
   Ground Story (2'-12' above grad40%
   Upper Stories                  25%
Residential
   Ground Story (2'-12' above gradNone
   Upper Stories                  None
 
         b.   Clear glazing shall have a visible transmittance rating of 0.5 or
greater to count towards the fenestration requirement.
         c.   The following alternatives may count towards a portion of the
fenestration requirement and can be used in singular or in combination.
Alternatives may count no more than 50% of the total fenestration requirement.
 
Alternative                               Percentage of Alternative Counting
                                          Towards Total Requirement
Windows at the ground story but outside   40%
the 2-12' zone
Wall mounted or recessed display cases at 40%
least 4' high
Walk-up automated teller machines, video  40%
rental or similar kiosk
Translucent, fritted, patterned, or color 40%
glazing
Energy efficient windows that do not meet 40%
the .5 transmittance requirement
Outdoor dining/seating located between    60%
the building and street
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9618.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9616.jpg]
 
      (4)   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building facades
(not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible streets or
open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
         a.   Stone.
         b.   Brick.
         c.   Terra cotta.
         d.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
         e .    Cement piaster stucco.
         f.    Cement board siding.
         g.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9614.jpg]
 
      (5)   Building entries.
      Intent: The intent of building entries is to create a pedestrian-oriented
development in which buildings are oriented toward publicly accessible streets
and sidewalks.
         a.   The principle building must have its main entrance from a public
sidewalk or plaza, or from a private sidewalk or plaza that is publicly
accessible through a public use easement. Interior buildings constructed as
part of a campus development are exempt from these requirements (see subsection
(d)(4)c, Campus Development).
         b.   Primary entrances shall not be from a parking lot.
         c.   Secondary entrances from parking lots are permitted.
         d.   All public building entrances for commercial developments and
primary entrances for residential units must incorporate arcades, roofs,
porches, alcoves, or awnings that protect pedestrians from the sun and rain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9612.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9610.jpg]
 
         e.   Residential entries.
            1.    Apartments, condominiums, and manor houses with street level
units must provide individual street-oriented entries for each unit along the
primary street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9608.jpg]
 
            2.   Apartments and condominiums must provide primary entrances at
intervals not to exceed 125 linear feet of street- oriented building frontage.
Entrance spacing is measured from the edge of door to the edge of the next
door.
            3.    Townhouses must have individual street- oriented entries for
each unit.
            4.   Manor houses must have a single primary entrance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9606.jpg]
 
            5.   A duplex may have one primary entrance for each unit. Each
primary entrance into a duplex must be provided under a shared porch or one of
the entrances must be accessed from a side facade of the structure.
         f.   Commercial entries.
            1.   Each retail use with exterior ground level exposure along a
street or public space shall have an individual public entry from the street or
public space.
            2.   Entrances to corner buildings with ground floor retail uses
shall be located at the corner of the primary street.
   (h)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Signs. In addition to the development standards in
Chapter 6, Article 4, the following provisions apply:
         a.   In addition to signs allowed in
Chapter 6, Article 4, one or more attached project identifier or wayfinding
signs may be erected on each facade of the occupied space.
         Note: Doors and windows shall be included in the calculation of the
facade area.
            1.   Signs may have a total area of 10% of the area of the facade
to which the signs are attached, with a maximum aggregate area of 500 square
feet per facade.
            2.   The facade area shall be calculated by multiplying the width
times the height, with a maximum calculated height of 15 feet.
            3.   For structures exceeding 15 feet in height, allowable sign
square footage shall be calculated as 0.75 square feet per linear foot of
building facade.
      (2)   Fences, gates, and walls.
         a.   Complexes with perimeter security fencing along public streets
are prohibited.
         b.   Fences shall not be located in the area between the front
building facade and the public street frontage or public open space.
         c.   Exterior fences and gates that are located along public streets,
along private streets or walkways that are publicly accessible through a public
use easement, or along publicly accessible open space shall not extend beyond
building facades.
         d.   All fences and walls along public street frontage or public open
space that are taller than four feet must be open design.
         e.   All fences and railings must be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high-quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9604.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9602.jpg]
 
         f.   All walls must be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high-quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         g.   For a private residential patio or yard, or a commercial outdoor
dining area, a fence, railing, or low wall may extend beyond the building
facade if the following requirements are met:
            1.   Fences, railings, and walls must not exceed four feet (48") in
total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing and/
or the wall however;
            2.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence, railing and/
or wall height must not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9600.jpg]
 
      (3)   Service areas screening.
         a.   Trash and recycling collection, and other similar service areas,
must be located to the side or rear of buildings and behind the primary
structures on street frontages.
         b.   All refuse and recycling collection containers for apartments/
condominiums must be located on a concrete pad and shall be screened on 3 sides
by an opaque fence or wall. The fourth side must be an opaque gate.
         c.   The design, colors, and materials of screening elements shall be
architecturally compatible with the character of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9598.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9596.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9594.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9592.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9590.jpg]
 
      (4)   Mechanical equipment screening.
 
               Fully Screened    Permitted Screening Materials
Alternative    from Public                                     Architectural
               Right-of-Way      Landscaping Opaque Wall/Fence Screening
               (Alleys excluded)                               Elements
Wall-Mounted   •               •         •2
Roof-Mounted   •1                                            •
Ground-Mounted •               •         •2
1   Must be screened from abutting properties and the public street.
2   If an opaque wall or fence is provided, it shall be compatible with the
principle building in terms of texture, quality, material, and color.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9588.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9586.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9584.jpg]
 
      (5)   Privately owned streets and drives with public access easements.
Private streets and drives with public access easements shall be considered
public streets or right-of-way for the purpose of review for compliance with
setbacks, pocket parks, parking, screening, enhanced landscaping, facade
variations, fenestration, and other MU-1 design requirements normally based on
streets.
      (6)   Drive-in business.
         a.   Drive-in businesses may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided that no such use shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. In the MU-1 district the following requirements
shall apply:
            1.   Drive-through windows and stacking lanes shall not be located
along facades of buildings that face a street, and where possible shall be
located to the rear of buildings;
            2.   Driveways shall not be located within the front yard setback
between the building front and the street;
            3.   The design and location of the facility shall not impede
vehicular traffic flow and shall not impede pedestrian movement and safety. To
minimize conflicts with vehicular and pedestrian circulation, shared driveways
and/or driveways located off of non-arterial streets shall be used, where
possible;
            4.   Architectural elements, landscaping and/ or other screening
elements shall be provided to minimize the visual impacts of the drive-through
facility; and
            5.   The design and location of the facility hall be consistent
with any design standards or guidelines that may be applicable to the pertinent
district.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21782-07-2015, § 1,
passed 7-16-2015, eff. 7-26-2015; Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 8-1-
2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23648-05-2019, §§ 1-3, 5-11, passed 5-7-2019; Ord.
24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25189-11-2021, § 1, passed 11-9-
2021, eff. 12-16-2021; Ord. 26920-05-2024, § 1, passed 5-14-2024, eff. 7-16-
2024)
§ 4.1301 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 3, adopted August 1, 2017, repealed § 4.1301, derived
from Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed April 3, 2012, amended by Ord.
21782-07- 2015, § 2, passed July 16, 2015, which pertained to the Low Intensity
Mixed-Use (“MU- 1G”) District. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 4.1302 HIGH INTENSITY MIXED-USE (“MU-2”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the High Intensity
Mixed-Use (MU-2) District to provide areas in which a variety of higher density
housing types exist among commercial, institutional, and selected light
industrial uses. The MU-2 District is designed to accommodate and encourage
compact, walkable development forms that are more land-efficient, cost-
effective, and revenue positive for the City than low density, single-use
developments. In addition to the purpose statements above, the intent of the
MU-2 District is to:
      (1)   Promote a pedestrian-oriented urban form. In contrast to
conventional zoning standards that place a primary emphasis on the regulation
of land uses, mixed-use development standards and guidelines focus on promoting
a walkable, urban form of development, consistent with the surrounding areas
historic urban development patterns. The focus on form promotes buildings that
conform to tested urban design principles.
      (2)   Require excellence in design of the public realm and of buildings
that front public spaces. The most successful and memorable urban environments
are those in which walking down the street is appealing. Streets, plazas,
parks, and other public spaces should be comfortable and inviting, and
buildings fronting those spaces should be active and visually interesting at
the pedestrian level.
      (3)   Encourage creativity, architectural diversity, and exceptional
design. Mixed-use is intended to promote high quality design, and the
development review process for mixed-use projects is intended to promote
flexibility. Standards, as well as the development review process, are intended
to support creativity and exceptional design while discouraging uniformity.
      (4)   Promote sustainable development that minimizes negative impacts on
natural resources. Creating walkable, higher density residential districts
surrounding mixed-use districts supports sustainable development by providing
an alternative to low density development in peripheral areas. In accordance
with sustainable development principles, the mixed-use buildings and public
spaces should be designed to minimize negative impacts on air and water quality
and promote innovation in environmental design.
      (5)   Promote walkability. Walkable communities are desirable places to
live, work, and play. Walkable communities give higher priority to pedestrian
activity by creating streetscapes that are safe, comfortable, interesting, and
that accommodate a wide range of transportation modes and users. To foster
walkability, development patterns should promote a mix of land uses and
density, have an emphasis on the placement and orientation of buildings, have
properly placed parking, place a high value on the design of quality
streetscapes, provide access to transit, and provide unimpeded pedestrian
connections to multiple destinations and open space.
      (6)   Maximize connectivity and access. In order for people to feel
comfortable walking, pedestrian access and connectivity among uses and
amenities, including transit facilities, is essential. Connectivity and access
can be accomplished by creating smaller blocks or by providing access through
blocks via publicly accessible alleys, pathways, paseos, and pedestrian
boulevards. Sidewalks should form a continuous network connected by frequent,
safe street crossing.
      (7)   Promote affordable housing and mixed income communities. Design a
mix of housing based on geographic growth projections and the needs of current
and future residents to accommodate families, single occupants, the elderly and
those with disabilities. Access to transportation and services should be a key
factor in the future distribution and allocation of affordable housing.
   (b)   Review procedures for development.
      (1)   General requirements. Projects should conform to all mixed-use
standards. Staff may also refer an administrative case or a case that does not
require waivers to the UDC for failure to meet the Purpose and Intent of the
ordinance.
      (2)   General rule allowing waiver or modification of standards.
         a.   Director or designee. The Director or designee is authorized to
grant modifications to certain development standards with a maximum
modification up to 10% increase or decrease for the following development
standards:
            1.   Setbacks for additions to existing structures.
            2.   Bufferyard width.
            3.   Primary entrance separation.
            4.    Fenestration.
         b.   Urban Design Commission. Unless otherwise limited by this
section, the Urban Design Commission (UDC), may waive or modify any individual
development standards through the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness,
if the UDC finds that the proposed development is consistent with the intent
statements of the MU-2 District but does not conform to certain development
standards. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall expire if a building permit
is not received within two years of the approval of the Certificate of
Appropriateness.
         c.   Board of Adjustment. Any waiver of basic property development
related to building heights, setbacks and bulk require a variance to the Board
of Adjustment after a recommendation provided by the Urban Design Commission
prior to the public hearing of the Board of Adjustment.
         d.   Zoning Commission/City Council. Any zoning proposal requesting a
Planned Development "PD" zoning district that uses the MU-2 district as the
base zoning, inclusive of any waivers from any MU-2 design standards, must
receive a recommendation from the Urban Design Commission prior to a public
hearing by the Zoning Commission or the City Council.
      (3)   Conceptual land use plan. To facilitate compliance with the MU-
2 District regulations, a conceptual land use plan must be submitted to the
Director or designee for review and approval prior to submitting permit
applications. The conceptual land use plan must include the following:
         a.   The anticipated location of proposed streets, sidewalks and
walkways, building footprints, parking areas, landscaped areas and features,
and open space. A change of 5% or greater in land uses to a conceptual land use
plan will require a new project review and approval prior to permitting.
         b.   The conceptual site plan shall illustrate the proposed location
of land uses on the site, using the following land use categories:
            1.   Residential (single-family, one-or-two-family attached, multi-
family, etc.) Leasing offices in multifamily developments shall count towards
residential use calculations.
            2.    Commercial/industrial.
            3.    Institutional/dedicated public parks (e.g. hospitals,
schools, churches, government buildings, dedicated public parks and the likes).
            4.   Mixed-use buildings (a mix of residential and non-residential
within the same building, meeting the percentage requirements defined in
subsection (d)(7)a.
         c.   Parking facilities and private open spaces shall be classified
the same as the primary land use they serve.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9810.jpg]
 
      (4)   Proximity test. Developments that are 90% or greater residential
uses must perform a proximity test to ensure a mix of uses in the surrounding
area. No development that comprises 90% or greater residential uses shall be
permitted unless the Director, or designee determines one of the following:
         a.   The residential land use category within a 1,320-foot radius of
the proposed project site boundary, shall not occupy greater than 70% of the
total land area. The proposed development shall be included in the calculation
of this percentage. The land use are percentages shall be based on current land
uses and calculated using land use information obtained from the applicable tax
appraisal district, site visits, or property research; or
         b.   There are demonstratable unique site conditions (e.g. adjacency
to natural features, freight yards, etc.) make compliance with the conditions
of section a above impractical in certain areas of the development site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9808.jpg]
 
   (c)   Uses. In the MU-2 District, no building or land use shall be used and
no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, nor
shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued, except in accordance with the use
table in
Chapter 4, Article 12, and the supplemental standards of
Chapter 5. Residential, commercial, and institutional uses may occupy the same
building lot.
      (1)   Building types. The following non-exhaustive list of conceptual
building illustrations demonstrate the recommended building forms in the MU-
2 District. Additional building types and configurations that comply with the
intent and regulations of the MU-2 district are encouraged. All intent
statements are addressed through development standards set out in §
4.1302 (d) through (h).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9806.jpg]
 
         a.   General commercial. A development type with nonresidential uses.
Ground story spaces are flexible enough to accommodate a variety of
nonresidential uses. Upper stories are used for offices and/or other types of
compatible nonresidential uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9804.jpg]
 
         b.   Mixed-use shopfront. A development type with ground-story retail
and upper-story residential and/or office uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9802.jpg]
 
         c.   Apartment/condominium. Multi-family residential development type
that often shares a common entrance. Primary entrances are prominent and
street-facing. An elevated ground floor for residential uses is recommended to
improve privacy. Parking for an apartment/condominium building is allowed on
the side or rear of the building, but the preferred method is at the rear of
the building or within a parking structure. A townhouse form shall be
considered an apartment/condominium when the homes are on one platted lot and
not on individually platted lots with ground floor separate entrances to each
unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9800.jpg]
 
         d.   One-family attached (townhouse). A two- or three-story building
with two or more attached dwelling units consolidated into a single structure
and platted into individual lots. An elevated ground floor for residential uses
is recommended to ensure privacy. A townhouse form is regarded as an apartment/
condominium when on one platted lot and not individually platted lots with
ground floor separate entrances to each unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9798.jpg]
 
         e.   Manor house. A building that has the appearance of a conventional
single-family dwelling with three to five attached dwelling units consolidated
in a single structure. Dwelling units within a building may be situated either
wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9796.jpg]
 
         f.   Two-family attached (duplex). A building with two dwelling units
on an individual lot separated by a shared common wall. Dwelling units within a
building may be situated either wholly or partially over or under other
dwelling units.
   (d)   Property development standards.
      (1)   General yard development standards. Development shall be exempt
from Chapter 6, Article 1, §§
6.101(b),
6.101(c),
6.101(d), and
6.101(f).
      (2)   Setbacks. The chart below represents the minimum and maximum
setbacks for building and structures within a MU-2 District.
 
Requirement                   Distance
1. Primary street (min./max.) 0'/20'
2. Side street (min./max.)    0'/20'
3. Rear yard (min.)           5'
4. *Common lot line (min.)    0'
*Subject to building code spacing requirements
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9794.jpg]
 
         a.   Buildings on corner lots shall not exceed the maximum front yard
setback on primary and side streets.
         b.   Buildings may exceed the maximum 20-foot setback if angled,
perpendicular, or parallel parking on private property meets the conditions of
subsection (e)(3)a. In these situations, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the curb instead of the property line, and the setback shall be
no greater than 20 feet.
         c.   Campus Developments: Interior buildings constructed as part of a
campus development may be set back from the property line more than 20 feet if
at least 50% of the public street frontage on each block face within the
development contains buildings within the maximum setback of 20 feet. Interior
buildings setback farther than 20 feet may not be constructed until the 50%
requirement has been satisfied.
         Note: A campus development is defined as a unified group of buildings
and/or facilities located on a contiguous parcel and operated as a place of
worship, school, or hospital.
      (3)   Minimum height single-use. Two stories at a minimum 18 feet of
occupiable space as measured from the top of the finished slab at grade level
to the top of the highest wall top plate.
      Intent: The High Intensity MU-2 zoning ordinance requires a minimum of
two stories in order to promote and accommodate higher densities of land uses
within a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9792.jpg]
 
      Note: Development in the MU-2 District is exempt from §
6.100. An unroofed and unenclosed roof top terrace, and the enclosed stairwell
or elevator that strictly provides access to the terrace, shall not be included
in the measurement of the total building height. Refer to §§
5.136 and
5.137 Telecommunication Antenna and Towers.
         a.   For sloped sites, average grade is determined by calculating the
average of the highest and lowest elevation along natural or the improved grade
(whichever is more restrictive) along the front of the building parallel to the
primary street setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9790.jpg]
 
         b.   Where a lot slopes downward from the front property line, one
story that is additional to the specified maximum number of stories may be
built on the lower rear portion of the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9788.jpg]
 
      (4)   Maximum height general.
 
Building Floor                       Maximum Height in Feet
Ground floor                         20 feet
Additional floors above ground floor 15 feet per floor
Apartment/condominiums top floor     20 feet
 
      (5)   Maximum height single-use.
         a.   Generally. Five stories as measured from the top of the finished
slab at grade level to the top of the highest wall top plate.
         b.   Single-use office building. A maximum height of ten stories shall
be allowed, provided a maximum height of five stories shall be required within
250 feet of A or B residential districts with an existing one- or two-family
dwelling. Retail and restaurant uses on the ground floor are allowed and
encouraged. Buildings within 1,000 feet of property on the block bounded by
University Drive, Lancaster Avenue, Montgomery Street, and Camp Bowie
Boulevard, shall have a maximum height of 120 feet.
         c.   Single-use hotel building. A maximum height of ten stories shall
be allowed, provided a maximum height of five stories shall be required within
250 feet of A or B residential districts with an existing one- or two-family
dwelling. Retail and restaurant uses on the ground floor are allowed and
encouraged. Buildings within 1,000 feet of property on the block bounded by
University Drive, Lancaster Avenue, Montgomery Street, and Camp Bowie
Boulevard, shall have a maximum height of 120 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9786.jpg]
 
   
      (6)   Minimum residential units per acre. None, except when a residential
mixed-use project is located within 1,320 feet of an entrance to an existing or
approved passenger rail station or stop: 50.
      (7)   Maximum residential units per acre.
 
Maximum Building Height And Use                          Maximum Units Per Acre
Up to 4 stories, single use                              70 units/acre
5 stories, single use                                    Unlimited
6 stories, single use, with height bonus (structured     Unlimited
parking or open space)
7-9 stories, single use, with height bonuses (structured Unlimited
parking and open space)
10 stories, mixed-use                                    Unlimited
 
      (8)   Height bonus options. Height bonuses can be utilized cumulatively
but shall not allow for heights beyond the established ten story maximum. When
adjacent to a one- or two-family district, all height bonuses must adhere to
the transitional height plan requirements, see subsection (f)(l)d.
         a.   Mixed-use building. A maximum height of ten stories shall be
allowed provided the criteria below are met. Buildings within 1,000 feet of
property on the block bounded by University Drive, Lancaster Avenue, Montgomery
Street, and Camp Bowie Boulevard, shall have a maximum height of 120 feet.
            1.   Residential uses account for no less than 20% of a building's
gross floor area, and;
            2.   Office, eating and entertainment, and/ or retail sales and
service uses or all account for no less than 10% of the building's gross floor
area.
            3.   Live/work units may be counted toward the mixed-use
requirement, provided however, only the commercial square footage and its
required restroom space of the unit shall be used when determining the
calculation. All live/work units require a commercial certificate of occupancy
and shall:
               (i)   Not exceed 3,000 square feet.
               (ii)   Maintain between 10% and 50% commercial space.
               (iii)   Not exceed five onsite employees who do not live in the
unit.
               (iv)    Maintain Adjacency between commercial and exterior
entry.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9784.jpg]
 
         b.   Structured parking. The intent of allowing a height bonus for
structure parking is to locate and design surface parking lots, individual
garages, and large parking garages so as to reduce their visual impact or to
create public amenities or both (e.g. through aesthetic or environmental
features).
            1.   One additional story of height shall be permitted if providing
structured parking for 100% of all off-street parking for the height bonus.
            2.   One-and-two family residential garages shall not be included
in a determination of the structured parking height bonus.
         c.   Open space. One additional story of height shall be permitted if
providing a publicly accessible urban pocket park that adheres to the following
standards.
         Note: Utilizing the open space height bonus does not exempt a
development from applicable park dedication fees.
            1.   Use criteria.
               (i)   Pocket parks must provide a community benefit such as:
play activity for children, relaxing spaces to enjoy lunch or meet friends,
interactive artwork, pet-friendly areas, or small event and garden space.
            2.   Location.
               (i)   Pocket parks must front public streets and be publicly
accessible.
               Note: Refer to subsection (h)(5), Development Standards
Applicable to Privately Owned Streets and Drives with Public Access Easements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9782.jpg]
 
            3.   Size.
               (i)   Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet minimum.
               (ii)   One (1) acre maximum.
            4.   Green space.
               (i)   Pocket parks shall provide a minimum of 20% ground level
green space. Additional ground area may be impervious provided the space is
structured for recreation, including, but not limited to, sculpture gardens,
basketball courts, or tennis courts.
               (ii)   All pocket parks require tree planting. Tree planting
requirement may be waived for areas that are designed for structured active
recreation.
            5.   Seating.
               (i)   A minimum of one linear foot of seating shall be required
for every 300 square feet of gross open space.
            6.   Fencing.
               (i)   Fencing for pocket parks must conform to Subsection (h)(2)
and must remain open to the public during daylight hours.
            7.   Maintenance.
               (i)   Pocket parks that are privately owned and maintained must
be publicly accessible or;
               (ii)   Must be dedicated in perpetuity as public open space
through the recording of a public use easement and have an established long-
term maintenance agreement with the Park and Recreation Department.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9780.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9776.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9778.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9774.jpg]
 
      (8)   Applicability. Where existing buildings are affected by a rezoning
to a Mixed-Use district, certain MU-2 standards will apply to subsequent reuse
or redevelopment of the building, depending on the extent of the improvement.
The following table describes changes in intensity based on uses as defined by
the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) trip generation manual and changes
that increase the structure footprint or usable area. Usable area includes a
change of use of any outdoor area from what was not a usable, occupiable area
prior to the change.
 0% to 15% Increase >15%, but <30% Increase >30% Increase
                   0% to 15% Increase  >15%, but <30%      >30% Increase
                                       Increase
                   Required if         Required if         Required if existing
Sidewalk           existing sidewalks  existing sidewalks  sidewalks are
                   are substandard as  are substandard as  substandard as
                   determined by TPW   determined by TPW   determined by TPW
                   Does Not Apply;     Applies; Street     Applies; Street
Enhance Landscapin Street Trees shall  Trees shall be      Trees shall be
g                  be installed if not installed as part   installed as part of
                   existing            of the total points the total points if
                                       if not existing     not existing
Setbacks           Does Not Apply      Applies in new      Applies in new
                                       footprint           footprint
                                       Applies in new      Applies in new
                                       footprint or any    footprint or any
Fenestration       Does Not Apply      areas of the        areas of the
                                       existing building   existing building
                                       being modified      being modified
Entrances          Does Not Apply      Applies in new      Applies in new
                                       footprint           footprint
                   Does Not Apply      Applies in new      Applies in new
Urban Forestry     unless new or       footprint including footprint including
                   expanded parking    any new or expanded any new or expanded
                   lots are provided   parking lots        parking lots
                                                           Applies to existing
                                                           2+ story building.
                                                           If a building
                                                           addition is 60% or
                                                           more, the addition
2nd Story          Does Not Apply      Does Not Apply      shall comply with
                                                           the 2-story minimum.
                                                           An addition of less
                                                           than 60% expansion
                                                           may expand at the
                                                           same level as the
                                                           existing structure.
 
   (e)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   Commercial and mixed-use parking.
 
                                         Requirement as a Percentage of Parking
Location                                 Requirement Listed in Section
                                         6.201(B)
                                         Minimum Maximum**
Project not located within 250 feet of a None*   100%
one- or two- family zoned property
Project located within 250 feet of a     75%     100%
one- or two- family zoned property
Project located within 1,320 feet of an
existing or approved passenger rail      50%     100%
station or stop
*Residential uses as part of a mixed-use building shall provide required
parking as listed in the residential parking table.
**For mixed-use buildings and projects, the maximum parking requirement shall
be the sum of the individual requirements for all uses.
 
      (2)   Residential parking.
 
                                                     Proximity to Rail Station
Building Type/Use          Requirement               If the Development is
                                                     Within 1,320 feet of a
                                                     Rail Transit Station:
                           2 spaces per dwelling     1 space per dwelling unit.
Townhouse                  unit.                     See subsection (e)(5) for
                           See subsection (e)(5) for location requirements.
                           location requirements.
                           2 spaces per dwelling     1 space per dwelling unit;
                           unit;                     Plus, 1 space per bedroom
                           Plus, 1 space per bedroom over three bedrooms per
Duplex and Manor House (2+ over three bedrooms per   dwelling unit.
units)                     dwelling unit.            See subsection (e)(4) for
                           See subsection (e)(4) for location requirements for
                           location requirements for duplexes.
                           duplexes.
                           *0.75 to 1 space required *0.5 to 1 space required
                           per bedroom;              per bedroom;
Apartment/                 Plus, 2 spaces per 500    Plus, 2 spaces per 500
Condominium                square feet of leasing    square feet of leasing
                           office and/or social      office and/or social
                           rooms.                    rooms.
*All partial spaces are rounded up.
 
      (3)   Other off-street parking and loading standards.
      Note: These requirements supersede the parking requirements of §
6.201(b). All other requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2 apply.
         a.   Surface parking shall not be permitted between a building front
and the street, provided however, angled, perpendicular, or parallel parking
that is designed to function as on- street parking shall be permitted if meets
the following three conditions:
            1.   The City's Traffic Engineer determines that the parking does
not adversely affect public safety or circulation and satisfies the conditions
described in §
22-175d of the City Code.
            2.   Each parking space is located adjacent to and is directly
accessible from a public street or publicly accessible private street; and
            3.   Surface parking permitted between a building front and the
street (on-street parking) and the required pedestrian walkway shall be either
dedicated as public right-of-way or be included in a public access easement
recorded in the real property records of the county. The front yard setback
shall be measured from the curb instead of the property line, and the setback
shall be no greater than 20 feet.
         b.   The required off-street parking for any use may be located off-
site, on property within 500 feet of the subject site.
         c.   Adjacent on-street parking may be applied toward the minimum
parking requirements only when it is located completely out of the travel
lanes, provided however, this shall not reduce the pertinent maximum parking
limitations.
         d.   Joint use parking facilities may be used to meet minimum parking
requirements in accordance with the following:
            1.   The total number of spaces shall not exceed the sum of the
maximum spaces allowed for all individual uses sharing the facility.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9772.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9770.jpg]
 
            2.   There must be two or more uses on the same site, or on
separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking
demands occur at different times.
            3.   The following documentation must be submitted in writing as
part of the building permit application or site plan review:
               (i)   The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or
tenants that are sharing the parking;
               (ii)   The location and number of parking spaces that are being
shared;
               (iii)   An analysis showing that the peak parking demands for
the different uses occur at different times, and that the parking area will
supply at least the minimum number of required spaces for each use during its
respective peak parking times; and,
               (iv)   A legal instrument such as an easement or deed
restriction that guarantees access to the joint parking for all uses.
         e.   Uses located in historically significant buildings shall be
exempt from off-street parking requirements pursuant to §
6.201(b)(3). For the purpose of this exemption, historically significant
buildings shall include those determined by the Historic Preservation Officer
to be eligible, based on the applicable criteria, for:
            1.   Listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or
            2.   Local designation as either Historic and Cultural Landmark
("HC") or Highly Significant Endangered ("HSE").
         f.   Maximum surface parking lot frontage.
         Intent: The intent of enforcing a maximum surface parking lot frontage
is to establish a prominent and continuous street wall that promotes a
multimodal, pedestrian-friendly environment while reducing the visual dominance
and negative pedestrian impacts of large, street-facing surface parking lots.
            1.   The percentage of parking lot frontage along any street shall
not exceed the following maximums:
               (i)    Forty percent (40%) of the development site's total
frontage length along a project's primary streets, and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9768.jpg]
 
               (ii)    Seventy percent (70%) of the development site's total
frontage length along a project's side streets.
            2.   Parking lot frontage measurements shall include the combined
frontage length of any paved and/ or drivable surface that functions as part of
a parking lot's circulation, such as, but not limited to, drive aisles and
parking spaces.
      (4)   Parking location for two-family dwellings.
         a.   All parking shall be located behind the front building line.
         b.   Garage doors that face the street must be located a minimum of 20
feet behind any front wall plane of a structure facing a publicly accessible
ROW.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9766.jpg]
 
      (5)   Parking location for one-family attached (townhouse, rowhouse).
         a.   Garages must be placed entirely to the rear of the primary
structure and accessed through the use of a rear driveway or alley.
         b.   Garage doors must face the rear driveway or alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9764.jpg]
 
      (6)   Bicycle parking. Must comply with §
6.204 of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (f)   Buffers, landscaping, and pedestrian Lighting.
      (1)   Bufferyard and supplemental building setback.
         a.   For the purpose of this section, the MU-2 District shall be
considered a nonresidential district.
         b.   When building a two-unit attached dwelling (duplex) within the
MU-2 District, a bufferyard and supplemental setback is not required with an
adjacent one-or-two family district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9762.jpg]
 
         c.   All uses within the MU-2 district adjacent to one- or two-family
district, other than the uses listed in item b. above, shall conform to the
supplemental building setback and bufferyard width standards required for the
Neighborhood Commercial ("E") District, as described in Section
6.300(c) Area Requirements. See §
6.300(d) through (i) for bufferyard requirements.
         d.   All uses within the MU-2 district adjacent to a one-or two-family
district must use a transitional height plane of 45 degrees to portions of a
building above three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less starting from the
property line of the one-or-two-family district.
            1.   Any portion of a building three stories shall be set back so
that the building does not encroach the transitional height plane.
            2.   These supplemental building setbacks and transitional height
plane requirements shall not apply to buildings adjacent to one-or-two-family
districts that serve as public open space, such as parks and drainage ways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9760.jpg]
 
      (2)   Enhanced landscaping and pedestrian lighting. Street trees and
pedestrian-scaled lighting are required along all public rights-of-way in MU-2,
see subsection (h)(5). Adherence to the landscape ordinance, §
6.301 is encouraged, except as here-in provided.
         a.   The Director, or their designee, may administratively approve any
modifications to streetscape requirements caused by mature trees, utility
conflicts, fire hydrants, shallow underground utilities, curb cuts or any other
obvious impediment, which could prevent the planting of a tree, which could
prevent the planting of a tree.
         b.   Street trees.
            1.   Trees must be planted within a planting strip or flush with
the sidewalk surface using tree grates as follows:
               (i)    Tree grates must be adjustable to allow for tree growth
and securely attached. Inner rings must be easily removed with an Allen wrench.
               (ii)    Tree grate openings shall not exceed 3/8 of an inch.
            2.   Exceptions.
               (i)   In the event that infrastructure prevents the use of at-
grade planting, a raised planter or crushed stone may be used if approved by
the Director or designee.
               (ii)    Other techniques to provide the street trees will be
considered on a case-by-case basis and may be approved by the Director or their
designee, or the Director or designee may send the matter to the Urban Design
Commission for consideration and decision.
            3.   Spacing.
 
Canopy Size         Spacing (On Center)
Small/Medium Canopy 25-30 ft.
Large Canopy        35-40 ft.
 
            4.   If there are no street trees existing on the project's block
face, then spacing is measured from the end of the block beginning 40 feet from
the curb intersection to accommodate public open space easement requirements.
         c.   Pedestrian-scaled lighting.
            1.   New public and private development must provide pedestrian
lights within the roadside's street tree/furniture zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9758.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9756.jpg]
 
            2.   Required spacing. Pedestrian lights must be located
approximately at the midpoint between two trees and spaced a maximum of 60 feet
apart.
            3.    Pedestrian-scaled lighting style must be approved by the
Transportation and Public Works Department (TPW) and be consistent with other
pedestrian lights on the same block.
            4.   If there are no pedestrian lights existing on the project's
block face, then the spacing is measured from the end of the block. If
pedestrian-scaled lights exist, then spacing is measured from existing lights.
         d.   Section
6.301(h) "Landscape Area Required" does not apply to developments in the MU-
2 district provided; however, the following are applicable in MU-2:
            1.   All landscaped areas must be located outside the perimeter of
the footprint of a building or structure;
            2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas;
            3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch, live ground cover,
decorative paving, sidewalk furniture or other decorative elements;
            4.   Landscaped bioretention areas are encourage for natural
drainage channels to reduce runoff and increase infiltration of water into the
soil;
            5.   When there is a front yard setback of at least five feet,
front yard landscaping is required for areas outside the ground level patios,
parkways and pedestrian walkways. Front yard landscaping must adhere to the
shrub and native plants as listed in Table A of §
6.301(h) as well as other applicable regulations described or referenced within
the MU-2 regulations.
         e.   Irrigation. An irrigation system must be installed to provide
total water coverage to all plant materials installed pursuant to §
6.301(i) Irrigation.
      (3)   Landscaping in parking and driveway areas.
      Intent: The MU-2 district is intended to create a public environment in
which pedestrian safety, interest, and comfort are paramount. Therefore,
parking areas that front public streets and pedestrian pathways shall be
screened to minimize pedestrians' view of parked vehicles and the impact of
vehicle headlights.
         a.   Parking lots and driveways that are located adjacent and parallel
to a public street must be screened from the public right-of-way with
landscaping, berms, fences, or walls a minimum of three feet in height measured
from parking lot grade to a maximum of four feet in height.
         b.   Landscape islands, linear landscaping strips, bio-swales, or rain
gardens must be required in parking lots with 12 or more spaces. All landscape
islands and strips shall have at least one tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9754.jpg]
 
         c.   Every parking space is required to be not more than 60 feet from
a large canopy tree or 40 feet from a medium canopy tree, planted within a
median, strip or island, measured from the trunk at planting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9752.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9750.jpg]
 
         d.   Required size of landscape islands and linear landscaping strips
containing trees:
            1.   Within parking lots with non-porous surfaces: 130 square feet;
eight feet minimum width.
            2.   Planted in structural soil: 64 square feet; 8 feet minimum
width. The use of approved structural soil shall be limited to landscape
islands and adjacent walkways and parking area necessary for proper tree
growth. Structural soils must not be used for fire lanes in parking lots.
            3.   Within parking lots with approved porous surfaces for parking
areas excluding fire lanes: 16 square feet. Tree trunks should be protected by
wheel stops or other physical barriers excluding curbs.
            4.   Linear landscaping strips are encouraged in lieu of
landscaping islands where possible.
      (4)   Urban forestry.
         a.   Developments with surface parking lots must provide 40% canopy
coverage over new, expanded, or reconstructed surface parking.
         b.   Submission of applicable urban forestry plans for review shall
comply with §
6.302(g), Urban Forestry Plan/Permits.
   (g)   Facade design standards.
      (1)   Parking structure facades.
         a.   Facade design. All parking structure facades that face a public
space must be designed to incorporate architectural elements and materials that
complement the adjacent building or buildings in the area.
         b.   Ground level screening. Screening must be incorporated to
minimize the visual impact of garages and parked cars at the pedestrian level.
Landscaping, including trees and shrubs, may be utilized for screening purposes
but must screen at least 50% of pedestrian level parking garage facades
immediately upon installation, with species selected to eventually provide a
full 100% screening.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9748.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9746.jpg]
 
         c.   Parking structure openings. Parking structure vehicle access
facing public and private streets, excluding alleys, shall not exceed 25 feet
along the same frontage.
            1.   For multifamily buildings less than 150 feet in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 50% of the ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
occupiable space.
            2.   For multifamily buildings 150 feet or more in width, the
parking structure opening, the parking structure, or both combined, shall not
exceed 25% of ground floor street facade, with the remaining facade for
occupiable space.
         d.   The property owner is responsible for maintaining all required
landscaping in good health and condition and the removal of any litter than has
accumulated in landscaped areas. Any dead, unhealthy, damaged or missing
landscaping and screening must be replaced with landscaping and screening that
conforms to this subsection within 90 days (or within 180 days where weather
concerns would jeopardize the health of plant materials).
      (2)   Facade variation.
         a.   Each new building facade that is greater than 50 feet in width
and is oriented to a publicly accessible street or open space must incorporate
each of the following scaling elements. For building facades less than 50 feet
in width, a minimum of two elements are required.
            1.   Expression of building structural elements such as:
               (i)    Floors (banding, belt courses, etc. not less than one
inch deep and four inches wide).
               (ii)    Columns (pilasters, piers, quoins, etc. not less than
one inch deep and six inches wide).
               (iii)    Foundation (water tables, rustication).
            2.   At least two variation in wall plane not less than three feet
in depth or projection and not less than two stories in height for multi-story
buildings. Such elements could include patterns of door and window openings by
utilizing sills, mullions, and other scale providing window elements, and/or
more pronounced architectural features such as porches, alcoves, and roof
dormers;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9742.jpg]
 
            3.   Changes in material, material pattern, or noticeable change in
color or shade Each change of material shall involve a minimum one-inch
variation in wall plane or noticeable change in color.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9740.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9738.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9736.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9734.jpg]
 
         b.   New building facades oriented to a publicly accessible street or
open space shall include differentiation between the first and the upper levels
with a canopy, balcony, arcade, or other architectural features.
         c.   If a project consists of more than one block face, each
sequential block of new construction must contain a different building facade
to encourage architectural variety within large projects, using the required
architectural elements listed in subsection (g)(3)a above and/or other
architectural features.
      (3)   Fenestration.
      Intent: Providing fenestration encourages interaction between the
pedestrian and the ground-story space. The intent of requiring clear
fenestration is to allow pedestrians to view activities inside the building or
displays related to those activities.
         a.   New single use commercial and mixed-use building facades fronting
publicly accessible street or open space shall meet the following requirements:
Project Type Fenestration Requirement
             Primary and Secondary Streets
Project Type                         Fenestration Requirement
                                     Primary and Secondary Streets
Mixed-Use and Commercial
   Ground story (2'-12' above grad40%
   Upper stories                  25%
Residential
   Ground story (2'-12' above gradNone
   Upper stories                  None
 
         b.   Clear glazing shall have a visible transmittance rating of 0.5 or
greater to count towards the fenestration requirement.
         c.   The following alternatives may count towards a portion of the
fenestration requirement and can be used in singular or in combination.
Alternatives may count no more than 50% of the total fenestration requirement.
 
Alternative                               Percentage of Alternative Counting
                                          Towards Total Requirement
Windows at the ground story but outside   40%
the 2-12' zone
Wall mounted or recessed display cases at 40%
least 4' high
Walk-up automated teller machines, video  40%
rental or similar kiosk
Translucent, fritted, patterned, or color 40%
glazing
Energy efficient windows that do not meet 40%
the .5 transmittance requirement
Outdoor dining/seating located between    60%
the building and street
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9732.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9730.jpg]
 
      (4)   Building materials. Not less than 70% of all new building facades
(not including door and window areas) facing publicly accessible streets or
open space shall be constructed of the following masonry materials:
         a.   Stone.
         b.   Brick.
         c.   Terra cotta.
         d.   Patterned pre-cast concrete.
         e.   Cement plaster stucco.
         f.   Cement board siding.
         g.   Cast stone or prefabricated brick panels.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9728.jpg]
 
      (5)    Building entries.
      Intent: The intent of building entries is to create a pedestrian-oriented
development in which buildings are oriented toward publicly accessible streets
and sidewalks.
         a.   The principle building must have its main entrance from a public
sidewalk or plaza, or from a private sidewalk or plaza that is publicly
accessible through a public use easement. Interior buildings constructed as
part of a campus development are exempt from these requirements (see Section
(d)(4)c Campus Development).
         b.   Primary entrances shall not be from a parking lot.
         c.   Secondary entrances from parking lots are permitted.
         d.   All public building entrances for commercial developments and
primary entrances for residential units must incorporate arcades, roofs,
porches, alcoves, or awnings that protect pedestrians from the sun and rain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9726.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9724.jpg]
 
         e.   Residential entries.
            1.    Apartments, condominiums, and manor houses with street level
units must provide individual street-oriented entries for each unit along the
primary street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9722.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9720.jpg]
 
            2.   Apartments and condominiums must provide primary entrances at
intervals not to exceed 125 linear feet of street-oriented building frontage.
Entrance spacing is measured from the edge of door to the edge of the next
door.
            3.    Townhouses must have individual street-oriented entries for
each unit.
            4.   Manor houses must have a single primary entrance;
            5.   A duplex may have one primary entrance for each unit. Each
primary entrance into a duplex must be provided under a shared porch or one of
the entrances must be accessed from a side facade of the structure.
         f.   Commercial entries.
            1.   Each retail use with exterior ground level exposure along a
street or public space shall have an individual public entry from the street or
public space.
            2.   Entrances to corner buildings with ground floor retail uses
shall be located at the corner of the primary street.
   (h)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Signs. In addition to the development standards in
Chapter 6, Article 4 , the following provisions apply:
         a.   In addition to signs allowed in
Chapter 6, Article 4, one or more attached project identifier or wayfinding
signs may be erected on each facade of the occupied space.
         Note: Doors and windows shall be included in the calculation of the
facade area.
            1.   Signs may have a total area of 10% of the area of the facade
to which the signs are attached, with a maximum aggregate area of 500 square
feet per facade.
            2.   The facade area shall be calculated by multiplying the width
times the height, with a maximum calculated height of 15 feet.
            3.   For structures exceeding 15 feet in height, allowable sign
square footage shall be calculated as 0.75 square feet per linear foot of
building facade.
      (2)   Fences, gates, and walls.
         a.   Complexes with perimeter security fencing along public streets
are prohibited.
         b.   Fences shall not be located in the area between the front
building facade and public street frontage or public open space.
         c.   Exterior fences and gates that are located along public streets,
along private streets or walkways that are publicly accessible through a public
use easement, or along publicly accessible open space shall not extend beyond
building facades.
         d.   All fences and walls along public street frontage or public open
space that are taller than four feet must be open style.
         e.   All fences and railings must be architecturally compatible with
the character of the building and be constructed of high-quality materials
including: wrought iron, composite fencing, treated wood, aluminum, or metal.
Chain link, barbed wire, and concertina wire material is prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9718.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9716.jpg]
 
         f.   All walls must be architecturally compatible with the character
of the building and constructed of high-quality materials including stone,
decorative blocks, brick, cast stone, or stucco over standard concrete masonry
blocks.
         g.   For a private residential patio or yard, or a commercial outdoor
dining area, a fence, railing, or low wall may extend beyond the building
facade if the following requirements are met:
            1.   Fences, railings, and walls must not exceed four feet (48") in
total height as measured from the ground to the top of the fence, railing and/
or the wall however;
            2.   For elevated residential stoops the total fence, railing and/
or wall height must not exceed five feet (60") total.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9714.jpg]
 
      (3)   Service areas screening.
         a.   Trash and recycling collection, and other similar service areas,
must be located to the side or rear of buildings and behind the primary
structures on street frontages.
         b.   All refuse and recycling collection containers for apartments/
condominiums must be located on a concrete pad and shall be screened on three
sides by an opaque fence or wall. The fourth side must be an opaque gate.
         c.   The design, colors, and materials of screening elements shall be
architecturally compatible with the character of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9712.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9710.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9708.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9706.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9704.jpg]
 
      (4)   Mechanical equipment screening.
 
                Fully Screened Permitted Screening Materials
                from Public
Alternative     Right-of- Way  Landscaping Opaque Wall/Fence Architectural
                (Alleys                                      Screening Element
                excluded)
Wall-Mounted    •            •         •2
Roof-Mounted    •1                                         •
Ground- Mounted •            •         •2
1   Must be screened from abutting properties and the public street.
2   If an opaque wall or fence if provided, it shall be compatible with the
principal building in terms of texture, quality, material, and color.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9702.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9700.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9698.jpg]
 
      (5)   Privately owned streets and drives with public access easements.
Private streets and drives with public access easements shall be considered
public streets or right-of-way for the purpose of review for compliance with
setbacks, pocket parks, parking, screening, enhanced landscaping, facade
variations, fenestration, and other MU-2 design requirements normally based on
streets.
      (6)   Drive-in businesses.
         a.   Drive-in businesses may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided that no such use shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. In the MU-2 district the following requirements
shall apply:
            1.    Drive-through windows and stacking lanes shall not be located
along facades of buildings that face a street, and where possible shall be
located to the rear of buildings;
            2.   Driveways shall not be located within the front yard setback
between the building front and the street;
            3.   The design and location of the facility shall not impede
vehicular traffic flow and shall not impede pedestrian movement and safety. To
minimize conflicts with vehicular and pedestrian circulation, shared driveways
and/or driveways located off of non-arterial streets shall be used, where
possible;
            4.    Architectural elements, landscaping and/ or other screening
elements shall be provided to minimize the visual impacts of the drive-through
facility; and
            5.   The design and location of the facility hall be consistent
with any design standards or guidelines that may be applicable to the pertinent
district.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21782-07-2015, § 3,
passed 7-16-2015, eff. 7-26-2015; Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 1 (Exh. B), passed 8-1-
2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23648-05-2019, §§ 1, 2, 4-11 passed 5-7- 2019; Ord.
24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25189-11-2021, § 1, passed 11-9-
2021, eff. 12-16-2021; Ord. 26920-05-2024, § 1, passed 5-14-2024, eff. 7-16-
2024)
§ 4.1303 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 3, adopted August 1, 2017, repealed § 4.1303, derived
from Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed April 3, 2012, amended by Ord.
21782-07- 2015, § 4, passed July 16, 2015, which pertained to the High
Intensity Mixed-Use (“MU- 2G”) District. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 4.1304 PANTHER ISLAND (“PI”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Panther Island (“PI”)
district to provide a specific mixed-use development zone that encourages
pedestrian-oriented, urban development in the Panther Island area, and to
provide development standards and administrative procedures that encourage
high-quality, sustainable development and creative design.
   (b)   Uses. In the Panther Island (“PU”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in § G. of the
document Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and
Guidelines an adopted supplement to the city’s zoning ordinance.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the Panther Island (“PI”) district, shall be as shown in the accompanying
table. Development in this district shall be exempt from all other zoning
ordinance regulations not contained within the accompanying table or the
document Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and
Guidelines.
      (2)   The development standards may only be applied to that area known as
the Panther Island district of Fort Worth boundary described as follows and
shown in Exhibit B.17:
A parcel of land out of the A. Gouehenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, the M.
Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 106, the J. Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 115, the F.
G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045, and the A. Robinson Survey, Abstract No.
1289, in Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and
bounds as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerlines of Commerce Street and
Weatherford Street;
THENCE with the centerline of Weatherford Street, North 60 degrees East, 270
feet to its intersection with the centerline of Calhoun Street;
THENCE with the centerline of Calhoun Street, North 30 degrees West, 280 feet
to its intersection with the centerline of Belknap Street;
THENCE with the centerline of Belknap Street, North 60 degrees East, 780 feet
to its intersection with the centerline of Pecan Street;
THENCE with the centerline of Pecan Street, North 30 degrees West, 270 feet to
its intersection with the centerline of Bluff Street;
THENCE with the centerline of Bluff Street, South 60 degrees West, 97 feet to
its intersection with the extension of the southwesterly property line of Lot
4R, Block 1 of Trinity Bluff, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth
according to the plat recorded in Cabinet B, Slide 3356 of the Plat Records of
Tarrant County, Texas (P.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Northwesterly with the extension of the said southwesterly property line
to its intersection with the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Northerly with the meanders of said river centerline to its intersection
with the south right-of-way line of Greer Street projected west;
THENCE Easterly, to and along the south right-of-way line of the said Greer
Street, to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 5 of S. Terrell
Addition, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth according to the plat
recorded in Volume 1624, Page 274 of the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas,
(D.R.T.C.T.), extended south;
THENCE Northerly, to and along the east property line of the said Lot 5, to the
northeast property corner of the said Lot 5;
THENCE Northerly to the southeast corner of the Baldemar Lane street right-of-
way;
THENCE Northerly, along the east right-of-way line of the said Baldemar Lane
and then along the said right-of-way line extended north to the southeast
property corner of Lot 9-RB of North Park Business Center, being an addition to
the City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in Volume 388-124, Page
77 of the (P.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Northerly, along the east property line of the said Lot 9-RB to a point
on the north property line of Lot 2 of Holloway’s Addition, being an addition
to the City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in Volume 1530, Page
373 of the (D.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Easterly, along the north property line of the said Lot 2 to a point on
the west right-of-way line of Samuels Avenue;
THENCE Northerly, along the west right-of-way line of said Samuels Avenue to
its intersection with the south right-of-way line of North Park Drive;
THENCE Westerly, along the south right-of-way line of North Park Drive, to the
northwest property corner of Lot 10-RA of the said Northpark Business Center
Addition, said point also being on the east right-of-way line of an existing 75
foot wide Texas Electric Service Co. right-of-way (T.E.S.Co. R.O.W.);
THENCE Southerly, along the east right-of-way line of the said T.E.S.Co. R.O.W.
to the southwest property corner of the said Lot 10-RA;
THENCE Northwesterly, to the southeast property corner of Lot 11-A of Northpark
Business Center, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth according to the
plat recorded in Volume 388-218, Page 37 of the (P.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Northerly, along the west right-of-way line of said T.E.S.Co. R.O.W. to
its intersection with the southwest right-of-way line of North Park Drive;
THENCE Northwesterly, along the southwest right-of-way line of said North Park
Drive to the northwest property corner of Lot 11-B of the said Northpark
Business Center Addition;
THENCE South 10 degrees 08 minutes West, 1043 feet to a point in the centerline
of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE North, 61 degrees 53 minutes 19 seconds West, with the said river
centerline, 320.55 feet to a point;
THENCE North, 42 degrees 28 minutes 14 seconds West, with the said river
centerline, 704.18 feet to a point at the beginning of a curve to the left
having a radius of 183.55 feet;
THENCE in the westerly direction along the said curve through an arc length of
320.21 feet and across a chord which bears South 82 degrees 47 minutes 01
seconds West 281.12 feet to point on the centerline of the proposed Trinity
River by-pass channel;
THENCE Southerly, along the centerline of the said proposed Trinity River by-
pass channel to its intersection with the centerline of the Clear Fork of the
Trinity River;
THENCE Northeasterly, along the centerline of the said Clear Fork of the
Trinity River, 1,126.42 feet to a point;
THENCE South 29 degrees 52 minutes 13 seconds east 346.15 feet to a point;
THENCE South 85 degrees 07 minutes 25 seconds East 348.96 feet to a point;
THENCE North 59 degrees 20 minutes 26 seconds East to the centerline of
Lexington Street;
THENCE Southeasterly, along the centerline of said Lexington Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Bluff Street;
THENCE Northeasterly, along the centerline of Bluff Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Henderson Street;
THENCE North 30 degrees 11 minutes 24 seconds West, along the centerline of
Henderson Street, at 249.16 feet passing the intersection of the centerline of
Peach Street extended, continuing in all a total distance of 317.61 feet to a
point;
THENCE North 58 degrees 46 minutes 38 seconds East 254.82 feet to a point;
THENCE North 30 degrees 20 minutes 09 seconds West 46.79 feet to a point;
THENCE North 20 degrees 59 minutes 49 seconds West 629.42 feet to a point in
the centerline of proposed Lexington Street;
THENCE Easterly, with the centerline of proposed Lexington Street to its
intersection with the centerline of North Main Street;
THENCE South 30 degrees 24 minutes 58 seconds East, along the centerline of
North Main Street 326.66 feet to a point;
THENCE North 60 degrees 12 minutes 03 seconds East 321.00 feet to the
centerline of Commerce Street;
THENCE Southeasterly, with the centerline of Commerce Street to the Point of
Beginning.
Core Zones are more particularly described as follows:
   UL 3 West (UL3)
   A parcel of land out of the A. Gouehenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of 5th Street and the
centerline of Street 12;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 5th Street to the centerline
of Street 11;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Street 11 to the centerline
of proposed Canal “B;”
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “B” to the
centerline of West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity
River to the centerline of proposed Canal “A;”
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “A” to the
said centerline of Street 12;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Street 12 to the Point of
Beginning.
   East (UL3)
   A parcel of land out of the A. Gouhenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of 5th Street and the
centerline of Street 12;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 5th Street to the centerline
of Street 11;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Street 11 to the centerline
of proposed Canal “B;”
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “B” to the
centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of West Fork of the Trinity
River to the centerline of proposed Canal “A;”
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “A” to the
said centerline of Street 12;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Street 12 to the Point of
Beginning.
   UL-2
   A parcel of land out of the M. Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 582, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of North Main Street and the
centerline of proposed Canal “B;”
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Main Street to the centerline
of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Westerly along the said centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River
to the centerline of the Clear Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of Clear Fork of the Trinity
River to the centerline of Street 13;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Street 13 to the centerline
of proposed Canal “A;”
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of Canal “A” to the said
centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity
River to the said centerline of proposed Canal “B;”
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of Canal “B” to the said
centerline of the Point of Beginning.
   UL-1
   A parcel of land out of the A. Robinson Survey, Abstract No. 1289, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of Henderson Street and the
centerline of proposed Lexington Street North;
THENCE Easterly along the said centerline of Lexington Street 516.11 feet to a
point;
THENCE South 20 degrees 59 minutes 49 seconds east 629.42 feet to a point;
THENCE South 30 degrees 20 minutes 09 seconds East 46.79 feet to a point;
THENCE South 58 degrees 46 minutes 38 seconds West 254.82 feet to the
centerline of Henderson Street;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Henderson Street to the Point
of Beginning.
   North Main (NM)
   A parcel of land out of the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045, A.
Gouhenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, Tarrant County, Texas, being more
particularly described by metes and bounds as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of 7th Street and the
centerline of Street 10;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 7th Street to the centerline
of Commerce Street;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Commerce Street to the
centerline of proposed Canal “B;”
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “B” to the
centerline of Street 11;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Street 11 to the centerline
of 5th Street;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 5th Street to the said
centerline of Street 10;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Street 10 to the Point of
Beginning.
   Neighborhood Tower Zones N3
   South (N3)
   A parcel of land out of the R. Crowley Survey, Abstract No. 313, and the W.
Russell Survey, Abstract No. 151, Tarrant County, Texas, being more
particularly described by metes and bounds as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of Henderson Street and the
centerline of proposed Canal “A;”
THENCE Southerly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “A” to the
centerline of the Clear Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of the Clear Fork of the Trinity
River to the centerline of the proposed Trinity River by-pass channel;
THENCE Northerly along the said centerline of the by-pass channel to the said
centerline of Henderson Street;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Henderson Street to the Point
of Beginning.
   North (N3)
   A parcel of land out of the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045,
Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bound as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of the proposed 7th Street and
the centerline of the west Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “D” to the
centerline of 6th Street;
THENCE southeasterly along the said centerline of proposed Canal “D” to the
centerline of 6th Street;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of 6th Street to the centerline
of Commerce Street;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Commerce Street to the
centerline of the 8th Street;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 8th Street to the centerline
of Calhoun Street;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Calhoun Street projected
north to the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity
River to the Point of Beginning.
   Southeast (N3)
   A parcel of land out of the A. Robinson Survey, Abstract No. 1289 and the W.
Russell, Abstract No. 151, Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly
described by metes and bounds as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of Henderson Street and the
centerline of the Clear Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Henderson Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Bluff Street;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of Bluff Street to its
intersection with the centerline of Lexington Street North;
THENCE North 29 degrees 58 minutes 55 seconds West, along the centerline of
Lexington Street North, 399.15 feet to a point;
THENCE south 59 degrees 20 minutes 26 seconds West 36.98 feet to a point;
THENCE North 85 degrees 07 minutes 25 seconds West 348.96 feet to a point;
THENCE North 29 degrees 52 minutes 13 seconds West 316.15 feet to a point on
the centerline of the Clear Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of Clear Fork of the Trinity
River to the Point of Beginning.
   N2 West (N2)
   A parcel of land out of the W. Russell Survey, Abstract No. 151, the R.
Crowley Survey, Abstract No. 313, the A. Gouehenant Survey, Abstract No. 582,
the J. Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 115, and the F. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No.
1045, Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and
bounds as follows.
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of 7th Street and the
centerline of Commerce Street;
THENCE Southwest along the said centerline of 7th Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Street 10;
THENCE Southeast along the said centerline of Street 10 to its intersection
with the centerline of 5th Street;
THENCE Southwest along the said centerline of 5th Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Street 12;
THENCE Southeast along the said centerline of Street 12 to its intersection
with the centerline of Canal “A;”
THENCE Southwest along the said centerline of Canal “A” its intersection with
the centerline of Street 13;
THENCE Southeast along the said centerline of Street 13 to its intersection of
Clear Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE upstream in a southwest direction along the said centerline of the Clear
Fork of the Trinity River to its intersection with the said centerline of Canal
“A;”
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Canal “A” to its intersection
with the centerline of Henderson Street;
THENCE Northwest along the said centerline of Henderson Street to its
intersection with the centerline of the Trinity River by-pass channel;
THENCE North along the said centerline of the by-pass channel to its
intersection with Calhoun Street projected North;
THENCE Southeast along the said projected centerline of Calhoun Street to its
intersection with the centerline of 8th Street;
THENCE Southwest along the said centerline of 8th Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Commerce Street;
THENCE Southeast along the said centerline of Commerce Street to the Point of
Beginning.
   East (N2)
   A parcel of land out of the A. Gouehenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, the M.
Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 106 and the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No.
1045, Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and
bounds as follows:
BEGINNING in the centerline Canal “B” at its intersection with the intersection
of Commerce Street;
THENCE Northwest along the said centerline of Commerce Street to its
intersection with the centerline of 6th Street;
THENCE Northeast along the said centerline of 6th Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Street 3;
THENCE Northwest along the said centerline of Street 3 to its intersection with
the centerline of 7th Street;
THENCE Northeast with the said centerline of proposed 7th Street to its
intersection with the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southerly and upstream with the said centerline of the West Fork of the
Trinity River to its intersection with the projected centerline of Canal “B;”
THENCE Westerly with the said centerline of Canal “B” to the Point of
Beginning.
   South (N2)
   A parcel of land out of the A. Robinson Survey, Abstract No. 1289, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of Henderson Street and the
centerline of proposed Lexington Street North;
THENCE Easterly along the said centerline of Lexington Street 516.11 feet to a
point;
THENCE South 20 degrees 59 minutes 49 seconds east 629.42 feet to a point;
THENCE South 30 degrees 20 minutes 09 seconds East 46.79 feet to a point;
THENCE South 58 degrees 46 minutes 38 seconds West 254.82 feet to the
centerline of Henderson Street;
THENCE Northwesterly along the said centerline of Henderson Street to the Point
of Beginning.
   Northeast (N2)
   A parcel of land out of the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045,
Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity
River and the south right-of-way line of Greer Street projected west;
THENCE easterly to and along the south right-of-way line of said Greer Street,
to its intersection with the east property line of Lot 5 of S. Terrell
Addition, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth according to the plat
recorded in Volume 1624, Page 274 of the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas
(D.R.T.C.T.), extended south;
THENCE Northerly to and along the east property line of the said Lot 5, to the
northeast property corner of the said Lot 5;
THENCE Northerly to the southeast corner of the Baldemar Lane street right-of-
way;
THENCE Northerly along the east right-of-way line of said Baldemar Lane and
then along the south right-of-way line extended north to the southeast property
corner of Lot 9-RB of North Park Business Center, being an addition to the City
of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in Volume 388-124, Page 77 of the
(P.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Northerly along the east property line of the said Lot 9-RB to a point
on the north property line of Lot 2 of Holloway’s Addition, being an addition
to the City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in Volume 1530, Page
373 of the (D.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Easterly along the north property line of the said Lot 2 to a point on
the west right-of-way line of Samuels Avenue;
THENCE Northerly along the west right-of-way line of said Samuels Avenue to its
intersection with the south right-of-way line of North Park Drive; Thence
Westerly along the south right-of-way line of North Park Drive, to the
northwest property corner of Lot 10-RA of the said North Park Business Center
Addition, said point also being on the east right-of-way line of an existing 75
foot wide Texas Electric Service Co. right-of-way (T.E.S.Co. R.O.W.);
THENCE Southerly along the east right-of-way of the said (T.E.S.Co. R.O.W.) to
the southwest property corner of the said Lot 10-RA;
THENCE Northwesterly to the southeast property corner of Lot 11-A of Northpark
Business Center, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth according to the
plat recorded in Volume 388-218, Page 37 of the P.R.T.C.T.;
THENCE Northerly along the west right-of-way line of said (T.E.S.Co. R.O.W.) to
its intersection with the southwest right-of-way line of North Park Drive;
THENCE Northwesterly along the southwest right-of-way line of North Park Drive
to the northwest property corner of Lot 11-B of the said Northpark Business
Center Addition;
THENCE South 10 degrees 08 minutes West 1,043 feet to a point in the centerline
of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity
River to the Point of Beginning.
   N1
   A parcel of land in the A. Gouehenant Survey, Abstract No. 582, and the M.
Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 106, Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly
described by metes and bounds as follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of North Main Street and the
centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE Northerly along the centerline of North Main Street to the centerline of
the proposed Canal “B” as shown on the Trinity Uptown Zoning Map;
THENCE Easterly along the centerline of proposed Canal “B” to the centerline of
the West fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE upstream along the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River in a
southerly direction to the Point of Beginning.
   LaGrave Field (LF)
   A parcel of land out of the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045,
Tarrant County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of 7th Street and the
centerline of proposed Canal “D;”
THENCE Northeasterly along the said centerline of 7th Street to the centerline
of Street 3;
THENCE Southeasterly along the said centerline of Street 3 to the centerline of
6th Street;
THENCE Southwesterly along the said centerline of 6th Street to the said
centerline of proposed Canal “D;”
Thence Northwesterly along the said centerline of Canal “D” to the Point of
Beginning.
   Tarrant County College (TCCD)
   A parcel of land out of the M. Baugh Survey, Abstract No. 106, Tarrant
County, Texas, being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerlines of Commerce Street and
Weatherford Street; Thence Northeasterly with the centerline of Weatherford
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Calhoun Street;
THENCE Northwesterly with the centerline of Calhoun Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Belknap Street;
THENCE Northeasterly with the centerline of Belknap Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Pecan Street;
THENCE Northwesterly with the centerline of Pecan Street to its intersection
with the centerline of Bluff Street;
THENCE Southwesterly with the centerline of Bluff Street to its intersection
with the extension of the southwest property line of Lot 4R, Block 1 of Trinity
Bluff, being an addition to the City of Fort Worth according to the plat
recorded in Cabinet B, Slide 3356 of the Plat Records of Tarrant County, Texas
(P.R.T.C.T.);
THENCE Northwesterly with the extension of the said southwesterly property line
to its intersection with the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River;
THENCE upstream along the centerline of the West Fork of the Trinity River in a
Southerly direction to the centerline of North Main Street;
THENCE Southeasterly with the centerline of North Main Street to its
intersection with East Bluff Street;
THENCE Northwesterly with the centerline of E. Bluff Street to its intersection
with Commerce Street;
THENCE Southeasterly with the centerline of Commerce Street to the Point of
Beginning.
   Canal C - Phase 1 (“CC-1")
BEING 15.404 acres of land located in the Adolph Gouhenant Survey, Abstract No.
582, the Felix G. Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045, and the Mitchell Baugh
Survey, Abstract No. 106, City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas. Said
15.404 acres of land being more particularly described by metes and bounds as
follows:
BEGINNING at a point at the intersection of Northeast 5th Street and North
Commerce Street, from which an iron rod found at the southeast corner of Block
21 bears N 81° 15'34"W 44.90 feet, and a 5/8" iron rod found at the southwest
corner of Block 20 being located N 20° 41'20"E 45.21 feet;
THENCE N 59° 59'19"E 1,032.74 feet, along the centerline of said Northeast 5th
Street, to a point at the intersection of the centerline of Northeast 5th
Street with the west proposed right-of- way line of Ring Road;
THENCE S 26° 18'46"E 663.91 feet, along the southwest right-of-way line of
proposed Ring Road, to a point at the centerline of Northeast 4th Street;
THENCE S 59° 51'02"W 720.26 feet, along the centerline of said Northeast 4th
Street, to a point;
THENCE S 59° 57'21"W 269.19 feet, continuing along the centerline of said
Northeast 4th Street, to a point at the intersection of the centerline of
Northeast 4th Street and the centerline of North Commerce Street, from which a
½" iron rod found bears N 77°07"28"W 47.79 feet;
THENCE N 30° 03'05"W 664.41 feet, along the centerline of North Commerce
Street, to the POINT OF BEGINNING containing approximately 15.404 acres
(670,987 square feet) of land.
Panther Island (“PI”) District
Panther Island (“PI”) District
Front      80% of a building’s front facade must be located within 10 feet of the property
build-to   line
range*
Waterfront 80% of a building’s front facade must be located no closer than 5 feet and no
build-to   farther than 15 feet from the property line
range*
Rear yard* 5 feet minimum
Side yard* None required; if provided, must be minimum of three feet and maximum of 10
           feet
Units per  No restriction
acre
Units per  No restriction
building
           Canal C - Phase 1
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 180 feet and 15 floors
           LaGrave Field Zone
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 72 feet
           Neighborhood Zones N-1
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 72 feet
           Neighborhood Zones N-2 - North and South
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 96 feet
Building   Neighborhood Tower Zones N-3 - North, Central and South
height        Minimum 6 floors; Maximum 288 feet
range**    Urban Lake Zone 1
              Minimum 2 floors; Maximum 36 feet
           Urban Lake Zone 2
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 72 feet
           Urban Lake Zone 3
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 96 feet
           North Main Zone
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 20 floors
           Tarrant County College District Zone
              Minimum 5 floors; Maximum 72 feet
Notes:
*   Additional setback standards and guidelines contained in Panther Island Form Based
Zoning District Zoning Standards and Guidelines
**   See core zone boundary map in Appendix B and Panther Island Form Based Zoning
District Standards and Guidelines.
 
   (d)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Generally. Development in the Panther Island (“PI”) district is
subject to the development standards and guidelines contained in the Panther
Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and Guidelines document.
Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and Guidelines are
hereby approved by the city council and are included in the zoning ordinance by
reference. All future amendments to the Panther Island Form Based Zoning
District Zoning Standards and Guidelines must be considered by the zoning
commission and approved by the city council in accordance with the procedure
set out in
Article 5, Chapter 3.
      (2)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal walls of the front and any
sides of a building facing a public street shall not be constructed with
exposed fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal
siding shall have at least two exterior architectural features for
articulation, such as front porches, gables, awning or other exterior siding
materials. Exterior metal siding shall not be considered an architectural
feature. These provisions shall not apply to large retail stores.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness. Within the Panther Island (“PI”)
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
with the Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and
Guidelines is required as outlined in subsection (e)(2) below.
      (2)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Panther Island
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
the Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning Standards and Guidelines
is required as a condition of the following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure; and
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot.
      (3)   Pre-design conference. A pre-design conference with the planning
and development department director or a designee is required before an
applicant makes application for a certificate of appropriateness. Two copies of
a site plan containing the following information shall be submitted to the
development services director for discussion at the pre-design conference:
         a.   Footprints of all existing structures;
         b.   Proposed footprints of all new structures;
         c.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
         d.   Existing and proposed floor plans (schematic drawings);
         e.   Building setbacks;
         f.   Location of parking areas;
         g.   Location of landscape areas;
         h.   Two copies of building elevations for all sides of the building
(s); and
         i.   Photographs of the site and adjoining properties.
      (4)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the urban
design commission at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness
will be considered:
         a.   Nine copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
            4.   Building setbacks; and
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Nine copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system and location and description of street furniture;
         c.   Nine copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
         d.   Nine copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior and site materials, finishes and fixtures; and
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall be
indicated on the drawing.
      (5)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness. The urban
design commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the
authority to:
         a.   Enforce the Panther Island Form Based Zoning District Zoning
Standards and Guidelines for new construction and renovations by hearing and
deciding applications for certificates of appropriateness in accordance with
this section; and
         b.   Propose amendments to the Panther Island Form Based Zoning
District Zoning Standards and Guidelines to the zoning commission and city
council from time to time.
      (6)   Appeal.
         a.   Appeals board. All decisions by the urban design commission may
be appealed to the board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of
appeal must be filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of
notification of the urban design commission’s decision. The written notice of
appeal shall specify:
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   Hearing. The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such
appeal within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon
thereafter as reasonably practicable. The secretary of the urban design
commission shall forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the
matter, including a transcript of the tape of the hearing before the urban
design commission. In consideration of an appeal, the appeal boards shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the urban design
commission;
            2.   Hear new testimony and consider new evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the urban design commission;
            3.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
urban design commission; and
            4.   Have to options to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
         c.   Decision. The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify
the decision of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to
by the owner/appellant.
         d.   Administrative remedies. A hearing before the board of adjustment
shall exhaust the administrative remedies of the property owner/appellant under
this title. Any owner/appellant aggrieved by the decision of the board of
adjustment may file in district court.
(Ord. 19268, passed 8-10-2010, eff. 9-4-2010; Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A),
passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5, passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 22336-08-2016,
§§ 1 and 2, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 23886-10-2019, § 2, passed 10-15-2019, eff.
11-7-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 26877-04-2024, §§ 1,
2, passed 4-23-2024, eff. 7-12-2024; Ord. 28077-10-2025, §§ 1-3, passed 10-21-
2025, eff. 12-5-2025)
§ 4.1305 NEAR SOUTHSIDE (“NS”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the near southside (“NS”)
district to provide a specific mixed-use development zone that encourages
pedestrian-oriented, urban development on the near southside, and to provide
development standards and administrative procedures that encourage high-
quality, sustainable development and creative design.
   (b)   Uses. In the near southside (“NS”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except in accordance
with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in § 6 of the document
Near Southside Development Standards and Guidelines, an adopted supplement to
the city’s zoning ordinance.
Near Southside (“NS”) District
Near Southside (“NS”) District
Front setback*           0 feet minimum, 20 feet maximum
Rear yard*               3 feet minimum
Side yard*               0 feet minimum
Units per acre           No restriction
Units per building       No restriction
                         New facades along public streets and public places:
                            15 feet for buildings < 4,000 square feet
Minimum heights             18 feet for buildings 4,000 square feet
                         Ground floors of multistory nonresidential buildings:
                            minimum 10 feet, floor to ceiling
                         T4 and T4-N:               3 stories
Maximum heights**        T4-I:                      6 stories
                         T5, T5-N                   5 stories
                         T5-I                       10 stories
                         TN4-N: mix or public space 4 stories
Maximum heights with mix T4: mix or public space    5 stories
of use and/or public     T4: mix and public space   6 stories
spaces bonuses**         T5: mix or public space    8 stories
                         T5: mix and public space   10 stories
Notes:
*   Additional setback standards and guidelines contained in Near Southside
Development Standards and Guidelines.
**   See zone boundary map in Exhibit “C.” Height bonus and Fairmount
transitional height plane provisions contained in Near Southside Development
Standards and Guidelines.
 
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the near southside (“NS”) district, shall be as shown in the accompanying
table and the document Near Southside Development Standards and Guidelines.
      (2)   The development standards may only be applied to that area known as
the near southside district of Fort Worth boundary as described in Exhibits “A”
through “C,” attached hereto and incorporated by reference. (Refer to Near
Southside Development Standards and Guidelines.)
   (d)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Generally. Development in the near southside (“NS”) district is
subject to the development standards and guidelines contained in the Near
Southside Development Standards and Guidelines document. The Near Southside
Development Standards and Guidelines attached hereto and approved by the city
council are included in the zoning ordinance by reference. All future
amendments to the Near Southside Development Standards and Guidelines must be
considered by the urban design commission and zoning commission and approved by
the city council in accordance with the procedure set out in
Article 5, Chapter 3.
      (2)   Metal buildings. The exterior metal walls of the front and any
sides of a building facing a public street shall not be constructed with
exposed fasteners on more than 50% of the building. All buildings with metal
siding shall have at least two exterior architectural features for
articulation, such as front porches, gables, awning or other exterior siding
materials. Exterior metal siding shall not be considered an architectural
feature. These provisions shall not apply to large retail stores.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness. The development services director
or urban design commission (UDC) will issue a certificate of appropriateness
(COA) for approved public and private projects. In exceptional cases the UDC
may approve a COA if a project is clearly consistent with applicable
development principles but does not conform to a certain development standard
(s) or guideline(s). The COA for such projects must describe the projects’
compliance with applicable principles. Within the near southside (“NS”)
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
with the Near Southside Development Standards and Guidelines is required as a
condition for the following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for exterior renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure;
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot; and
         e.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the UDC at
which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will be considered.
At the time application materials are submitted, the applicant shall receive a
sign provided by the planning and development department that shall be posted
on the project site at street level in a location readily visible to the public
no less than ten days prior to the meeting of the UDC:
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
            4.   Building setbacks; and
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system and location and description of street furniture;
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures;
and
         f.   For all detached signs, site plans drawn to scale indicating sign
location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to scale
of at least one-quarter inch to the foot including any support structures.
Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and actual color
samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall be indicated
on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when the project conforms
to all standards and guidelines.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with the duty and
invested with the authority to enforce the Near Southside Development Standards
and Guidelines for new construction and exterior renovations by hearing and
deciding applications for certificates of appropriateness in accordance with
this section.
   (f)   Appeals.
      (1)   All decisions by the development services director may be appealed
to the urban design commission. A written notice of appeal must be filed with
the executive secretary of the UDC within ten days of notice of the decision of
the development services director or designee. The standard of review for an
appeal before the UDC shall be de novo.
      (2)   All decisions other than actions relating to designation by the UDC
may be appealed to the board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice
of appeal must be filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt
of notification of the UDC’s decision. The written notice of appeal shall
specify:
         a.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in whole
or in part; and
         b.   The grounds for the appeal.
      (3)   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt ofthe notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the UDC shall forward to the board of
adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a transcript of the tape
of the hearing before the UDC. In consideration of an appeal, the board of
adjustment shall:
         a.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the previous
recommendations and actions of the city staff and the UDC;
         b.   Hear new testimony and consider new evidence that was not
available at the time of the hearing before the UDC;
         c.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the UDC,
considering the record made before the UDC; and
         d.   Have the option to remand any case back to the UDC for further
proceedings.
      (4)   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the decision
of the UDC unless a continuance is agreed to by the owner/appellant.
      (5)   A hearing before the board of adjustment shall exhaust the
administrative remedies of the property owner/appellant under this section. Any
owner/appellant aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may file
in district court.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3- 2012; Ord. 20985-10-2013, § 1,
passed 10-7- 2013, eff. 11-5-2013; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5, passed 6-3-2014;
Ord. 21670-03-2015, § 1, passed 3-3-2015, eff. 3-19-2015; Ord. 23586-03- 2019,
§ 1, passed 3-5-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25329-02-
2022, § 1, passed 2-8-2022, eff. 3-22-2022; Ord. 26242-06- 2023, § 1, passed 6-
13-2023, eff. 7-11-2023; Ord. 28040-09-2025, § 1, passed 9-30-2025, eff. 12-5-
2025)
§ 4.1306 CAMP BOWIE (“CB”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Camp Bowie district to
provide a more functional and attractive community through the use of
recognized principles of urban design and allow property owners flexibility in
land use. The design standards and guidelines and administrative procedures for
new construction and certain renovations in the area prescribe a higher level
of detail in building design and form.
   (b)   Uses. In the Camp Bowie (“CB”) district, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued except in accordance
with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in § 5 of the document
“Camp Bowie Boulevard Revitalization Code,” an adopted supplement to the city’s
zoning ordinance.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the Camp Bowie (“CB”) district is listed below by character zone and shall
be as shown in the document Camp Bowie Boulevard Revitalization Code.
      (2)   The development standards may only be applied to that area known as
the Camp Bowie district of Fort Worth, boundary as described in Exhibits “A”
and “B,” attached here to and incorporated by reference.
Highway Commercial Zone
Highway Commercial Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (neighborhood street/civic space)              minimum, 20
                                                                 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard/local street/highway)               minimum, 40
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side and rear (from property line)                   0 ft.
   Building height                                            6 stories
                                                                 maximum
Ridglea Gateway Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (neighborhood street/civic space)              minimum, 20
                                                                 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard/local street)                       minimum, 30
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side and rear (from property line)                   0 ft.
   Building height                                            5 stories
                                                                 maximum
Ridglea Urban Village Core North Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          5 ft. minimum,
                                                                 10 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 75
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            3 stories
                                                                 maximum
Ridglea Urban Village Core South Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          5 ft. minimum,
                                                                 10 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 75
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            10 stories
                                                                 maximum
General Corridor Mixed Use Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          minimum, 20
                                                                 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 75
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            6 stories
                                                                 maximum
Industrial Arts Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          minimum, 20
                                                                 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 30
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            5 stories
                                                                 maximum
Western Business District Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          minimum, 20
                                                                 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 75
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            5 stories
                                                                 maximum
Transition Zone
   Setbacks (dependent on street classification in regulating  
plan)
      Front (neighborhood street and civic space)          5 ft. minimum,
                                                                 10 ft. maximum
                                                                 10 ft.
      Front (boulevard and local streets)                  minimum, 30
                                                                 ft. maximum
      Side or rear (distance from property line)           0 ft.
   Building height                                            3 stories
                                                                 maximum
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the Camp Bowie (“CB”)
district is subject to the development standards and guidelines contained in
the Camp Bowie District Boulevard Revitalization Code document, attached as
Exhibit “C.” The Camp Bowie District Boulevard Revitalization Code is hereby
approved by the city council and included in the zoning ordinance by reference.
All future amendments to the Camp Bowie District Boulevard Revitalization Code
must be considered by the zoning commission and approved by the city council in
accordance with the procedure set out in
Article 5, Chapter 3.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Camp Bowie
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
the Camp Bowie Boulevard Revitalization Code is required as a condition for the
following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure;
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot; and
         e.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will
be considered. At the time application materials are submitted, the applicant
shall receive a sign provided by the planning and development department that
shall be posted on the project site at street level in a location readily
visible to the public no less than ten days prior to the meeting of the UDC:
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
            4.   Building setbacks; and
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system and location and description of street furniture;
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site;
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures;
and
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when the project conforms
to all standards and guidelines of the Camp Bowie Boulevard Revitalization
Code. The director may refer any case to the UDC for review.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with and invested
with the authority to enforce the Camp Bowie Boulevard Revitalization Code for
new construction and exterior renovations by hearing and deciding applications
for certificates of appropriateness with this section.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the development services director may be appealed
to the urban design commission. A written notice of the appeal must be filed
with the executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days of
notice of the decision of the development services director or designee. The
standard of review before the UDC shall be de novo.
      (2)   All decisions by the urban design commission may be appealed to the
board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of the
urban design commission’s decision.
         a.   The written notice of appeal shall specify:
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the urban design commission shall
forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a
transcript of the tape of the hearing before the urban design commission. In
consideration of an appeal, the board of adjustment shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the urban design
commission;
            2.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
urban design commission, considering the record made before the urban design
commission; and
            3.   Have the option to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
         c.   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to by
the owner/appellant.
(Ord. 20159-04-2012, § 1 (Exh. A), passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5,
passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 22337-08-2016, § 1, passed 8-2- 2016; Ord. 24030-02-2020,
§ 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.1307 TRINITY LAKES (“TL”) DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Trinity Lakes district to
provide a more functional and attractive community through the use of
recognized principles of urban design and allow property owners flexibility in
land use. The design standards and guidelines and administrative procedures for
new construction and certain renovations in the area prescribe a higher level
of detail in building design and form.
   (b)   Uses. In the Trinity Lakes (“TL”) district, no building or land shall
be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued except in accordance
with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in the document
Trinity Lakes Development Code, an adopted supplement to the city’s zoning
ordinance.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the Trinity Lakes (“TL”) District are listed below by character zone and
shall be as shown in the document Trinity Lakes Development Code.
      (2)   The development standards may only be applied to that area known as
the Trinity Lakes district of Fort Worth, boundary as described in Exhibits “A”
and “B,” attached here to and incorporated by reference.
Boulevard Mixed Use Zone
Boulevard Mixed Use Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in  
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   0 ft. minimum, 10 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 75 ft. maximum
   Side and Rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 3 stories maximum
Village Mixed Use Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   5 ft. minimum, 10 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 75 ft. maximum
   Side and rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 6 stories maximum
Highway Mixed Use Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   5 ft. minimum, 10 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/Type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 75 ft. maximum
   Side and rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 6 stories maximum
Campus Commercial Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   5 ft. minimum, 10 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/Type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 10 ft. maximum
   Side and rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 15 stories maximum
Transition Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   5 ft. minimum, 20 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/Type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 30 ft. maximum
   Side and rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 3 stories maximum
Neighborhood Zone
Setbacks (dependent on street classification in
regulating plan)
   Front (Type “A” street/civic space)   0 ft. minimum, 20 ft. maximum
   Front (Boulevard/Type “B” street)     0 ft. minimum, 30 ft. maximum
   Side and rear (from property line)        0 ft. minimum
Building height                                 3 stories maximum
 
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the Trinity Lakes (“TL”)
district is subject to the development standards and guidelines contained in
the Trinity Lakes Development Code document, the current version of which is
attached as Exhibit “A” to Ord. 21359-08-2014 and is amended as set out in
exhibits to Ords. 21670-03-2015, 21671-03-2015, 25191-11-2021, 26168-05- 2023
and 27888-08-2025. The Trinity Lakes Development Code is hereby approved by the
city council and included in the zoning ordinance by reference. All future
amendments to the Trinity Lakes Development Code must be considered by the
urban design commission, the zoning commission and approved by the city council
in accordance with the procedure set out in
Article 5, Chapter 3.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Trinity Lakes
district, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
the Trinity Lakes Development Code is required as a condition for the
following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure;
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot; and
         e.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will
be considered.
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures;
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures;
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property;
            4.   Building setbacks;
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs, and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system, and location and description of street furniture.
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site.
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material.
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures.
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when the project conforms
to all standards and guidelines of the Trinity Lakes Development Code. The
director may refer any case to the UDC for review.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with and invested
with the authority to enforce the Trinity Lakes Development Code for new
construction and exterior renovations by hearing and deciding applications for
certificates of appropriateness with this section.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the development services director may be appealed
to the urban design commission. A written notice of the appeal must be filed
with the executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days of
notice of the decision of the development services director or designee. The
standard of review before the UDC shall be de novo.
      (2)   a.   All decisions by the urban design commission may be appealed
to the board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be
filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of
the urban design commission’s decision. The written notice of appeal shall
specify:
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   The board of adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the urban design commission shall
forward to the board of adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a
transcript of the tape of the hearing before the urban design commission. In
consideration of an appeal, the board of adjustment shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the urban design
commission;
            2.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
urban design commission, considering the record made before the urban design
commission;
            3.   Have the option to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
         c.   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to by
the owner/appellant.
(Ord. 20511-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-22-2012; Ord. 20950-09-
2013, §§ 1, 2, passed 9-17-2013, eff. 10-4-2013; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 5,
passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 21359-08-2014, § 1, passed 8-5-2014, eff. 8-12-2014; Ord.
21671-03- 2015, § 1, passed 3-3-2015, eff. 3-19-2015; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22,
passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25191-11-2021, § 1, passed 11-9-2021, eff. 12-9-2021;
Ord. 26168-05-2023, § 1, passed 5-9-2023, eff. 5-30-2023; Ord. 27888-08-2025, §
1, passed 8-12-2025, eff. 10-22-2025)
§ 4.1308 BERRY/UNIVERSITY (“BU”) DISTRICT.
Editor’s note:
   The Attachment to Ord. 23647-05-2019, titled Exhibit_A is on file in the
City Secretary’s Office.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Berry/University Form
Based District to provide a more functional and attractive community through
the use of recognized principles of urban design and allow property owners
flexibility in land use. The design standards and guidelines and administrative
procedures for new construction and certain renovations in the area prescribe a
higher level of detail in building design and form.
   (b)   Uses. In the Berry/University ("BU") District, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued except in
accordance with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in the
document "Berry/University Form Based Code," an adopted supplement to the
city's zoning ordinance.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the Berry/University ("BU") District are as described by sub-districts
contained and as shown in the document "Berry/University Form Based Code."
      (2)   The development standards may only be applied to that area known as
the Berry/University District of Fort Worth, boundary as described in Exhibits
B.34 and B.35, attached to Ordinance 22593-02-2017, added to
Appendix B of the zoning ordinance and incorporated by reference.
   (d)   Other development standards. Development in the Berry/University
("BU") District is subject to the development regulations contained in the
"Berry/University Form Based Code" document, attached as Exhibit "A" to
Ordinance 23647-05-2019. The Berry/University Form Based Code is hereby
approved by the city council and included in the zoning ordinance by reference.
All future amendments to the Berry/University Form Based Code must be
considered by the urban design commission, the zoning commission and approved
by the city council in accordance with the procedure set out in Chapter 3,
Article 5 of the zoning ordinance.
   (e)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Berry/
University District, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting
compliance the Berry/University Form Based Code is required as a condition for
the following:
         a.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure; and
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot.
         e.   Acceptance by the planning and development department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the planning and development department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will
be considered.
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures.
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures.
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property.
            4.   Building setbacks.
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters, and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs, and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system, and location and description of street furniture.
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site.
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material.
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures.
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The development services director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when the project conforms
to all standards and guidelines of the Berry/University Form Based Code. The
director or designee may refer any case to the UDC for review.
         b.   The urban design commission is hereby charged with and invested
with the authority to enforce the Berry/University Form Based Code for new
construction and exterior renovations by hearing and deciding applications for
certificates of appropriateness with this section.
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the
urban design commission. A written notice of the appeal must be filed with the
executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days of notice of
the decision of the development services director or designee. The standard of
review before the UDC shall be de novo.
      (2)   a.   All decisions by the urban design commission may be appealed
to the board of adjustment by the applicant. A written notice of appeal must be
filed with the city secretary within ten days after receipt of notification of
the urban design commission's decision. The written notice of appeal shall
specify:
            1.   That the decision of the board is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
            2.   The grounds for the appeal.
         b.   The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the Urban Design Commission shall
forward to the Board of Adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a
transcript of the tape of the hearing before the Urban Design Commission. In
consideration of an appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall:
            1.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the
previous recommendations and actions of the city staff and the urban design
commission;
            2.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the
urban design commission, considering the record made before the urban design
commission;
            3.   Have the option to remand any case back to the urban design
commission for further proceedings.
         c.   The board of adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the
decision of the urban design commission unless a continuance is agreed to by
the owner/appellant.
(Ord. 22593-02-2017, § 1, passed 2-7-2017; Ord. 23647-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-7-
2019, eff. 12-25-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 4.1309 STOCKYARDS (“SY”) DISTRICT.
Editor’s note:
   The Attachment to Ord. 22703-05-2017, titled Exhibit_A is on file in the
City Secretary’s Office.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the Stockyards Form Based
District to provide a more functional and attractive community through the use
of recognized principles of historic preservation and urban design and allow
property owners flexibility in land use. The design standards and guidelines
and administrative procedures for new construction and certain renovations in
the area prescribe a higher level of detail in building design and form.
   (b)   Uses. In the Stockyards ("SY") District, no building or land shall be
used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged, nor shall a Certificate of Occupancy be issued except in accordance
with the use tables and supplemental standards contained in the document "Fort
Worth Stockyards Form Based Code and Design Guidelines," an adopted supplement
to the city's Zoning Ordinance.
   (c)   Property development standards.
      (1)   The minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings
in the Stockyards ("SY") District are as described by sub-districts contained
and as shown in the document "Fort Worth Stockyards Form Based Code and Design
Guidelines."
      (2)   The Fort Worth Stockyards Form Based code and Design Guidelines
development standards and guidelines may only be applied to that area known as
the Stockyards District of Fort Worth, boundary as described in Exhibit B.33,
as amended and attached hereto, added to Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance and
incorporated by reference.
   (d)   Relationship of Stockyards District to other Overlay Zoning Districts.
Alterations, additions, and new construction on properties with a local
historic designation, with the exception of the demolition delay ("DD")
designation, located within or partially within the boundary of the Stockyards
District properties shall be under the sole jurisdiction of the Historic and
Cultural Landmarks Commission. Provided however, any property designated
demolition delay ("DD") is subject to review by the Historic and Cultural
Landmarks Commission.
   (e)   Other development standards. Development in the Stockyards ("SY")
District is subject to the development regulations contained in the "Stockyards
Form Based Code and Design Guidelines" document, attached as Exhibit "A". The
Stockyards Form Based Code and Design Guidelines is hereby approved by the city
council and included in the Zoning Ordinance by reference. All future
amendments to the Fort Worth Stockyards Form Based Code and Design Guidelines
must be considered by the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission, the Urban
Design Commission, the Zoning Commission with respect to their area of
authority and approved by the city council in accordance with the procedure set
out in Article 5, Chapter 3.
   (f)   Development review process.
      (1)   Certificate of appropriateness required. Within the Stockyards
District, issuance of a certificate of appropriateness reflecting compliance
the Stockyards Form Based Code and Design Guidelines is required as a condition
for the following:
         a.   Acceptance by the Planning and Development Department of an
application for a building permit for construction of a new structure;
         b.   Acceptance by the Planning and Development Department of an
application for a building permit for expansion of an existing structure;
         c.   Acceptance by the Planning and Development Department of an
application for a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other
alteration of an existing structure; and
         d.   Construction of a surface parking lot.
         e.   Acceptance by the Planning and Development Department of an
application for a sign permit.
      (2)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. The following
materials shall be submitted to the Planning and Development Department in
connection with an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The
materials must be submitted at least 21 days before the meeting of the design
review board at which the application for a certificate of appropriateness will
be considered.
         a.   Copies of site plan including:
            1.   Footprints of all existing structures.
            2.   Proposed footprint of all new structures.
            3.   Existing structures adjacent to the property.
            4.   Building setbacks.
            5.   Location of parking areas, parking lot islands, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, loading areas, walls or fences, utilities, lighting,
signage, at-grade mechanical units, dumpsters, and all other site improvements.
         b.   Copies of landscape plan including location and dimension of
areas to be landscaped (including private property, adjoining right-of-way and
parking lot islands), total amount of landscaped area, location, number and
planting size of all trees, shrubs, and groundcover, location and coverage of
irrigation system, and location and description of street furniture.
         c.   Copies of schematic floor plans depicting the arrangement of
interior spaces, location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment,
electrical meter and utility locations. First floor site plans should show the
relationship between the first floor and the site.
         d.   Copies of schematic building elevations for all sides of the
building(s) showing design of all elevations, existing grade, proposed grade,
finish floor elevations, roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location
and type of outdoor light fixtures, design and location of all wall sign(s) and
notations regarding exterior colors and material;
         e.   Material specification outline with samples, brochures and/or
photographs of all exterior building and site materials, finishes and fixtures.
         f.   For all detached signs, nine site plans drawn to scale indicating
sign location and drawings of proposed sign, lettering and graphics, drawn to
scale of at least one-quarter-inch to the foot including any support
structures. Colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing and
actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination shall
be indicated on the drawing.
      (3)   Authority to approve certificate of appropriateness.
         a.   The Development Services Director or designee is hereby charged
with the duty and invested with the authority to approve a certificate of
appropriateness for new construction and renovations when the project conforms
to all standards and guidelines of the Fort Worth Stockyards Form Based Code
and Design Guidelines, with the exception of those properties with a local
historic designation. The director or designee may refer any case to the UDC
for review.
         b.   The Urban Design Commission, with the exception of those
properties with a local historic designation, is hereby charged with and
invested with the authority to enforce the Fort Worth Stockyards Form Based
Code and Design Guidelines for new construction and exterior renovations by
hearing and deciding applications for certificates of appropriateness with this
section.
   (g)   Appeal.
      (1)   All decisions by the Development Services Director may be appealed
to the Urban Design Commission or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks
Commission with respect to their area of authority. A written notice of the
appeal must be filed with the Executive Secretary of the Urban Design
Commission or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission within ten days of
notice of the decision of the Development Services Director or designee. The
standard of review before the Urban Design Commission or the Historic and
Cultural Landmarks Commission shall be de novo.
      (2)   All decisions by the Urban Design Commission or the Historic and
Cultural Landmarks Commission may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment by the
applicant. A written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Secretary
within ten days after receipt of notification of the Urban Design Commission's
or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission's decision. The written
notice of appeal shall specify:
         a.   That the decision of the commission is unreasonable, either in
whole or in part; and
         b.   The grounds for the appeal.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as
reasonably practicable. The secretary of the Urban Design Commission or
Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission shall forward to the Board of
Adjustment a complete record of the matter, including a transcript of the tape
of the hearing before the Urban Design Commission or the Historic and Cultural
Landmarks Commission. In consideration of an appeal, the Board of Adjustment
shall:
         a.   Hear and consider testimony and evidence concerning the previous
recommendations and actions of the city staff and the Urban Design Commission
or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission;
         b.   Apply the substantial evidence test to the decision of the Urban
Design Commission or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission,
considering the record made before the Urban Design Commission or the Historic
and Cultural Landmarks Commission;
         c.   Have the option to remand any case back to the Urban Design
Commission or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks Commission for further
proceedings.
      (4)   The Board of Adjustment may uphold, reverse or modify the decision
of the Urban Design Commission or the Historic and Cultural Landmarks
Commission unless a continuance is agreed to by the owner/appellant.
(Ord. 22703-05-2017, § 1, passed 5-2-2017; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020; Ord. 25911-12-2022, § 1, passed 12-13-2022, eff. 1-4-2023; Ord. 27064-
08-2024, § 1, passed 8-13-2024, eff. 9-19-2024)
CHAPTER 5: SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS
Section
Article 1: Standards for Selected Uses
   
5.100   General
   
5.101   Ambulance dispatch station
   
5.102   Appliance sales
   
5.103   Assaying
   
5.104   Automotive repair; paint and body shop
   
5.105   Game room
   
5.106   Bed and breakfast home
   
5.107   Bed and breakfast inn
   
5.107A   Lodging houses
   
5.108   Car wash
   
5.109   Reserved
   
5.110   Community home
   
5.111   Day care center
   
5.112   Drive-in business
   
5.113   Firewood sales
   
5.114   Greenhouse or plant nursery
   
5.115   Group home I or II
   
5.116   Hotel, motel or inn
   
5.116.B   Industrialized housing
   
5.116.A   Home occupations
   
5.117   Kennel
   
5.118   Kindergarten
   
5.119   Reserved
   
5.120   Manufacturing
   
5.121   Metal casting
   
5.122   Metal foundry or fabrication plant
   
5.123   Metal stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching
   
5.124   Newspaper distribution center
   
5.125   Pawnshop
   
5.126   Print center, commercial
   
5.127   Probation or parole office
   
5.128   Recording studio
   
5.129   Recreational vehicle park
   
5.130   Recycling collection facility
   
5.131   Sheet metal shop
   
5.132   Stable, commercial
   
5.133   Storage, non accessory outside
   
5.134   Store, large retail
   
5.135   Swimming pool, commercial
   
5.136   Telecommunications antenna
   
5.137   Telecommunications tower and stealth telecommunication tower
   
5.138   Theater, movie theater or auditorium
   
5.139   Terminal: truck, freight, rail or water
   
5.140   Utility transmission tower or distribution line; natural gas compressor
stations
   
5.141   Vehicle junkyard
   
5.142   Veterinary clinic
   
5.143   Warehouse or bulk storage
   
5.144   Fresh water fracture ponds
   
5.145   Farmers’ market
   
5.146   Urban agriculture and community gardens
   
5.147   Halfway houses
   
5.148   Horse, dog or automotive racing
   
5.149   Landfill, waste transfer station, government recycling drop off center,
recycling center with outdoor processing and stockpiling, household hazardous
waste or waste tire facility
   
5.150   Mining, quarrying, dredging or excavation
   
5.151   Small box discount store
   
5.152   Retail smoke shop
   
5.153   Boarding home facilities
   
5.154   Bars or taverns
   
5.155   Shelter
   
5.156   Batch plant, asphalt or concrete (permanent)
Article 2: Sexually Oriented Businesses
   
5.200   Regulations affecting all sexually oriented businesses; purpose and
intent
   
5.201   Classifications
   
5.202   Prohibited locations of any type of sexually oriented business
   
5.203   Specialized certificate of occupancy
   
5.204   Employee background checks
   
5.205   General regulations for sexually oriented businesses
   
5.206   Conduct of employees
   
5.207   Hours of operation
   
5.208   Interior of the of sexually oriented businesses
   
5.209   Exterior appearance of sexually oriented businesses
   
5.210   Sign requirements
   
5.211   Additional regulations for adult entertainment cabarets
   
5.212   Additional regulations for escort agencies
   
5.213   Additional regulations for outcall businesses
   
5.214   Additional regulations for nude modeling businesses
   
5.215   Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture
theaters
   
5.216   Additional regulations for adult motel
   
5.217   Additional regulations for adult arcades
   
5.218   Display of sexually explicit material to minors
   
5.219   Enforcement
   
5.220   Revocation
   
5.221   Injunction
Article 3: Accessory Uses
   
5.300   General
   
5.301   Accessory uses on residential lots
   
5.302   Accessory uses on nonresidential lots
   
5.303   Reserved
   
5.304   Reserved
   
5.305   Fences
   
5.306   Storage or display in commercial districts, outdoor
   
5.307   Large animals
   
5.308   Docks, piers and boathouses
Article 4: Temporary Uses
   
5.400   Amusement, outdoor (temporary)
   
5.401   Batch plant, asphalt or concrete (temporary)
   
5.402   Garage or other occasional sale
   
5.403   Model home
   
5.404   Residence for security purposes, temporary
   
5.405   Portable trailer - residential sales, construction or related storage
   
5.406   Mobile vendors
ARTICLE 1: STANDARDS FOR SELECTED USES
§ 5.100 GENERAL.
   (a)   Relationship to use tables. The supplemental use standards of this
article shall apply only to uses that are so designated in the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8. Where the use tables do not indicate that supplemental use standards apply,
the conditions set forth in this article shall not apply.
   (b)   Additional conditions. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city
from imposing additional conditions during either the special exception,
conditional use permit or planned unit development review process.
   (c)   Distance measurements. Unless otherwise noted, all measurements are in
a straight line (ignoring intervening structures) from the property line of the
specified use to the boundary of the designated district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 9, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.101 AMBULANCE DISPATCH STATION.
   An ambulance dispatch station may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8, and
12, provided that permits shall be for a limited period of time as specified by
the city council.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.102 APPLIANCE SALES.
   Electrical, gas, plumbing and heating appliances and supply sales; and
electrical, gas, plumbing and heating repair and installation services may be
permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided that the use is limited to shops that serve the immediate adjacent
neighborhood.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.103 ASSAYING.
   No assaying of gold or silver shall be permitted in the “I” or “J” district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.104 AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR; PAINT AND BODY SHOP.
   Automotive repair and lubrication, oil changes, paint and body work and
other maintenance services are permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   All repairs must be conducted within an enclosed building.
   (b)   Vehicle storage requirements for automotive repair; paint and body
shops near one or two-family residential use.
      (1)   Screening.
         a.   Automotive repair; paint and body shops located on property
adjacent to a one- or two-family residential use must screen all vehicles that
have been accepted for repairs from view from such residential use by parking/
storing the vehicles within a building or by providing a six-foot solid
screening fence or six-foot solid screen evergreen hedge along the property
line adjacent to, or across an alley from, the one or two-family residential
use. The solid screen evergreen hedge shall planted be in accordance with the
zoning ordinance landscaping and buffer requirements.
         b.   All other automotive repair; paint and body shops within 200 feet
from any one or two-family residential use must screen all vehicles that have
been accepted for repairs from view from such residential use by parking/
storing the vehicles within a building or by providing a six-foot solid
screening fence or six-foot solid screen evergreen hedge on all property lines
facing the residential use. The measurement of the distance between the
automotive repair or paint and body shop and the one or two-family residential
use shall be along the nearest property line of the one- or two-family
residential use to the nearest property line of the automotive repair or paint
and body shop, along street lines and in a direct line across intersections.
The solid screen evergreen hedge shall planted be in accordance with the zoning
ordinance landscaping and buffer requirements.
      (2)   Overnight vehicle storage requirements.
         a.   No more than two vehicles per bay or repair/inspection station
that have been accepted for repairs by the repair, paint or body shop may be
stored/parked outside after regular business hours unless the vehicles in
excess of two per bay or repair/inspection station are completely enclosed:
            1.   Behind a minimum six-foot solid screening fence in accordance
with this section;
            2.   Behind a minimum six-foot solid screen evergreen hedge; or
            3.   Within a building.
         b.   The solid screen evergreen hedge shall planted be in accordance
with the zoning ordinance landscaping and buffer requirements.
      (3)   Vehicle storage requirements for wrecked or dismantled vehicles.
All wrecked or dismantled vehicles must be stored in an enclosed building or
completely enclosed behind a minimum six-foot solid screening fence or a
minimum six-foot solid screen evergreen hedge. The solid screen evergreen hedge
shall planted be in accordance with the zoning ordinance landscaping and buffer
requirements.
   (c)   No repairs shall be conducted on any premises that adjoin any
residential district boundary.
   (d)   No automobile repair or service facility shall be permitted to have
bay doors facing a one- or two-family district.
   (e)   (1)   No vehicle retained for repairs may be stored for more than 60
days from the date the vehicle is accepted for repair. The 60-day time limit
may be extended to a total of 180 days from the date the vehicle is accepted
for repair if the automotive repair or paint and body shop has begun the
process to obtain a lien on the vehicle pursuant to state law. Extension beyond
this time shall be considered a change in use of the property and the board of
adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to grant any variance to extend the 60-
day or the 180-day period.
      (2)   The time limit in subsection (e)(1) above shall not apply to the
repair and/or conditioning of antique vehicles and race car fabrication if the
automotive repair or paint and body shop is located in an industrially zoned
district.
      (3)   The time limit in subsection (e)(1) above shall not apply to any
vehicle ordered by a court or mandated by arbitration or mediation to be stored
by the automotive repair or paint and body shop.
   (f)   Any property used as an automotive repair, paint or body shop located
in a “MU-2,” “I,” “J” or “K” district must comply with subsections (b) and (e)
above. Further, such facilities located in an “MU-2” or MU-2G” district must
also comply with §§
4.1302(g)(5) and 4.1303(g)(5) (Fences and Gates) of the respective districts.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14911, § 1, passed 12-18-2001; Ord. 15166,
§ 1, passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17093, § 5, passed 8-8-2006)
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that § 4 of Ord. 15166 states, “All automotive repair,
paint and body shops shall comply with §
5.104(b) no later than January 1, 2003.
§ 5.105 GAME ROOM.
   A game room as defined in §
23-22 of the City Code is not permitted in all zoning districts. A conditional
use permit overlay shall not be granted for a game room.
(Ord. 27381-12-2024, § 5, passed 12-10-2024, eff. 12-20-2024)
§ 5.106 BED AND BREAKFAST HOME.
   Bed and breakfast homes may be permitted in accordance with the use tables
in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8, and
12, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   A site plan to scale shall be presented to the city council when
application is made for a bed and breakfast home conditional use permit showing
required off-street parking spaces, driveways, sidewalks and any other paving,
and the floor plan of the residence showing bedrooms to be used for public
accommodation. Applicant shall submit three photographs of the existing
residence; a picture of the front of the property showing the property from the
street to the front of the residence; and a view from each side property line
showing the property from the property line to the residence. The city council
will have no authority to waive the site plan.
   (b)   Provisions must be made for one off-street parking space per guest
room, plus two off-street parking spaces for the owner. The parking area must
be a hard surface and dust free. The city council shall have no authority to
grant variances to this requirement.
   (c)   All overnight parking shall be in designated parking spaces, as
provided on the site plan.
      (1)   Other than driveways and sidewalks, the front yard (which means the
property from the front of the building to the street) may not be paved. The
city council shall have no authority to issue variances to this subsection (c)
(1).
      (2)   All parking areas on property (except driveways) shall be behind
any building lines and must be screened from the view of adjacent residences to
a height of six feet by a solid screening fence, or dense shrubs and
vegetation. The city council shall have no authority to grant variances to this
requirement.
   (d)   Stacked parking is permitted in driveways for a maximum of four
vehicles. The city council shall have no authority to issue variances to this
subsection (d).
   (e)   Recreational vehicles, trailer homes, campers and utility trucks
exceeding seven-foot height, seven-foot width or 20-foot length may not be
parked by the owners or occupants of a bed and breakfast home on the premises
or the street.
   (f)   A maximum of three guest rooms is allowed with no more than three
occupants per guest room up to a maximum total of nine guests per night. The
city council shall have no authority to issue variances to this subsection (f).
   (g)   The maximum length of stay is limited to 14 consecutive days for each
individual guest. No guest shall stay more than 60 days in a 12-month period.
   (h)   Signage is limited to one square foot, attached to building or
mailbox, non-illuminated, and shall display only the name of the bed and
breakfast home on it. No additional outdoor advertising of any kind is allowed.
The city council will have no authority to issue variances to this subsection
(h).
   (i)   The floor plan of a bed and breakfast home cannot be altered or
changed without approval by the city council.
   (j)   Basements, garage apartments, guest houses and attic rooms can be
rented under these guidelines. Existing garages cannot be converted.
   (k)   A bed and breakfast home must comply with all applicable state and
city health and safety laws.
   (l)   No weddings, receptions, events or parties may be held at a bed and
breakfast home.
   (m)   No alcoholic beverage may be sold to bed and breakfast guests on the
premises.
   (n)   No cooking is permitted in bedrooms.
   (o)   No vending machines are allowed.
   (p)   Souvenirs, clothing or miscellaneous items can be sold only to
registered guests by the owner.
   (q)   No trash dumpsters are allowed.
   (r)   Owner must secure an annual operator’s license and obtain a
certificate of occupancy before operating a bed and breakfast home.
   (s)   If a bed and breakfast home is also in an historic and cultural
landmark (“HC”) overlay district, the strictest guidelines will be enforced.
   (t)   Guests must register on arrival. A guest must provide name, permanent
home address and telephone number, vehicle license number and date(s) of
occupancy. Registration records must be maintained for five years and are
subject to review by city officials at any time.
   (u)   A bed and breakfast home may not be located within 400 feet of another
bed and breakfast home or inn or a boarding/lodging house. The distance will be
determined by a straight line from the closest property line of the lot on
which the home is located to the closest property line of the lot on which the
other home or inn or boarding/lodging house is located.
   (v)   A conditional use permit can only be granted for a maximum period of
five years and is not transferable to a subsequent owner or to another
property.
   (w)   Violation of this section or any other city ordinance may result in
revocation of operator’s license.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.107 BED AND BREAKFAST INN.
   Bed and breakfast inns may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8, and
12, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   A site plan to scale shall be presented to the city council when
application is made for a bed and breakfast inn conditional use permit showing
required off-street parking spaces, driveways, sidewalks and any other paving,
and the floor plan of the residence showing bedrooms to be used for public
accommodation. The burden of proof regarding all conditions is on the
applicant. Such site plan and floor plan will become part of the approval of
the conditional use permit. Applicant shall submit three photographs of the
existing residence; a picture of the front of the property showing the property
from the street to the front of the residence; and a view from each side
property line showing the property from the property line to the residence. The
city council will have no authority to waive the site plan.
   (b)   A bed and breakfast inn shall have a manager on-site at all times when
occupied by guests.
   (c)   Provisions must be made for adequate off-street parking in accordance
with §
6.201. The parking area must be a hard surface and dust free.
   (d)   In residential districts “D,” “D-HR1” and “D-HR2,” no parking shall be
permitted in the front yard (from the front of the building to the street)
other than on a driveway.
      (1)   Other than driveways and sidewalks, the front yard (meaning the
property from the front of the building to the street) may not be paved. The
city council shall have no authority to issue variances to this subsection (d)
(1).
      (2)   All parking areas (except driveways) on a property adjacent to any
a one- or two-family district must be screened from the view of adjacent
residences to a height of six feet by a solid screening fence or dense shrubs
and vegetation. The city council will have no authority to issue variances to
this subsection (d)(2).
      (3)   All overnight parking shall be in designated parking spaces, as
provided on the site plan.
   (e)   Stacked parking is permitted in driveways.
   (f)   Off-site parking may be provided within 200 feet of a bed and
breakfast inn provided the property is properly zoned or a conditional use
permit for auxiliary parking in compliance with §
6.202(f) is granted. In addition, all off-site parking must comply with
Chapter 6, Article 3 relative to screening fence and bufferyard requirements if
adjacent property is in a one- or two-family district. A fence may not extend
into the front or side yard past any building line.
   (g)   A maximum of five guest rooms is allowed with no more than three
occupants per guest room up to a maximum of 15 guests per night. The city
council will have no authority to issue variances to this subsection (g).
   (h)   The maximum length of stay is limited to 14 consecutive days for each
individual guest. No guest shall stay more than 60 days in a 12-month period.
   (i)   In any “D,” “D-HR1” or “D-HR2” district, signage is limited to one
square foot, displaying only the name and/or address of the bed and breakfast
inn on it. No additional outdoor advertising of any kind is allowed. In all
other districts, compliance with
Chapter 6, Article 4, Signs, is required.
   (j)   Recreational vehicles, trailer homes, campers and commercial trucks of
at least seven-foot height, seven-foot width and 20-foot length may not be
parked by the owners or occupants of a bed and breakfast inn on the premises or
the street in a residential district.
   (k)   The floor plan of a bed and breakfast inn cannot be altered or changed
without approval by the city council.
   (l)   Cooking is not permitted in bedrooms.
   (m)   No vending machines are allowed.
   (n)   Souvenirs, clothing or miscellaneous items can be sold only to
registered guests by the owner/operator.
   (o)   Owner must secure an annual operator’s license and obtain a
certificate of occupancy before operating a bed and breakfast inn.
   (p)   If a bed and breakfast inn is also in an historic and cultural
landmark (“HC”) overlay district, the strictest guidelines will be enforced.
   (q)   Guests must register on arrival. A guest must provide name, permanent
home address and telephone number, vehicle license number and date of
occupancy. Registration records must be maintained for five years and are
subject to review by city officials at any time.
   (r)   Violation of this ordinance or any other city ordinance may result in
revocation of operator’s license.
   (s)   A conditional use permit can only be granted for a maximum period of
five years and is not transferable to a subsequent owner or to another
property.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.107A LODGING HOUSES.
   Lodging houses may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, and
12, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   No more than one lodging house per individual tract, parcel or platted
lot is allowed.
   (b)   Public ingress and egress to the boarding house shall be through one
common exterior entrance. Ingress and egress for lodger shall be through common
exterior entrance.
   (c)   Entry access to all sleeping rooms shall be through the interior of
the building. No exit doors from individual sleeping rooms shall lead directly
to the exterior of the building.
   (d)   Residents must have access on-site to shared common areas for cooking
and eating. A common kitchen facility equipped for cooking meals located on-
site must be available to the residents, or daily meals must be provided on-
site for the residents of the lodging house.
   (e)   No cooking is permitted in any sleeping room. No cooking facilities
are permitted in any sleeping room.
   (f)   Each floor must contain at least one fully-equipped bathroom for each
five residents that is accessible from a common hallway.
   (g)   Each resident must execute a lease before occupancy.
   (h)   Parking spaces shall be provided as follows: one space per leased
sleeping room; and one space per four employees.
   (i)   Owner of the lodging house must obtain a certificate of occupancy and
register with the multi-family inspection program before operating a lodging
house.
(Ord. 15286, § 1, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 21946-10-2015, § 1, passed 10-13-2015,
eff. 10-17-2015; Ord. 26358-08-2023, § 5, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 5.108 CAR WASH.
   Car wash facilities shall be limited to the districts designated "CUP" or
"P" in the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 8 and
12, subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   All washing facilities shall occur under a roofed area with at least
two walls.
   (b)   All drying and vacuuming facilities may be outside the building but
shall not be in the front yard and shall not be closer than 25 feet from any
residential district. No car wash dryer shall face a residential district or
use.
   (c)   The building surfaces shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized
steel, baked enamel steel or other material equal in durability and appearance.
   (d)   Setback requirements for full-service and automated-service car
washes:
      (1)   Full-service car washes are allowed by right in "F" and "G" when
the distance from a residential district or use is greater than 200 feet. A
conditional use permit is required if the distance from a residential district
or use is 200 feet or less.
      (2)   Automated-service car washes in " G" are allowed by right when the
distance from a residential district or use is greater than 200 feet. A
conditional use permit is required when the distance from a residential
district or use is 200 feet or less.
      (3)   The measurement of the distance between the car wash and the
residential use shall be along the nearest property line of the residential use
to the nearest property line of the car wash, along street lines and a direct
line across intersections.
   (e)   The building shall set back not less than 25 feet from the front
property line.
   (f)   Off-street parking shall be provided on the property in the ratio of
not less than three parking spaces for each washing stall, or five parking
spaces for each automobile that may be accommodated on the washing line within
a facility.
   (g)   All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced and dust-free.
   (h)   Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be directed downward and
away from adjacent residential properties.
   (i)   A permanent screening fence or wall not less than six feet in height
shall be constructed along any site property line which abuts a residential
district or use.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 25514-05-2022, § 1, passed 5-10-2022, eff.
5-18-2022)
§ 5.109 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   §
5.109 pertaining to cold storage plants was added by Ord. 13896, passed October
12, 1999 and repealed by Ord. 17093, passed August 8, 2006. See the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 5.110 COMMUNITY HOME.
   A community home may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   Conditions. A community home must meet all applicable licensing
requirements of Tex. Human Resources Code Chapter 123.001.
   (b)   Spacing requirements. A community home may not be established within
one-half mile of a previously existing community home.
   (c)   Motor vehicles on premises. Residents of a community home may not
keep, on the premises of a home or on the public rights-of-way adjacent to the
home, more than one motor vehicle per bedroom for the use of residents of the
home.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.111 DAY CARE CENTER.
   Day care centers and kindergartens may be permitted as a conditional use
permit by the city council in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8, and
12, provided they meet the following conditions.
   (a)   Permits shall be for a limited period of time to be specified by the
city council, but not to exceed five years. Upon application, time may be
extended for successive periods of five years or less, provided that there
shall be new notice and hearing before each extension.
   (b)   Prior to deciding upon any application, the city council may require a
report from the health department, fire department, traffic engineering
department and planning and development department, and such other agencies as
the city council may specify, and shall verify or require that such day care
center or kindergarten shall comply with state statutes and other applicable
City of Fort Worth ordinances.
   (c)   Outdoor play area of not less than 100 square feet shall be furnished
for each child authorized by state license to be cared for on the premises.
Such play area shall be located in the side or rear yards and shall be
completely enclosed by a fence or wall that meets the requirements of §
5.305. When the city council finds that additional fencing or screening is
necessary or desirable to protect the children cared for and the adjacent
properties, it shall require such fencing or screening as a condition of
approval.
   (d)   Off-street parking shall be furnished in the minimum amounts required
in
Chapter 6, Article 2.
   (e)   Hours of operation are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17025, passed 6-26-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5,
passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.112 DRIVE-IN BUSINESS.
   (a)   Drive-in businesses may be permitted in accordance with the use tables
in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided that no such use shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. In the “MU-1” and “MU-2” districts the following
requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Drive-through windows and stacking lanes are not located along
facades of buildings that face a street, and where possible are located to the
rear of buildings;
      (2)   Driveways are not located within the front yard setback between the
building front and the street;
      (3)   The design and location of the facility does not impede vehicular
traffic flow and does not impede pedestrian movement and safety. To minimize
conflicts with vehicular and pedestrian circulation, shared driveways and/or
driveways located off of non-arterial streets should be used, where possible;
      (4)   Architectural elements, landscaping and/or other screening elements
minimize the visual impacts of the drive-through facility; and
      (5)   The design and location of the facility are consistent with any
design standards or guidelines that may be applicable to the pertinent
district.
   (b)   A site plan demonstrating compliance with these drive-in restaurant or
business development standards shall be submitted to the development services
director or designee for review and approval.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 24030-
02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 5.113 FIREWOOD SALES.
   Firewood sales may be permitted in accordance with the use tables of
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, when conducted entirely indoors.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.114 GREENHOUSE OR PLANT NURSERY.
   A greenhouse or plant nursery may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided it meets the following conditions.
   (a)   If located in an “A” through “ER” district, the use is operated for
retail purposes and includes the sale of plant material and products intended
for use in connection with home gardening activities.
   (b)   If located in the “E” through “H” districts, all incidental equipment
and supplies, including fertilizer and empty containers, are kept within a
building.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.115 GROUP HOME I OR II.
   A group home I or II may be permitted in accordance with the use tables of
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided it shall be located no less than one-half mile from any existing
group home or halfway house.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.116 HOTEL, MOTEL OR INN.
   (a)   Location adjacent to residential district. Where a hotel, motel or inn
is less than 1,000 feet from any one- or two-family district, or public and
private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up
through and including the twelfth grade, a planned development district shall
be created for such use. This regulation shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   When the property in the one- or two-family district is used for
utilities, waterways, public parks, railroads or other nonresidential public
use or separated from the hotel, motel or inn by a public right-of-way of at
least 300 feet; or
      (2)   The Central Business Zoning District; or
      (3)   The following mixed-use or form-based zoning districts:
         a.   MU-1;
         b.   MU-2;
         c.   Panther Island;
         d.   Near Southside;
         e.   Camp Bowie;
         f.   Trinity Lakes;
         g.   Berry/University; or
         h.   Stockyards.
   (b)   Planned development hotel use. The following criteria shall be
applicable to any planned development hotel use:
      (1)   Ingress/egress should be taken from the major street furthest from
the residential district;
      (2)   No screening fence shall be erected along the perimeter of the
hotel property adjacent to a street, alley or right-of-way; provided, however
that a screening fence shall be permitted around swimming pools, tennis courts
and other recreational facilities; and a screening fence shall be permitted
along property lines adjacent to other lots;
      (3)   Incidental businesses may be conducted within the hotel, provided
that the principal entrance to the business shall be from the inside of the
building;
      (4)   A secondary entrance to the hotel may be provided from a court or
from the principal frontage but from no other street and shall not face any
residential district. Exception: Emergency egress only when required by the
building code and only when no other emergency egress can be designed; and
      (5)   Any other conditions required by the city council as a condition of
site plan approval.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15622, § 2, passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 20453-
10-2012, § 4, passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 27096-08-2024, § 1, passed 8-27-2024, eff.
9-19-2024)
§ 5.116.B INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
   (a)   Industrialized housing may be permitted in accordance with the use
table in
Chapter 4, Article 6, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   All single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have a
value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family
dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing
is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax
appraisal roll for each county in which the properties are located;
      (2)   All single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have
exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia and fenestration
compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot
on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
      (3)   All single-family or duplex industrialized housing must comply with
all building setbacks and site requirements of the applicable zoning district;
      (4)   All single-family or duplex industrialized housing must be securely
fixed to a permanent foundation; and
      (5)   A minimum horizontal dimension of 15 feet shall be required.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, VALUE shall mean the taxable value of
the industrialized housing and the lot after the installation of the housing.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, COMPATIBLE shall mean that the exterior
siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia and fenestration of the proposed
industrialized housing must match or be indistinguishable from the majority
single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located.
   (d)   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, install
or move any industrialized housing into the city shall first make application
to the building official and obtain the required permits. In addition to any
other information otherwise required for said permits, the application shall:
      (1)   Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the
lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located by address, lot and
block number and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by
the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county in which the
properties are located;
      (2)   Describe and provide front view photographs of the exterior siding,
roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia and fenestration for each single-family
dwelling located with 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing
is to be located;
      (3)   Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment proposed
for the industrialized housing;
      (4)   State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot
after installation of the industrialized housing; and
      (5)   Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real
property on which the industrialized housing is to be located.
   (e)   A person is in violation of this section if the person:
      (1)   Fails to make an application for permit as required by this
section; or
      (2)   Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing
into the city which does not comply with this section.
(Ord. 15831, § 1, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 18823-09-2009, § 1, passed 9-15-2009)
§ 5.116.A HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (a)   Home occupations may be permitted in accordance with the use table in
Chapter 4, Article 6, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   All home occupations must be conducted entirely from within the
principal dwelling and attached garage or one accessory building except for
home occupations that are outdoor activities as described below.
      (2)   Use as home occupation is limited to the members of the family or
other residents residing in the dwelling unit and one additional employee.
Employees that do not visit the home as part of their job are excluded from
this provision. Provided however, up to five employees may be permitted if
approved by the City Council. In reviewing such a request, the City Council may
consider the following:
         a.   The reason for request;
         b.   The impact on the character of the neighborhood;
         c.   Availability of on-site parking and number of employee vehicles;
         d.   Hours when employees will be located on site;
         e.   Whether the home occupation is conducted entirely inside the
dwelling unit; and
         f.   The consent of the majority of property owners of the one or two-
family residential property along both sides of the block face.
      (3)   Outdoor activities:
         a.   Performance of the activity shall not be visible from the street.
         b.   Performance of outdoor activity shall be solely located and
contained in the rear yard.
         c.   Operation of hours for outdoor activities shall be between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
         d.   For swimming lessons and water safety instruction, provided that
such instruction involves no more than four pupils at any one time; and
         e.   Participants must have access to a permanent restroom facility in
the principal dwelling unit, attached garage or an accessory building connected
to water and sewer.
      (4)   Traffic. No vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home
occupation business in greater volumes than would reasonably be expected in the
residential neighborhood or create unreasonable parking or traffic congestion
for the abutting or adjoining neighbors or for the immediate neighborhood. Any
parking of vehicles must be consistent with city ordinances. Any parking or
traffic of such character, intensity and continued duration, which
substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by
persons of ordinary sensibilities, shall be considered unreasonable. It shall
be a defense to prosecution under this subsection (a) that the parking or
traffic created was reasonable under the totality of the circumstances existing
in the neighborhood. Upon request of the residents of the neighborhood, a
representative from the transportation and public works department shall review
the traffic impacts to the neighborhood and, if applicable, refer the review to
the traffic management program.
      (5)   Accessory and secondary. The use must be clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and may not alter the existing
residential character of the principal dwelling or the garage/accessory
building. A home occupation that requires structural alteration of the
principal dwelling or garage/accessory building to comply with nonresidential
construction code is prohibited, except for accessibility requirements.
      (6)   Appearance. A change in the outside appearance of the dwelling unit
or lot indicating the use or conduct of a home occupation, including
advertising signs or displays is prohibited. All equipment, goods, wares,
merchandise or materials associated with home occupation, including equipment,
goods, wares, merchandise or materials located in or on vehicles, must not be
visible from any public street or public right-of-way or from other locations
off the premises.
      (7)   Direct sales. The direct sale of commodities, goods, wares,
materials, merchandise or products to the general public is prohibited, however
orders may be filled on the premises to persons by prior individual oral or
written invitation or if placed earlier by a customer by phone, mail, internet
or off-site sales parties. Products from a cottage food production operation as
defined in the Tex. Health and Safety Code § 437.001(2-b) may be sold directly
to the consumer.
      (8)   Signs. Home occupations must not involve the use of advertising
signs or window displays, or any other device that calls attention to the
business use of the dwelling through audio or visual means.
         a.   All on-site advertising that is visible from any public street or
public right-of-way or from other locations off the premises, other than
advertising located on vehicles, is prohibited. For the purposes of this
subsection (a)(6), VEHICLE is defined as a passenger automobile, passenger van,
motorcycle or pick-up truck. All advertising on vehicles shall be mounted flat
against or painted on the vehicle and shall not refer to the street address of
the home occupation business.
         b.   All off-site advertising, including signs, displays, billboards,
television, radio and/or any other advertising medium uses that refers to the
street address is prohibited, other than business stationery, business cards,
the home occupation business website, newsletters and applicable trade
directories.
      (9)   Nuisance. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted that
produces noise, noxious odor, dust, smoke, fumes, vibration, glare, electrical
interference or radio or electromagnetic interference beyond the boundary of
the property. Only general types and sizes of machinery that are typically
found in dwellings for hobby or domestic purposes shall be permitted. No use
shall generate noise or glare in excess of what is typical in a residential
neighborhood. No combustible materials shall be permitted on the premises that
are in violation of the city's fire code.
   (b)   The operation of detail, auto repair, paint or body shop business,
including, but not limited to, a boat, motorcycle, trailer or auto shop
business, shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
   (c)   A home school shall not be considered a home occupation and shall not
be subject to the regulations of this section.
   (d)   A home occupation is permitted as an incidental use and is secondary
to the use of a dwelling. The city council may, at any time, amend this
ordinance to terminate any or all home based business uses without creating
nonconforming rights to the continuance of a home-based business.
(Ord. 16183, § 1, passed 10-19-2004; Ord. 20900-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-10-2013;
eff. 9-25-2013; Ord. 25380-03-2022, § 1, passed 3-8-2022, eff. 3-22-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16183, § 1, adopted October 19, 2004, amended the code by adding
provisions designated as a new § 5.116A. Inasmuch as there already exist
provisions so designated, the provisions of said ordinance have been included
herein as § 5.116B at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 5.117 KENNEL.
   Dog kennels are permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   The kennel shall be located not less than 300 feet from a residential
structure that is located on any property in separate ownership.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, measurement of the 300-foot distance
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of an existing habitation to the nearest
portion of the kennel.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.118 KINDERGARTEN.
   The standards in §
5.111, day care center shall apply to any kindergarten approved as a special
exception in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.119 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 14624, § 3, adopted May 15, 2001, repealed §
5.119, which pertained to laundry or dry cleaner. See the Code Comparative
Table.
§ 5.120 MANUFACTURING.
   Manufacturing is permitted in the “I” district in accordance with the use
table in
Chapter 4, Article 8, provided power not in excess of 50 HP motor is employed
in the operation of any one machine. The term “manufacturing” shall not include
other uses expressly permitted only in the “J” or “K” districts.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.121 METAL CASTING.
   Metal casting is permitted in the “J” district, provided that the capacity
of any one melting pot or ladle shall not exceed 300 pounds.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.122 METAL FOUNDRY OR FABRICATION PLANT.
   No riveting is permitted within 500 feet of any more restrictive district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.123 METAL STAMPING, DYEING, SHEARING OR PUNCHING.
   Shops stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching metal not exceeding one-eighth
inch in thickness.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.124 NEWSPAPER DISTRIBUTION CENTER.
   Newspaper distribution centers may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Maximum size of 20,000 square feet; and
   (b)   Must be screened from adjacent residential district or properties with
a minimum six-foot high screening fence.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.125 PAWNSHOP.
   (a)   Distance restrictions. Regardless of the zoning district in which it
is located, a pawnshop shall be subject to the following distance restrictions:
      (1)   No pawnshop shall be located within 500 feet of any one- or two-
family district; and
      (2)   No pawnshop shall be located within 500 feet of any other pawnshop.
   (b)   Special exception by board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may
grant a special exception to the above distance restrictions in accordance with
the requirements set forth for special exceptions in
Chapter 3, Article 3, provided, however, that in granting any such special
exception the board of adjustment shall place such reasonable conditions on the
location, use and operation of the pawnshop as are necessary to protect and
maintain nearby one- and two-family residential districts.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.126 PRINT CENTER, COMMERCIAL.
   A commercial print center with off-set printing in any commercial district
shall be limited to small jobs, such as business cards, invitations, stationery
and similar personal and business needs only.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.127 PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICE.
   Probation or parole offices may be permitted in accordance with the use
tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following.
   (a)   Unless located in a building, other structure or land under the
control, administration or jurisdiction of a state or federal agency, parole or
probation offices shall be permitted only in the “FR” district and less
restrictive zoning districts.
   (b)   Regardless of the zoning, parole or probation offices shall not be
located within 500 feet of any one- or two-family residential district.
   (c)   Nonconforming parole or probation offices located in leased facilities
shall be permitted to continue in operation only during the term of the
existing lease. Upon expiration of the existing lease, the nonconforming use
shall no longer be permitted.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.128 RECORDING STUDIO.
   Recording studios may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   Internal noise shall not be audible from outside the building.
   (b)   External activity or noise generation shall not be greater than the
existing background noise level of the surrounding area.
   (c)   Mass reproduction, duplication or storage of recorded material for
distribution, sale or promotion is prohibited.
   (e)   Parking requirements shall be the same as for a commercial building.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14624, § 4, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 5.129 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.
   Recreational vehicle parks are permitted in accordance with the use tables
in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided they are constructed and developed in accordance with the minimum
building standards code, other applicable provisions of the city code and the
following conditions.
   (a)   Development approval requirements. A recreational vehicle park shall
not be constructed, altered or enlarged without an approved development plan
issued by the planning and development department in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (b)   Property development standards.
      (1)   In recreational vehicle parks, the minimum dimension of lots and
yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying table.
Recreational Vehicle Parks
Recreational Vehicle Parks
Land area       Minimum of 50 vehicle lot spaces, with required streets and
                service buildings
Density         Not to exceed 25 lots per acre of gross site area
Lot area        1,000 square feet minimum
                Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and
                from all other structures by at least 10 feet; for the purposes
                of such measurement, any accessory to a recreational vehicle,
                such as an awning or individual storage facility, shall be
Other setbacks  considered as part of the recreational vehicle
                No recreational vehicle shall be closer than 20 feet to the
                property line adjoining a public street nor closer than 15 feet
                to any property line on which the abutting property is zoned
                residential
Private streets 36 feet minimum width; minimum cul-de-sac diameter 100 feet;
                maximum block length 500 feet.
Parking         1 off-street space
Notes:
May be subject to projected front yard (§
6.101(f))
 
      (2)   Entrances and exits may not be through a residentially zoned
district nor require traffic movement to or from the recreational vehicle park
through a residentially zoned district.
   (c)   Service and auxiliary buildings.
      (1)   This section shall apply to all service buildings, recreation
buildings, management offices, repair shops, storage areas, sanitary
facilities, laundry facilities, indoor recreation areas, commercial buildings
supplying essential goods or services for park tenants and other similar
buildings in recreational vehicle parks.
      (2)   All service and auxiliary buildings shall be located to be
convenient to the recreational vehicle lots they service and shall be kept
clean.
      (3)   Each park shall contain one or more service buildings providing
separate sanitary facilities for men and women.
         a.   No lot space shall be located farther than 500 feet from such a
service building.
         b.   The entrances to such buildings shall be clearly marked to show
which gender the facilities serve.
   (d)   Permanent residential structures.
      (1)   At each recreational vehicle park, no more than one existing
residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure
constructed for occupancy by the owner or operator of the park.
      (2)   An existing residential structure located on a recreational vehicle
park may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for
use by the guest of the park. A structure so converted shall meet all
applicable codes for public occupancy to the proposed use.
   (e)   Use of recreational vehicle lots.
      (1)   Recreational vehicle parks lots shall be occupied only by
recreational vehicles.
      (2)   Lots shall be rented only a daily or weekly basis.
      (3)   The owner or operator of a recreational vehicle park shall not
permit a guest or a recreational vehicle to remain in the park longer than 60
consecutive days.
   (f)   Other development standards.
      (1)   Ground surface and drainage.
         a.   Each lot shall provide adequate support and drainage for the
placement of the recreational vehicle.
         b.   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of a recreational vehicle
park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and elimination of dust.
         c.   The ground surface in all parts of a recreational vehicle park
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient
manner.
      (2)   Public telephone. A public telephone shall be installed and
maintained in each recreational vehicle park, located in a well-lighted area
and accessible to park guests 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
   (g)   Development plan approval requirements and appeal.
      (1)   Development plan and application.
         a.   A recreational vehicle park shall not be constructed, altered or
enlarged without a valid approved development plan issued by the planning and
development department. Before any new, altered or enlargement action can
occur, a development plan must be submitted for review. Such plan must be
approved before any action may proceed. The development plan shall also be used
when applying for appropriate permits as regulated by other codes.
         b.   Applications for development plan approval shall contain at a
minimum the following:
            1.   Name and address of applicant;
            2.   Location and legal description of the recreational vehicle
park; and
            3.   Two copies of a development plan in conformance with the
requirements of this section, and drawn at a minimum scale of:
               i.   One inch equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres; or
               ii.   One inch equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more.
         c.   The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee;
         d.   A development plan shall show the following:
            i.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land, identifying its
location and boundaries;
            ii.   The number, location and size of all recreational vehicle
lots;
            iii.   The location, width and specifications of driveways, private
internal streets, parking and walkways;
            iv.   The location and details of lighting, public telephones and
electrical and gas systems;
            v.   The location and specification of water and sewer lines and
sewer service riser pipes;
            vi.   The location and specifications of all buildings constructed
or to be constructed within the recreational vehicle park;
            vii.   Existing and proposed topography of the recreational vehicle
park;
            viii.   The location of fire mains, including the size of the main,
fire hydrants and fire extinguishment equipment and available fire flow; and
            ix.   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
departments reviewing the development plan.
      (2)   Appeal and modifications.
         a.   If the development plan is denied, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the board of adjustment.
         b.   The board of adjustment may approve the development plan; approve
with modifications or may uphold the denial of the development plan.
         c.   The board of adjustment shall consider the following when
modifying a development plan:
            i.   The minimum number of recreational vehicle spaces in a
recreational vehicle park;
            ii.   The minimum square footage of recreational vehicle spaces;
            iii.   The minimum per acre density of recreational vehicle spaces;
and
            iv.   The number of permanent residential structures in the
recreational vehicle park.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 18435-01-2009, § 1, passed 1-6-2009, eff.
1-14-2009)
§ 5.130 RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY.
   Automated collection vending machines and small collection facilities, not
to exceed 500 square feet, for recycling aluminum cans, glass, grocery bags,
plastic bottles, magazines, newspapers and other comparable materials may be
permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following:
   (a)   Required off-street parking is not diminished; and
   (b)   The board of adjustment finds that the size, location and design of
the machines or facility are compatible with surrounding uses.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.131 SHEET METAL SHOP.
   Shops using 16 gauge or thinner sheet metal only.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.132 STABLE, COMMERCIAL.
   Stables for the commercial boarding of horses and for the business of
selling rides on horses may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the limitation that such uses be located 500 feet from any
residential district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.133 STORAGE, NON ACCESSORY OUTSIDE.
   (a)   Storage of articles, material or merchandise not customarily
incidental to the primary or main use or activity of the property may be kept
or stored outside the primary building in accordance with use tables in
Chapter 4, Article 8 subject to the following.
   (b)   The city council may grant a conditional use permit for no more than
five years for non-accessory outside storage in accordance with the
requirements set forth for conditional use permits in
Chapter 4, Article 4, provided, however, that in granting any such conditional
use permit the city council shall require the following.
      (1)   The storage must be secured from vandalism, theft or other
mischievous acts.
      (2)   The storage must be surrounded by a screen fence a minimum of six
feet in order to screen the storage from public view. No material may be
visible above the required screen fence.
      (3)   The storage may not be placed in any area which will interfere with
the natural flow of stormwater drainage.
      (4)   No storage of unregistered motor vehicles wrecked or dismantled
vehicles or vehicles being retained for the purpose of removing or using parts
thereof shall be permitted.
(Ord. 17093, § 2, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.134 STORE, LARGE RETAIL.
   (a)   Regulations applicable to all large retail stores in “E,” “FR,” “F,”
“G” and “H” and to large retail stores in “I,” “J” and “K” that are located
within 500 feet of residential property, unless there is an existing commercial
use on a lot or tract at least 100 feet wide or an existing industrial use
between the large retail store and the residential property.
      (1)   Applicability. The following regulations apply to:
         a.   Large retail stores located in the “E” neighborhood commercial,
“FR” restricted commercial, “F” general commercial, “G” heavy commercial and
“H” central business districts, subject to a maximum permissible gross floor
area of 60,000 square feet in the “E” neighborhood commercial district; and
         b.   Large retail stores in the “I” light industrial, “J” medium
industrial and “K” heavy industrial districts located within 500 feet of
residential property, provided, however, the regulations do not apply if there
is an existing commercial use on a lot or tract at least 100 feet wide or an
existing industrial use in the 500-foot area between the large retail store and
the residential property. For purposes of this section RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
means a one- or two-family residential district or property used for one- or
two-family residential purposes. Measurement shall be from the property line of
the large retail store to the boundary line of a one- or two-family residential
district or the property line of property used for one- or two-family use.
      (2)   Standards and guidelines. Standards and guidelines set out below
require a basic level of architectural variety, compatible scale and mitigation
of negative impacts. “Guidelines” are not mandatory, but are provided in order
to educate planners, design consultants, developers and city staff about design
objectives. “Standards” are mandatory.
      (3)   Landscape and buffering on streets. In addition to the bufferyard
and landscape requirements of §§
6.300 and 6.301, a minimum 20-foot irrigated and landscaped bufferyard shall be
provided along all street frontages to screen the view of the property from the
public rights-of-way. Such screening shall be provided using hedges, berms or
mass plantings to a height of not less than 24 inches with live groundcover. A
minimum of one three-inch caliper canopy tree every 50 feet shall be provided
with a mature height of 25 feet by industry standards.
      (4)   Landscaping in parking lot. In addition to the bufferyard and
landscape requirements of §§
6.300 and 6.301 and the 20-foot landscaped bufferyard described above, one
three-inch caliper tree within an irrigated landscape island of not less than
150 square feet with live groundcover shall be provided for every 100 parking
spaces, or fraction thereof. A separate irrigated landscape island is required
for every 100 parking spaces; the required 150-square foot landscape areas
cannot be combined to create fewer, larger landscape islands. In addition, each
end of a parking strip shall have an irrigated landscape island planted with a
minimum of one three-inch caliper tree and three shrubs within an area of not
less than 300 square feet with live ground cover. Additional landscaping is
required if parking exceeds one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area,
in accordance with subsection (a)(10) below.
      (5)   Building materials and color.
         a.   Guidelines. Exterior building materials and colors comprise a
significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should be
aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors used in the
surrounding area.
         b.   Standards.
            1.   Materials. All building facades that are visible from
adjoining properties and/or public streets (excluding facades facing
residential property that are screened by an eight-foot masonry wall) shall be
of architectural block, brick, stone or tinted, textured concrete masonry
units. Tilt-up concrete construction is permitted, provided the exterior
surface is textured or covered with brick, stone or material fabricated to
simulate brick or stone. Stucco and EIFS (exterior installation finished
system) are permitted, up to a maximum of 30% of a facade area. Smooth concrete
block and prefabricated steel panels are prohibited.
            2.   Colors. Except for brick or stone, surfaces shall be painted
in subtle, neutral or earth tone colors, specifically including without
limitation white, tan, brown and gray. Trim and accent areas may feature
brighter colors, including primary colors. Metallic or fluorescent colors are
prohibited. Accent colors on each facade shall be limited to a maximum of 25%
of the facade area for logo colors and a maximum of 10% of the facade area for
other accent colors. A logo color is a color commonly used by a large retail
store as an identifying characteristic.
      (6)   Architectural features.
         a.   Guidelines. Facades should be articulated to reduce the massive
scale and the uniform, impersonal appearances of large retail buildings and
provide visual interest.
         b.   Standards. Architectural features on building facades that are
visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets (excluding facades
facing residential property that are screened by an eight-foot masonry wall and
facades facing the side or rear of property zoned and used for commercial
purposes or industrial purposes) shall address the visual impact of long
uninterrupted walls by providing a minimum of three of the following elements.
No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 100 feet. See illustrations
of architectural features attached as Exhibit “A-1.”
            1.   Variation in color and materials;
            2.   Wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least
3% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20% of the length of the
facade, not to exceed 100 feet;
            3.   Variation of a minimum of two feet in the height of parapets.
Variation to parapet height may include pilasters and projecting raised
entrance features;
            4.   Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by a minimum
of 16 inches. The use of pilasters to interrupt horizontal patterns such as
accent banding is encouraged;
            5.   Canopies projecting a minimum of ten feet from the plane of
the primary facade walls; and
            6.   Repetitive ornamentation including decorative applied features
such as wall-mounted light fixtures or applied materials. Repetitive
ornamentation shall be located with a maximum spacing of 50 feet.
      (7)   Attached signs. Attached on-premises signs shall be limited to 10%
of each wall face. No wall signage shall be back-lighted or illuminated to such
an intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision.
      (8)   Detached signs. Detached on-premises signage shall be limited to
one sign per large retail store; provided, however, two signs shall be
permitted when the large retail store is located on a corner lot or through
lot. A sign shall be located at the main entrance to the property. The sign(s)
shall be of monument type no larger than 128 square feet in area and eight feet
high. In the alternative, a unified sign agreement may be approved in
accordance with §
6.410(f). Such uniform sign agreement shall not be restricted by the 128-square
foot area and eight-foot height limitations. Signs shall not be illuminated to
such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision. Lighting shall
be shielded upward to prevent beams or rays from being directed at any portion
of a traveled roadway or residential property.
      (9)   Outdoor display, sales and storage.
         a.   Applicability. The outdoor display, sales and storage regulations
in this section apply to the following retail establishments:
            1.   General merchandise stores and home improvement stores in the
“E” neighborhood commercial, “FR” restricted commercial, “F” general
commercial, “G” intensive commercial and “H” central business districts,
subject to a maximum permissible gross floor area of 60,000 square feet in the
“E” neighborhood commercial district. All large retail stores in the “E,” “FR,”
“F,” “G” and “H” districts, other than general merchandise stores and home
improvement stores, shall comply with the outdoor storage and display
requirements in §
5.306; and
            2.   Large retail stores, including without limitation general
merchandise stores and home improvement stores, in the “I” light industrial,
“J” medium industrial and “K” heavy industrial districts located within 500
feet of residential property, unless there is an existing commercial use on a
lot or tract at least 100 feet wide or an existing industrial use in the 500-
foot area between the large retail store and the residential property. Outdoor
display, sales and storage are permitted for all large retail stores in the
“I,” “J” and “K” industrial districts that are not within 500 feet of
residential property or where there is an existing commercial use on a lot or
tract at least 100 feet wide or an existing industrial use between the large
retail store and the residential property, subject only to compliance with
height, setback and other development regulations for the applicable district.
         b.   Sidewalk display and cart storage. “Sidewalk” display is a term
commonly used in the retail industry to describe display areas along the front
of a building. Nothing herein permits storage, display or sale of any item on
property that has been dedicated for public use. Sidewalk display and cart
storage in the sidewalk display area are subject to the following restrictions.
            1.   Merchandise may be displayed and carts may be stored within 20
feet of the front of the building.
            2.   No single item may exceed 12 feet in height.
            3.   Items may not be stacked to exceed six feet in height.
            4.   A clearly delineated pedestrian walkway at least four feet in
width shall be provided contiguous to the 20-foot display and cart storage area
to provide unimpeded pedestrian access to the building.
            5.   An area the width of the customer entrance and exit door(s)
plus 15 feet on either side of the door(s) shall be maintained clear of
merchandise and carts to allow unimpeded pedestrian access to the building.
            6.   Areas for customer loading of merchandise shall be clearly
delineated and shall not be located in front of any customer entrance or exit
door(s) or within 15 feet on either side of the door(s).
            7.   This section does not prohibit storage of carts in the parking
lot, but merely regulates storage of carts in the sidewalk display area.
            8.   Outdoor storage, display and sales of plumbing fixtures and
large household appliances, including without limitation hot tubs, washers,
dryers, refrigerators, dishwashers and trash compactors, is prohibited.
         c.   Permanent outdoor display, sales and storage. Merchandise may be
stored or displayed for sale to customers on the front or side of the building
in accordance with this subsection (a)(9)c. The total square footage of all
permanent outdoor storage, display and sales areas permitted by subsections (a)
(9)c.1., (a)(9)c.2. and (a)(9)c.3. below shall be limited to 10% of the
footprint of the building, but in no event shall exceed 15,000 square feet.
Permanent outdoor storage, display and sales shall be contiguous to the
building and shall not be permitted within 100 feet of residential property.
Outdoor storage, display and sales of plumbing fixtures and large household
appliances, including without limitation hot tubs, washers, dryers,
refrigerators, dishwashers and trash compactors, is prohibited.
            1.   Permanent outdoor display, storage and sales: general
merchandise stores. The permanent storage, display and sales area shall be
enclosed by a minimum eight-foot wall of like appearance to the building or a
base of like appearance to the building topped by wrought iron or tubular steel
fencing, with a minimum total height of eight feet. No merchandise other than
trees shall be visible above the wall or fence.
            2.   Permanent outdoor display, storage and sales: home improvement
stores. The permanent storage, display and sales area shall be enclosed by a
chain link fence covered with windscreen or wall of like material to the
building with a minimum height of eight feet. Windscreen shall be maintained in
good repair and free of tears. Merchandise may be stacked up to 25-feet high or
level with the top of the adjacent side wall, whichever is lower, but may not
be stacked above the height of the wall or fence. The roofline on the front
facade shall have architectural features, such as gables or parapets, to
obscure merchandise stored in the area.
            3.   Large retail stores in “I,” “J” and “K” industrial districts
within 500 feet of residential property (other than home improvement stores,
which are subject to subsection (c)(2) above), unless there is an existing
commercial use on a lot or tract at least 100 feet wide or an existing
industrial use between the large retail store and the residential property. The
permanent storage, display and sales area shall be enclosed by a minimum eight-
foot wall of like appearance to the building or a base of like appearance to
the building topped by wrought iron or tubular steel fencing, with a minimum
total height of eight feet. No merchandise other than trees may be visible
above the top of the wall or fence.
         d.   Seasonal outdoor display and sales: Christmas trees may be
displayed for sale. In addition, bedding plants, trees, shrubs, potting soil
and bagged yard products including without limitation fertilizer, bark, mulch,
peat moss and play sand may be displayed from March 15 to June 15. The seasonal
outdoor sales area shall be limited to 10% of the footprint of the building but
in no event shall exceed 12,000 square feet. No merchandise may exceed five
feet in height, except Christmas trees.
         e.   Rear storage: bulk merchandise may be stored behind the building.
The sides and back of the storage area shall be screened with a chain link
fence covered with windscreen, except for any side or back that is separated
from any residential property by an eight-foot masonry wall and landscaped
bufferyard pursuant to subsection (b)(2) below. Windscreen shall be maintained
in good repair and free of tears. The rear storage area shall not be accessible
to customers. Merchandise shall be stacked no higher than 25 feet or level with
the top of the adjacent side wall of the building, whichever is lower, and may
not be stacked above the height of the chain link fence.
      (10)   Parking. A minimum of one parking space per 250 square feet of
gross floor area, or fraction thereof, shall be provided. Additional parking
may be provided, with a maximum of one space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area, or fraction thereof. An irrigated landscape island of at least 150 square
feet with one three-inch caliper tree and live groundcover, in conformance with
subsection (a)(4) above, shall be provided for each 50 parking spaces, or
fraction thereof, exceeding one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
These requirements supersede the parking requirements of §
6.201(b). All other requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 2, “Off-Street Parking and Loading” requirements apply. In
the event of any inconsistency, the stricter requirements shall apply.
      (11)   Parking lot lighting. Light poles shall be no more than 35 feet in
height and painted black, dark gray or dark green or have bronze oxidant
protective coating. The main entrance shall be lit to be distinguishable from
surrounding ambient lighting. See subsection (b)(8) below for additional
lighting requirements within 140 feet of residential property.
      (12)   Vehicular access. No large retail store shall be located on a
public right-of-way or private street less than four lanes (two in each
direction) on at least one side of the property.
      (13)   Traffic impact study. Where traffic generated by the project is
anticipated to exceed 4,000 trips per day, as determined by the director of the
department of transportation and public works or his or her designee, a traffic
assessment shall be required defining on-site and off-site improvements
necessary to accommodate the impacts of the project.
   (b)   Regulations applicable to all large retail stores in “E,” “FR,” “F,”
“G,” “H,” “I,” “J” and “K” in proximity to residential property.
      (1)   Applicability. The following regulations apply to large retail
stores located in the “E” neighborhood commercial, “FR” restricted commercial,
“F” general commercial, “G” heavy commercial, “H” central business, “I” light
industrial, “J” medium industrial and “K” heavy industrial districts, subject
to a maximum permissible gross floor area of 60,000 square feet in the “E”
neighborhood commercial district. The wall and buffering requirements of
subsection (b)(2) below apply only to large retail stores that share a common
boundary with residential property or whose property line is less than 20 feet
from residential property. Subsection (b)(3) below establishes setback
requirements from residential property. Subsections (b)(4) through (b)(7) below
establish restrictions on certain activities within 100 feet of residential
property. Subsection (b)(8) below establishes lighting requirements within 140
feet of residential property. RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means a one-or two-family
residential district or property used for one- or two-family residential
purposes. See illustration of regulations applicable within 100 feet of
residential property attached as Exhibit “A-2.”
      (2)   Wall and landscaped bufferyard. An eight-foot masonry wall of
brick, stone, split block or concrete cast to simulate such materials shall be
constructed along the common boundary line of the adjacent residential
property, or as close as practicable in the event of intervening alleys,
easements and drainage channels. If the large retail store property and
residential property are separated by intervening property under separate
ownership that is less than 20 feet wide, a wall shall be constructed along the
property line of the large retail store facing the residential property. In
addition to the landscape requirements of §
6.301, a 20-foot wide irrigated and landscaped bufferyard shall be provided
with three-inch caliper canopy trees with a mature height of 25 feet by
industry standards planted every 20 feet in an overlapping pattern such that
the canopy creates a solid visual screening at maturity and live groundcover.
      (3)   Setback. All structures shall be set back three feet from all one-
or two-family residential districts or the property line of all property used
for one- or two-family residential purposes for each one foot in overall
vertical building height. For the purpose of determining such setback, building
height shall be measured from the lowest finished grade along the building face
to the peak of the roof on the building facade facing residential property.
      (4)   Activities and equipment permitted within 100 feet of residential
property. The area within 100 feet of residential property may be used only for
driveways, emergency access easements, employee parking, paving, landscaping
and maneuvering space.
      (5)   Pickup and delivery.
         a.   Distance requirements from residential. Outdoor storage, pickup,
delivery, loading and unloading of merchandise, equipment or other items may
not occur within 100 feet of residential property. Loading docks shall be
located more than 100 feet from residential property.
         b.   Additional night-time restrictions. No delivery vehicle may be
driven within 100 feet of residential property between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. No delivery vehicle within 100 feet of residential property shall
have its engine, refrigeration unit or generator running between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Trucks or trailers parked at a loading dock may be
unloaded onto the loading dock between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
provided that all activity occurs inside the truck or trailer or within the
building.
      (6)   Trash collection and compaction. Trash collection and compaction
may not occur within 100 feet of residential property.
      (7)   Mechanical equipment. No mechanical equipment may be located within
100 feet of residential property. Mechanical equipment shall be screened in
accordance with §
6.301(d).
      (8)   Lighting. Lighting within the 20-foot bufferyard adjacent to
residential property shall not exceed one foot candle at ground level. Light
poles within 140 feet of residential property shall not exceed 20 feet in
height and shall be shielded away from residential property. All other light
poles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. All light poles shall be painted
black, dark gray or dark green or have bronze oxidant protective coating.
      (9)   Pedestrian walkway. A pedestrian walkway shall be provided between
any public transportation stop adjacent to the large retail property and the
main entrance. The pedestrian walkway shall be clearly delineated with pavement
striping and shall be a minimum of six feet wide.
   (c)   Variances by board of adjustment. As provided by state law, the board
of adjustment may grant variances to the provisions of this section only if the
variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the section would result in unnecessary hardship, and
so that the spirit of the section is observed and substantial justice is done.
As provided by state law, a “hardship” does not include financial hardship
resulting from compliance with this section. The city manager or a designee
shall report monthly to the city council any variances granted to this section.
   (d)   Expansion. Any building expanded to a footprint exceeding 50,000
square feet to be used as a large retail store shall comply with the provisions
of subsection (a) above or shall be located in a planned development district.
(Ord. 14331, § 5, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 14624, § 12, passed 5-15-2001; Ord.
17093, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.135 SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL.
   Commercial swimming pools may be permitted in accordance with the use tables
in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   The swimming pool shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in area measured
at the scum gutter.
   (b)   No pool shall be closer than 100 feet from any residential district.
   (c)   The area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 50% of the pool
area, with a minimum of 600 square feet allowable.
   (d)   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the minimum ratio of
one off-street parking space to each 200 square feet of pool area or fraction
thereof, and the parking arrangements shall have the approval of the city
traffic engineer.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.136 TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA.
   Telecommunications antennas shall be permitted in any zoning district after
an administrative review and administrative approval in accordance with the
standards set forth below.
   (a)   Antennas are permitted in all districts on existing commercial,
institutional or industrial structures, including, but not limited to,
buildings, existing towers, signs, light poles, flag poles, water towers and/or
utility structures, provided, however, that antennas may not extend more than
12 feet above the structure.
   (b)   If placed on the facade of a structure, the antenna shall be of panel
construction, and of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
   (c)   Existing antennas on stealth and telecommunication towers may be
upgraded as required by changes in technology. Variances to height allowances
must be approved by the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15283, § 11, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 17093,
§ 3, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 20158-04-2012, § 1, passed 4-3-2012)
§ 5.137 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND STEALTH TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER.
   (a)   Telecommunication towers.
      (1)   Where allowed.
         a.   Allowed by right in “G,” “I,” “J,” “K;”
         b.   Allowed by special exception in “ER,” “E,” “MU-1,”“FR,” “F,” “MU-
2,”“AG,” “CF,” “NS-T4,” “NS-T5,” “TU;” and
         c.   Not allowed in residential zoning districts, historic overlay
districts or conservation overlay districts, “H,” “PD” or in scenic areas or
corridors as designated in §
6.402.
      (2)   Setback requirements.
         a.   Five hundred feet from historic district (“HC,” “HSE”)
conservation district (“CD”) or scenic area or corridor as designated in §
6.402;
         b.   Five hundred feet from any one-family district or two-family
district or 250 feet if the one-family or two-family use is located in any
other zoning district;
         c.   Two hundred and fifty feet from any multifamily district or use;
         d.   Two hundred feet from the shoreline of the Trinity River or the
West Fork, Clear Fork, Marine Creek, Mary’s Creek or Sycamore Creek per the map
established by the “Trinity River Corridor Mapping Data” prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments; and
         e.   No telecommunication tower or stealth telecommunication tower
shall be located within 200 feet from the shoreline of Lake Arlington, Lake
Benbrook, Lake Worth, Eagle Mountain Lake or Marine Creek Lake.
      (3)   Letter of authorization. A letter of authorization signed by the
property owner granting the agent/applicant the authority to represent the
property owner if the applicant is required to seek a grant of approval from
the board of adjustment or any other board or commission.
      (4)   Construction requirements.
         a.   All telecommunication towers shall be of monopole construction.
         b.   Telecommunication towers shall not be illuminated by artificial
means or shall display strobe lights or other warning lighting unless required
by the Federal Aviation Administration or any other federal, state or city law,
rule or regulation. Any lighting shall be shielded or directed so as not to
project directly onto property zoned residential or any residential use. When
incorporated into the approved design, light fixtures used to illuminate ball
fields, parking lots or other similar areas may be attached to a
telecommunication tower.
         c.   All new telecommunication towers must be constructed to support
at least two separate antenna arrays. In addition, any new telecommunication
tower must be able to support at least one additional antenna for every 15 feet
(or fraction thereof) above 60 feet in height and provide the ground space for
any equipment necessary for the operation of additional antenna.
      (5)   Screening, fencing and landscaping requirements. All
telecommunications towers and support facilities shall have the following:
         a.   A six-foot solid screening fence constructed of wood, brick,
stone or reinforced concrete products per the specifications of §
5.305, Fences of the zoning ordinance; or
         b.   Screening shrubs shall be installed around a fence and screen
from view the associated structures. All screening shrubs shall be a minimum of
three feet in height at planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height
of a minimum of six feet in three years and must have a permanently installed
irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials.
The vegetation shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at
all times.
      (6)   Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of vehicles, materials or
equipment is permitted. Equipment not used in direct support of the facility
shall not be stored or parked on the premises unless a technician is present.
      (7)   Commercial message prohibited. No signs, including commercial
advertising, logos, political signs, flyers, flags or banners, graphics or
other attention devices shall be allowed on any part of the telecommunication
tower or ancillary support facilities except for warning and safety signage.
      (8)   Removal.
         a.   Upon cessation for more than 180 days of the use of a
telecommunication tower structure for the support of active communications
antennas, the owner of record must notify the planning and development
department. Disconnection of electric service for more than 180 days at the
telecommunications tower site shall be considered cessation of use.
         b.   All transmission telecommunications towers or antennas shall be
removed by the person who constructed the facility, by the person who operates
the facility or by the property owner within one year from the time the
facilities have ceased being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data
signals to or from wireless communications devices.
         c.   The person who constructed the facility, the person who operates
the facility or owner of record must notify the planning and development
department of any change in the status of the telecommunication tower. If the
use of the antennas on the telecommunication tower has not been restored within
the one year period from the time the facilities have ceased being used to
transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from wireless
communication devices, the telecommunication tower must be removed and the
telecommunication tower site restored to its original condition to a depth of
two feet, at the owner’s expense.
      (9)   Fees. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the
city may require, as part of any application fees for a telecommunication
facility, an amount sufficient to recover all of the city’s costs in retaining
consultants to verify statements made in conjunction with the permit
application, to the extent that verification requires telecommunication
expertise.
   (b)   Stealth telecommunication towers.
      (1)   Where allowed.
         a.   Allowed by right in “E,” “MU-1,”“FR,” “F,” “MU-2,”“NS-T4,” “NS-
T5,” “TU,” “CB,” “TUP,” “G,” “H,” “I,” “J,” “K;” and
         b.   Allowed by special exception in residential districts “ER,” “AG,”
“CF,” in scenic corridors or areas as designated in §
6.402, historic overlay districts (“HC,” “HSE”) and conservation overlay
districts (“CD”).
      (2)   Setback requirements.
         a.   Stealth telecommunication towers shall be setback two feet for
each foot in height from a one-family, two-family or multifamily district or
use unless located in such a district and permitted by special exception;
         b.   In all other zoning districts, the standard setback shall apply;
however, additional setbacks may be required as described in this section;
         c.   Two hundred feet from the shoreline of the Trinity River or the
West Fork, Clear Fork, Marine Creek, Mary’s Creek or Sycamore Creek per the map
established by the “Trinity River Corridor Mapping Data” prepared by the North
Central Texas Council of Governments; and
         d.   Two hundred feet from the shoreline of Lake Arlington, Lake
Benbrook, Lake Worth, Eagle Mountain Lake or Marine Creek Lake.
      (3)   Administrative approval of stealth telecommunication towers. A
monopole flag, athletic light pole, parking or street light pole or other
monopole design with internal antenna for a stealth telecommunication tower
design may be approved administratively by the development services director,
or his or her designee, subject to the following:
         a.   Conforms to the definition of a stealth tower;
         b.   Has a monotone color of light gray or off-white;
         c.   Displays a light fixture of 175 watts or less, if applicable;
         d.   Displays an American, state or corporate logo flag without copy
(must meet proper flag etiquette), if applicable;
         e.   Being appropriately located to functionally serve the use(s) of
the site;
         f.   Screening the support equipment with a six-foot masonry wall
consistent with the site design materials or architecture, or screening with a
black or green rubberized chain-link fence surrounded with three-foot high
hedge on all sides exclusive of entry gate; and
         g.   Being no more than 60 feet in height unless the tower is
providing space for an additional antenna, allowing up to an additional 15 feet
of height, with a maximum of 75 feet.
      (4)   Design and appearance requirements.
         a.   Any design plan not eligible for administrative approval in
accordance with subsection (b)(3) above may apply to the board of adjustment
for a special exception. In granting the special exception, the board shall
consider the overall design of the stealth telecommunication tower, including
the scale, placement on the site, materials, form and color.
         b.   A design plan must be submitted by the applicant at the time of
application.
         c.   The design plan must include:
            1.   Visual study, visualization or simulation showing the
appearance of the proposed stealth telecommunication tower and ancillary
facilities, to scale and in the existing natural or built environment from at
least two points of public view;
            2.   General capacity of the proposed tower, in terms of the number
and types of antennas it is designed to accommodate;
            3.   Current overall system plan for the city, documenting
telecommunication facilities presently constructed or approved, including a map
indicating the proposed provider’s current coverage for the city and the area
the requested site would cover;
            4.   Statement outlining the rationales for the particular
location, design and height of the stealth telecommunication tower;
            5.   Landscape plan drawn to scale showing the proposed and
existing fencing and landscaping, including type, spacing, size and irrigation
methods;
            6.   Visual depiction or architect’s rendering (drawn to scale) of
the stealth telecommunications tower; and
            7.   Site plan (drawn to scale)indicating the location and height
of the stealth telecommunication tower, with ancillary facilities, as well as
their proximity to buildings and to other structures on adjacent properties to
include a radius of 200 feet.
      (5)   Construction requirements.
         a.   Stealth telecommunication towers shall not be illuminated by
artificial means or shall display strobe lights or other warning lighting
unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or any other federal,
state or city law, rule or regulation. Any lighting shall be shielded or
directed so as not to project directly onto property zoned residential or any
residential use. When incorporated into the approved design, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or other similar areas may be
attached to a telecommunication tower.
         b.   Any new stealth telecommunication tower must be able to support
at least one additional antenna for every 15 feet (or fraction thereof) above
60 feet in height and provide the ground space for any equipment necessary for
the operation of additional antenna.
      (6)   Screening, fencing and landscaping requirements. All stealth
telecommunication towers and all support facilities shall have the following:
         a.   A six-foot solid screening fence constructed of wood, brick,
stone or reinforced concrete products per the specifications of §
5.305 Fences of the zoning ordinance; or
         b.   Screening shrubs shall be installed around a fence and screen
from view the associated structures. All screening shrubs shall be a minimum of
three feet in height at planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height
of a minimum of six feet in three years and must have a permanently installed
irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials.
The vegetation shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at
all times.
      (7)   Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of vehicles, materials or
equipment is permitted. Equipment not used in direct support of the facility
shall not be stored or parked on the premises unless a technician is present.
      (8)   Commercial message prohibited. No signs, including commercial
advertising, logos, political signs, flyers, flags or banners, graphics or
other attention devices shall be allowed on any part of the telecommunication
tower or ancillary support facilities except for warning and safety signage.
      (9)   Removal.
         a.   Upon cessation for more than 180 days of the use of a stealth
telecommunication tower structure for the support of active communications
antennas, the owner of record must notify the planning and development
department. Disconnection of electric service for more than 180 days at the
stealth telecommunications tower site shall be considered cessation of use.
         b.   All transmission stealth telecommunications towers or antennas
shall be removed by the person who constructed the facility, by the person who
operates the facility or by the property owner within one year from the time
the facilities have ceased being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and
data signals to or from wireless communications devices.
         c.   The person who constructed the facility, the person who operates
the facility or owner of record must notify the planning and development
department of any change in the status of the stealth telecommunication tower.
If the use of the antennas on the stealth telecommunication tower has not been
restored within the one year period from the time the facilities have ceased
being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from
wireless communication devices, the stealth telecommunication tower must be
removed and the stealth telecommunication tower site restored to its original
condition to a depth of two feet, at the owners expense.
      (10)   Fees. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the
city may require, as part of any application fees for a telecommunication
facility, an amount sufficient to recover all of the city’s costs in retaining
consultants to verify statements made in conjunction with the permit
application, to the extent that verification requires telecommunication
expertise.
      (11)   Board of adjustment. Except for stealth communication towers built
under subsection (b)(3) above, the board of adjustment shall review proposed
designs considering the materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping
designs of the equipment of the structure and any other permitted structures to
determine the visibility, aesthetic impact and compatibility to the surrounding
natural or built environments.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15283, § 14, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 17093,
§ 3, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17844, passed 11-
1-2007; Ord. 20158-04-2012, § 1, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 21272-06-2014, § 4,
passed 6-3-2014; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 5.138 THEATER, MOVIE THEATER OR AUDITORIUM.
   Theaters (including movie theaters) and auditoriums and theaters may be
permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided the use has a seating capacity no greater than 1,500 people.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.139 TERMINAL: TRUCK, FREIGHT, RAIL OR WATER.
   Terminals may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   A traffic flow plan shall be approved by the city traffic engineer,
based on an accurate plot plan drawn to scale. The applicant shall prepare and
submit the plot plan to the city traffic engineer.
   (b)   Loading, parking and maneuvering space shall be entirely on private
property.
   (c)   The operation of any such terminal shall be not less than 200 feet
from any residential district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.140 UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER OR DISTRIBUTION LINE; NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR
STATIONS.
   (a)   Utility transmission tower or distribution line.
      (1)   Location. Utility transmission towers and distribution lines and
supporting structures owned and/or operated by the city, county or public
utility companies, which are necessary for the furnishing of utility services,
are permitted in all districts.
      (2)   Accessory uses. The following are permitted as accessory uses in
all districts:
         a.   Communication antennas that are mounted on and supported by
utility transmission towers, provided that no communication antenna shall
extend more than 12 feet above the highest point of the tower; and
         b.   Auxiliary structures housing electronic communications equipment
which is necessary for the operation of communication antennas established
pursuant to subsection (a)(2)a. above.
      (3)   Exemption from height requirements. District height requirements
shall not apply to:
         a.   Utility transmission towers and distribution lines and supporting
structures; and
         b.   Communication antennas established in compliance with subsection
(a)(2)a. above.
   (b)   Natural gas compressor stations.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically stated, variances to the compressor
regulations may not be granted by the board of adjustment.
      (2)   Lift compressors.
         a.   Lift compressors shall be allowed in all zoning districts, but
shall be restricted to the gas drilling pad site.
         b.   One three-inch caliper tree shall be planted every 40 linear feet
along the property line abutting a public right-of-way. No heavy equipment,
including, but not limited to, trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat
tractors, trenchers, compressors and hoists shall be allowed inside the
critical root zone of any protected tree on any compressor site without the
specific approval of the city forester. This requirement shall supersede other
landscaping requirements.
         c.   All equipment or buildings associated with the operation of the
compressor located in or within 600 feet of residentially used property or from
the public right-of-way shall be screened from public view by landscaping,
berming, structure or wall constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally
sound material as approved by the director of planning and development or his
or her designee that significantly screens the equipment and is painted in a
non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as
nearly as possible. This requirement shall supersede other landscaping
requirements.
(Ord. 16995, § 1, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006; Ord.
18504-03-2009, § 1, passed 3-3-2009, eff. 3-11-2009; Ord. 20999, § 2, passed
10-15-2013)
§ 5.141 VEHICLE JUNKYARD.
   The city council shall receive a report from appropriate city departments
when considering a conditional use permit.
   (a)   In the “AG” district. A motor vehicle junk yard or used automobile
junk area may be permitted as a conditional use permit. Conditional use permit
approvals shall be limited to the following period of time. Extensions of time
shall each be subject to the same application, report and hearing procedures as
the original approval.
      (1)   First approval. A period not to exceed five years;
      (2)   First extension. A period not to exceed three years; and
      (3)   Each subsequent extension. A period not to exceed two years.
   (b)   In the “J” district. In the “J” district a motor vehicle junk yard or
used automobile junk area may be permitted as a conditional use permit. The
conditional use permit shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The junkyard or area shall not adjoin any residential district.
      (2)   The junkyard or area must be completely enclosed by a six-foot
screening fence.
      (3)   Conditional use permit approvals shall be limited to the following
period of time. Extensions of time shall each be subject to the same
application, report and hearing procedures as the original approval.
         a.   First approval. A period not to exceed five years;
         b.   First extension. A period not to exceed three years; and
         c.   Each subsequent extension. A period not to exceed two years.
   (c)   In the “K” district. A motor vehicle junk yard or used automobile junk
area may be permitted as a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit
shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The junkyard or area shall not adjoin any residential district.
      (2)   The junkyard or area must be completely enclosed by a six-foot
screening fence.
      (3)   Conditional use permit approvals shall be limited to the following
period of time. Extensions of time shall each be subject to the same
application, report and hearing procedures as the original approval.
         a.   First approval. A period not to exceed ten years; and
         b.   Each subsequent extension. A period not to exceed ten years.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 23609-
03-2019, § 10, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.142 VETERINARY CLINIC.
   (a)   Commercial districts (indoor). Veterinary clinics, including dog and
cat hospitals and associated indoor kennels, may be permitted in commercial
districts, subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The entire business must be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed sound-proofed and air-conditioned building.
      (2)   Noise and odors created by activities within the building shall not
be perceptible beyond the property line.
      (3)   No animals shall be kept outside the building at any time.
   (b)   Industrial districts (outdoor). Veterinary clinics, including dog and
cat hospitals and associated outdoor kennels, may be permitted in industrial
districts, subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   No animal hospital or kennel shall be permitted within 100 feet of
any residential use.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, measurement of the 100-foot
distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of a
residentially-zoned property or premises used for residential purposes, to the
nearest portion of the kennel or hospital.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.143 WAREHOUSE OR BULK STORAGE.
   Storage in bulk of, or warehouse for, commodities and materials associated
with uses allowed in the “ER” through “I” districts is permitted in the “I”
district provided the storage complies with the City of Fort Worth fire code.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17093, § 3, passed 8-8-2006)
§ 5.144 FRESH WATER FRACTURE PONDS.
   (a)   Fresh water fracture ponds located on a tract of land not adjacent to
a gas drilling pad site shall be permitted by right in “AG” agricultural
district, “I” light industrial, “J” medium industrial and “K” heavy industrial
zoning districts.
   (b)   All fresh water fracture ponds must meet the permitting requirements
and regulations as outlined in
Article II of Chapter 15, Gas entitled Gas Drilling and Production.
(Ord. 18504-03-2009, § 2, passed 3-3-2009, eff. 3-11-2009)
§ 5.145 FARMERS’ MARKET.
   Farmers’ markets in the “E” neighborhood commercial district and the “MU-1”
low intensity mixed use district shall have no more than ten vendors or a sales
area of no greater than 2,000 square feet.
(Ord. 20666-03-2013, § 3, passed 3-19-2013, eff. 4-9-2013)
§ 5.146 URBAN AGRICULTURE AND COMMUNITY GARDENS.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   A single responsible party shall be identified for any urban farm.
The party may be a private resident, nonprofit or for profit entity.
      (2)   A land use certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be required for any
area that is used solely for food crop production. Contiguous property within a
production unit may be included within one CO. Noncontiguous property will
require separate COs.
      (3)   Building permits and COs shall be required for any habitable
structure. Building permits shall be required for non-habitable structures
greater than 400 square feet.
      (4)   A maximum 12 square foot sign may be provided displaying the
operator and description of the operation.
      (5)   Large animals. Raising large animals for production or slaughter or
both shall not be an allowed use under urban agriculture. Large animals are
allowed in accordance with §
5.307.
      (6)   Fowl are allowed in accordance with Appendix B, "Code Compliance"
Section
11A-22, "Keeping of Pigeons and Certain Fowl" of the city code.
      (7)   Parking may be provided off-site if employees are parking personal
vehicles and traveling to the worksite in a single or minimal number of
vehicles. If personal vehicles are parked on the street at a site in a
residential area, the vehicles shall not remain parked longer than four hours
in a workday.
      (8)   Urban forestry requirements shall not apply for any production
area. Trees shall be required as part of a required landscape buffer when
structures requiring a building permit are on the site, including nonproduction
areas such as retail and warehouse. Fruiting trees may be provided as credit
toward the buffer and planting requirements. An urban forestry plan showing the
existing conditions and any trees to be removed shall be provided. If trees are
removed for agricultural purposes and the agricultural use ceases within five
years, replacement trees shall be installed from the protected tree list.
      (9)   Odor shall be controlled on all urban gardens and farms so as to
not be a nuisance to surrounding properties. Any sources of odor shall be
controlled and mitigated in accordance with the city code and all applicable
laws.
      (10)   Beekeeping/apiary is allowed with the below regulations:
         a.   The responsible parties, who are beekeepers, must adhere to all
applicable state laws concerning the care and handling of bees.
         b.   Honeybee colonies are kept in hives with removable frames or top
bars with dividers, which shall be maintained in sound working condition.
         c.   The numbers of hives is tailored to the size of the lot as
follows: a maximum of two hives on lots ¼ acre or smaller, four hives on lots
larger than ¼ but less than ½ acre, six hives on lots larger than ½ acre but
smaller than one acre. There shall be no limit on the number of hives on lots
larger than one acre. The number of hives may increase by up to 50% over the
designated limits for a period not greater than 60 days. The Development
Services Director or designee shall have the authority to require a person to
reduce the number of hives or require other reasonable safety precautions in an
apiary in order to abate any nuisance.
         d.   If a hive's orientation has the hive entrances located
perpendicular to and within 25 feet or less of an adjacent property line, a
solid wall, fence, hedge or combination thereof at least six feet high shall be
placed between hives and adjacent property lines of developed properties, and
extends at least four feet beyond the hive in each direction along the property
line in order to minimize interactions between bees and the adjacent property.
         e.   A convenient source of water is provided to the bees on the
property at all times during the year to discourage bees from congregating at
swimming pools, hose bibs, or other water sources where contact with humans or
pets may occur.
         f.   No wax comb or other material that encourage robbing by other
bees is left upon the grounds of the lot; instead this material should be
stored in sealed, insect-proof containers or closed buildings. For a period not
greater than 24 hours frames and hone harvesting equipment may be left in the
bee yard to allow bees to clean excess honey from the equipment.
         g.   If a colony exhibits aggressive behavior without provocation, the
beekeeper will ensure that the colony is re-queened or otherwise managed using
customary beekeeping practices.
      (11)   Watering equipment shall comply with the water regulations of the
City of Fort Worth. Irrigation shall utilize water conserving fixtures.
      (12)   Delivery of compost, mulch, soil, or other clean organic or
inorganic materials shall be allowed, provided however, that the storage of the
materials shall not exceed six feet in height and is screened from public view.
      (13)   Chemical applications such as pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers are allowed provided that state regulations are followed and the
responsible party obtains the required permits. However, organic growing
practices are preferred due to the negative impacts of many chemicals on
environmental quality and public health.
      (14)   All food products provided for sale shall comply with the
requirements of
Chapter 16 "Health and Sanitation" of the city code.
      (15)   Property shall be restored to its former condition immediately
prior to or an improved state upon cessation of the urban agriculture use,
including but not limited to, the removal of all agricultural structures,
tanks, raised beds, irrigation lines and equipment.
   (b)   In all residential districts as a primary use and "ER" Neighborhood
Commercial as a primary use:
      (1)   On site sales shall be allowed sunrise to sunset, not to exceed
three days per week. A maximum sales area 50 square feet with one temporary
structure to be used the day of the sale. A maximum two foot by two foot
signage shall be allowed the day of sale. A temporary sandwich board sign shall
be allowed within ten feet of the site of sales.
      (2)   Sales may occur in accordance with division (b)(1) above for
nonresidential properties in residential districts, e.g. churches and schools.
      (3)   There shall be no size limitation for urban farms.
      (4)   Coverage of buildings shall be determined by the lot coverage for
the zoning district. Any vertical structure over four feet is included in this
calculation and includes classrooms, greenhouses, and storage structures.
      (5)   Screening fences are required for the storage of compost, mulch and
similar items. Storage piles or the fence shall not exceed six feet in height.
Storage of these items shall not be visible from the ground level of adjacent
residential property or public street. Open security fencing shall be allowed
for all production areas provided however fences in the front yard shall comply
with §
5.305.
      (6)   Cisterns shall not exceed 500 gallons and/or six feet in height,
whichever is greater.
      (7)   Aquaponics shall be allowed within a structure with no outside
storage of equipment or materials.
      (8)   When the agricultural use is accessory to a primary residential
use:
         a.   Division (b)(1) above applies; and
         b.   Front yard gardens are allowed for crop production. Once
production ceases and plants begin to die back, the yard shall be maintained.
No weeds or other unkempt conditions shall remain. Plants that seed shall be
allowed to remain during the seeding process but shall be otherwise maintained.
   (c)   In "E", "F" and "G" commercial districts and "CF" community facilities
district:.
      (1)   Production plus permanent or temporary retail sales allowed.
Permanent sales facilities shall operate in accordance with §
5.145 as a farmer's market. Temporary sales operations shall comply with
division (b)(1) above.
      (2)   Aquaponics shall be allowed within a structure, with no outside
storage of equipment or materials.
      (3)   Self-pick farms are allowed. Parking shall be required at one
vehicle per four employees and one vehicle per acre of urban farm for customer
parking and may be provided as compacted gravel base.
      (4)   Screening fences are required for the storage of compost, mulch and
similar items. Storage piles or the fence shall not exceed six feet in height.
Open security fencing shall be allowed for all production areas. Any retail or
nonproduction structure or any structure that contains a portion of these
activities shall comply with the commercial regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance.
      (5)   Motorized equipment shall not exceed ten horsepower.
   (d)   In "I", "J" and "K" industrial districts.
      (1)   The commercial requirements in division (c) above apply; warehouse/
distribution uses are allowed.
      (2)   Storage of equipment and vehicles including tractors, spreaders and
harvesting equipment may only occur on lots within industrial districts.
      (3)   Aquaponics shall be permitted within or outside a structure.
      (4)   Storage piles and fencing may exceed six feet in height.
   (e)   In "H" central business district, mixed use ("MU) and form-based
districts.
      (1)   Acreage shall be limited to one acre.
      (2)   Motorized equipment shall not exceed ten horsepower.
      (3)   Screening fences are required for the storage of compost, mulch and
similar items. Neither the storage piles nor the fence shall exceed six feet.
Open security fencing shall be allowed for all production areas. Any retail or
nonproduction structure or any structure that contains a portion of these
activities shall comply with the commercial regulations of this section.
   (f)   Site plans.
      (1)   A site plan is required for any urban farm under division (b)
through (e) above operated as a primary use. The site plan shall show all areas
used for the farming purposes and may include a multi-lot production unit. The
site plan may be approved administratively by the development services director
or designee. Operations as an accessory to a residential use shall not be
required to provide a site plan. The site plan may be prepared by the
applicant.
      (2)   A site plan shall include the following information:
         a.   Name and contact information of responsible party(ies);
         b.   The land area included within the site, the zoning classification
of adjacent sites, and a plat, or survey if not recorded;
         c.   A legal description of the platted lots of the proposed site and
the boundaries thereof;
         d.   The location of each proposed permanent structure on the site
labeled with the intended use and include the distance to the property lines;
         e.   The location of any temporary sales structure;
         f.   Identification of the location of outdoor storage including
composting, organic debris, and permanent equipment. Storage in piles shall
provide intended maximum pile height;
         g.   Identification of any equipment to be used in the crop
production, location of storage and expected frequency and duration of use;
         h.   The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas,
as applicable;
         i.   Depiction of the landscaping of all street frontages for retail
or warehouse uses or a note that it will comply with §
6.301 of the Zoning Ordinance;
         j.   The location and height of all walls, fences and screen planting
and landscaping;
         k.   The location of parking for employees;
         l.   The location, size, height, foot candle level (brightness) and
direction of all lighting in residential districts or adjacent to "A" or "B"
residential districts. Lighting in residential districts or adjacent to "A" or
"B" residential districts shall be shielded in order to eliminate light
trespass onto adjacent properties;
         m.   Proposed signage if applicable. Signage for nonproduction uses
shall meet the regulations of the applicable zoning district;
         n.   The location and screening of refuse containers, mechanical
equipment, and other structures not requiring a building permit;
         o.   A schedule of the phasing of all improvements shown in the plan,
if applicable;
         p.   For production areas only: if not provided on the farming site, a
note shall be provided where restrooms shall be available for employees. If at
the farm's business office, provide the location. If by agreement with a
surrounding business, provide the name and address of the business and a copy
of the written agreement. Temporary restroom facilities shall be allowed as
allowed by Chapter 16 "Health and Sanitation" of the city code. Restrooms shall
be provided in accordance with applicable building codes for retail, warehouse,
and distribution structures.
         q.   Location and type of water supply and electrical outlet(s)
provided for the farm/garden.
   Note: A basic storm water/erosion and sediment control plan will be required
for review.
   Note: All regulations of the Zoning Ordinance apply unless a variance is
received and provided on the site plan.
   (g)   Community garden.
      (1)   On site sales shall be allowed sunrise to sunset, not to exceed
three days per week. Maximum sales area 50 square feet with a temporary
structure to be moved to the point of sale only the day of the sale. Maximum 2
ft. x 2 ft. signage shall be allowed for the day of sale only. A temporary
sandwich board sign shall be allowed within ten feet of the site of sales.
      (2)   No fencing or landscaping required, but gardens shall be maintained
to a residential standard. No weeds or other unkempt conditions shall remain.
      (3)   No additional parking spaces are required.
      (4)   No size limit but shall be located on a platted residential lot.
      (5)   Accessory structures shall not exceed 400 total square feet.
      (6)   Landscaping structures such as arbors may be installed for
aesthetic and shade purposes behind the required front setback.
      (7)   The maximum structure lot coverage for the applicable zoning
district shall apply.
      (8)   A minimum 2 ft. x 2 ft. permanent unilluminated sign shall be
installed providing the phone number of a contact person. A maximum 32 square
foot sign may be installed behind the required front setback. The sign shall be
well maintained and removed upon closure of the garden.
(Ord. 22335-08-2016, § 1, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020)
§ 5.147 HALFWAY HOUSES.
   (a)   The applicant shall submit the following information to the planning
and development department:
      (1)   Area plan showing zoning classifications and land uses of all
property within one-quarter mile of the site of the proposed halfway house. The
area plan must specifically identify all uses related to children, such as
schools, places of worship, parks, playgrounds, day care centers, public and
private youth centers, public swimming pools and video arcade facilities. The
applicant is expected to make a good faith effort to locate all such uses;
      (2)   Site plan for the property, in compliance with this article. The
site plan shall include a floor plan detailing room sizes, sleeping areas,
number of beds, training rooms, kitchen and food service areas, bathrooms,
recreational areas and all other uses. The site plan requirement cannot be
waived by the zoning commission;
      (3)   Copy of the contract governing the operation of the facility;
      (4)   Security plan identifying security features of facility; and
      (5)   Copy of policies and rules for operation of the facility.
   (b)   The zoning commission shall consider comments from the police
department and planning and development department concerning the documentation
described above prior to recommending approval of any zoning change request for
a halfway house.
   (c)   Notification of the requested zoning change shall be sent to the
owners of all property within 1,000 feet of the property on which the change in
zoning is proposed, in accordance with the procedure set out in state law and
local ordinances, and to all neighborhoods registered with the planning and
development department that include property located within 1,000 feet of the
proposed site. Notice of the time and place of the hearing before the city
council shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation at least 15 days before the hearing as required by state law and
shall be at least five inches by eight inches.
   (d)   If the owner or operator of a nonconforming halfway house wishes to
expand the facility or make structural alterations which require the approval
of the city council, notification of the request shall be sent to the owners of
all property within 1,000 feet of the property on which the expansion is
proposed and to all neighborhoods registered with the planning and development
department that include property located within 1,000 feet of the proposed
site. In addition, notice of the time and place of the hearing before the city
council shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation at least 15 days before the hearing and shall be at least five
inches by eight inches.
(Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 8, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.148 HORSE, DOG OR AUTOMOTIVE RACING.
   (a)   Additional development controls shall be required, as follows:
      (1)   Holding areas for horses or dogs shall be provided in case of fire;
      (2)   An approved emergency plan and an approved evacuation plan shall be
provided;
      (3)   Security plans shall be provided and reviewed by the police
department;
      (4)   Spectator parking lots shall be 500 feet from any one- or two-
family districts;
      (5)   Other facilities, including accessory uses and facilities such as
the race track and the bleachers, shall be 1,000 feet from any one- or two-
family district and from any multifamily district not a part of race track as a
mixed use;
      (6)   The parking required shall be one space for every two spectator
seats and one space for every ten square feet of spectator standing area;
      (7)   When located within or adjacent to any city, state or national
historic district, the racetrack building and structures shall be designed to
be compatible with said district;
      (8)   An approved solid waste disposal plan shall be provided and set
into operation upon occupancy of the racetrack and its buildings and
structures; and
      (9)   All support activities and other proposed uses, which the site may
include, shall be specifically identified.
   (b)   In addition to site plan requirements and development controls above,
the following design considerations shall be incorporated where feasible:
      (1)   Impact studies (such as traffic impact) on the effects of the track
operations on adjacent lands. Such studies shall include setbacks; street,
arterial and highway access; and buffering of properties surrounding the
racetrack site;
      (2)   Compartmentalization of parking areas for traffic circulation and
emergency vehicle circulation;
      (3)   Emergency vehicle access around site located at the bleachers area
with connection through the spectator parking lots to the user area;
      (4)   Height of buildings and structures not to exceed 12 stories or 120
feet, whichever is the most restrictive; and
      (5)   User parking and storage area for trailers and similar vehicles
with separate access than from spectator parking area.
(Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 8, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.149 LANDFILL, WASTE TRANSFER STATION, GOVERNMENT RECYCLING DROP OFF CENTER,
RECYCLING CENTER WITH OUTDOOR PROCESSING AND STOCKPILING, HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS
WASTE OR WASTE TIRE FACILITY.
   (a)   Facilities handling, processing and loading of municipal solid waste
and recyclable materials for transportation at transfer stations; storage,
processing, bailing or reclamation of paper, glass, wood, metals, plastics,
rags, junk, concrete, asphalt and other materials at materials recovery
facilities and recycling centers; disposal, dumping or reducing of offal or
dead animals; composting for yard and wood wastes, municipal solid waste and/or
sludge at composting facilities; collection and storage of household hazardous
wastes; and processing and storage of scrap tires at waste tire facilities,
subject to the requirements set out below. Provided however, a conditional use
permit is required when a recycling center with outdoor processing and
stockpiling, household hazardous waste or waste tire facility is within 1,000
feet of a residential district or mixed use/form-based district that includes a
residential use, a "CF" community facilities district, or a public or private
park as measured property line to property line of the protected zoning
district or park. If an application to create a planned development district to
allow one of the uses described in this section is on file with the city prior
to the adoption of this section, the city may approved the planned development
district, and any use permitted by that planned development district shall be a
legal conforming use. For purposes of this subsection (a), such facilities are
further defined by Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 330, Municipal
Solid Waste, § 330.3, and Tex. Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 335,
Industrial Solid Waste and Municipal Hazardous Waste, § 335.1. The operator
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Submit a site development plan for review that provides detailed
information about the design and development of the facility and that
addresses:
         a.   Zoning and land use within one-quarter mile of the site;
         b.   Proximity to residences, businesses and other uses;
         c.   Availability and characteristics of access roads including
current traffic volumes and impact of proposed facility on roads and traffic;
         d.   Locations of all existing and proposed buildings, equipment and
machinery;
         e.   Fire prevention and control;
         f.   Groundwater, drinking water and surface water protection
including wash areas, stream or water course diversions, holding ponds and
tanks;
         g.   Screening fences, berms, buffers and landscaping;
         h.   Provisions for all activities including loading, unloading,
handling, processing of materials and maintenance and storage of containers,
vehicles and other equipment and machinery to be done within the confines of
the facility and behind required screening fences; and
         i.   Erection and maintenance of signage at the entrance to the
facility that is clearly visible to the public and identifies the owner,
operator, business address, telephone number and hours of operation of the
facility.
      (2)   Obtain, maintain and have available on-site all required permits
and comply with all federal, state and local regulations that relate to the
collection, transportation, handling, processing and disposal of all materials
for which the facility is approved.
      (3)   Submit and maintain on-site an operations plan that addresses:
         a.   Provisions for preventing unauthorized wastes and materials from
being brought to the facility;
         b.   Procedures for identifying, handling, removing, transporting and
disposing of unauthorized wastes and materials that may have been brought to
the facility;
         c.   Procedures for controlling water runoff, erosion, dust, odors,
vectors and rodents;
         d.   Procedures and employee training for fire prevention and control;
         e.   Litter control and cleanup; and
         f.   Procedures for reporting and handling fuel and chemical spills.
   (b)   City council may appoint an oversight committee of city staff, public
representatives and others, as required, to provide assurance of compliance
with all federal, state and local regulations, codes and ordinances. The
operator and/or owner shall provide in writing for access to the property by
said members subject to all safety and operational restrictions required by law
to protect on-site public welfare and safety.
   (c)   The planning and development department may not issue a certificate of
occupancy until the operator of such facility submits proof that the operation
of the facility has been approved by all applicable federal and state
regulatory agencies as required by law.
(Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 8, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.150 MINING, QUARRYING, DREDGING OR EXCAVATION.
   Mining, quarrying, dredging or excavation of dirt, gravel, sand or stone,
for the purpose of removing, screening, crushing, washing or storage of ore,
clay, stone, gravel or similar materials, subject to the following
requirements:
   (a)   Provision of a site plan of all existing conditions, including
topography at five-foot intervals, streams, lakes and other bodies of water,
roadways, utility lines, structures and major vegetation, including canopy
cover;
   (b)   Identification of any known protected species of plant, fish or animal
life, or the presence of areas of historic, cultural or archeological
significance. Such property that is found to be protected or of significant
public interest shall not be included in any area approved for mining;
   (c)   Delineation of all permits and licenses (including NPDES and Texas air
control board) required for the operation of such a facility, name of contact
person, agency address and telephone number of all permitting agencies and
verification of approval of same prior to operation;
   (d)   Submission of a plan of operation, including scheduling of activities,
phasing, traffic generation, employees and use of explosives or other hazardous
or caustic materials or chemicals;
   (e)   Analysis of potential impacts to adjacent properties (especially
residential) due to dust, noise, water runoff and diversion, ground water
alteration, silting, sedimentation, erosion, traffic and mitigation measures to
control such impacts. Submittal of drainage study if deemed necessary by the
department of transportation and public works. When deemed appropriate, as a
mitigation measure of the site perimeter, city council may require appropriate
buffering, berming, screening and landscaping greater than that required under
this zoning ordinance, which shall be maintained in a proper manner at the
expense of the property owner. All mitigation measures must be installed and
completed prior to any physical mining of the site;
   (f)   Submission of plan for protection of adjacent rights-of-way and
streets if mining operations are planned within 50 feet of such rights-of-way
and streets, and approval of plans required from the transportation and public
works director;
   (g)   Approvals from all utility service providers, transmission, electric
and pipeline companies for work around, near or across such utility facility,
including approvals for relocation of such utility facility if required;
   (h)   Site plan identifying all proposed structures, operating facilities,
loading and wash areas, roadways, stream or water course diversions, holding
ponds/tanks, temporary power lines and other site improvements;
   (i)   A reclamation plan, including final topography contours, at five-foot
intervals, relocated stream beds, lakes, ponds and other physical features,
type and depth of surface material, seeding and replanting plan for restoration
of the original canopy cover of the site, including any required cross-section
and engineering/construction plans as approved by the city forester or a soil
conservation scientist. It is recommended that plant materials native to the
site be used;
   (j)   Submission of a performance bond or cash payment for each phase as
required under the standard contract for community facilities agreement of the
city to ensure that all restoration costs in accordance with the reclamation
plan of the site are met;
   (k)   Provision of a clearly visible sign at the entrance to the mining
operation identifying the name, business address and phone number of the
facility owner and operator in compliance with the requirements for on-premises
signs; and
   (l)   City council may appoint an oversight committee of city staff, public
representatives and others, as required, to provide assurance of compliance
with all federal, state and city regulations, codes and ordinances. The
operator and/or owner of a mining operation shall provide in writing for the
limited access to the property by said members subject to all safety and
operational restrictions required by law to protect on-site public welfare and
safety. Such access approval shall be a prerequisite and part of the conditions
of approval of the use.
(Ord. 23609-03-2019, § 8, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 5.151 SMALL BOX DISCOUNT STORE.
   Small box discount store may be permitted in accordance with the use tables
in Chapter 4, Articles 6, 8 and 12, the city council may consider the following
criteria:
   (a)   The proposed location is no less than two miles from any existing
small box discount store. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the
property line of the proposed small box discount store to the property line of
the existing small box discount store, in a direct line across intersections.
   (b)   A minimum of 10% of the floor area is dedicated to fresh produce, meat
and dairy products.
(Ord. 23971-12-2019, § 1, passed 12-3-2019, eff. 12-11-2019)
§ 5.152 RETAIL SMOKE SHOP.
   Retail smoke shop may be permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6, 8 and 12, provided however, retail smoke shops are
prohibited within 300 feet of schools, universities and hospitals. The
measurement shall be in a direct line from the property line of the proposed
retail smoke shop to the property line of the existing schools, universities or
hospitals.
(Ord. 25955-01-2023, § 4, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 1-20-2023)
§ 5.153 BOARDING HOME FACILITIES.
   Boarding home facilities are permitted in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6,
8 and
12, subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   In one-family districts the maximum number of residents in a boarding
home facility, by right, shall be six.
   (b)   A boarding home facility must meet all applicable permitting
requirements of
Chapter 20, Article XIV, Boarding Homes of the City Code and any applicable
Tex. Human Resources Code requirements.
   (c)   A boarding home facility may not be established within one-half mile
of a previously existing boarding home facility.
   (d)   Compatibility standards in one-family zoning districts:
      (1)   There shall be no exterior display or sign with the exception that
a nameplate, not exceeding one square feet in area, may be permitted when
attached to the front of the main structure provided the nameplate is not
illuminated and attached flat to the dwelling unit or visible through a window.
      (2)   No exterior construction features shall be permitted which would
place the structure out of character with the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
      (3)   Front yard impervious cover shall comply with maximum percentages
indicated in
Chapter 6.
   (e)   Any residential structure converted into a boarding home facility will
be required to comply With all additional city code standards including but not
limited to the building code, electric code or fire code, as applicable, based
on the nature of the proposed use and occupancy classification.
   (f)   Motor vehicles on premises. Residents of a boarding home facility may
not keep, on the premises of a home or on the public rights-of-way adjacent to
the home, more than one motor vehicle per bedroom for the use of residents of
the home.
(Ord. 26358-08-2023, § 6, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 5.154 BARS OR TAVERNS.
   A bar or tavern may be permitted in the high intensity mixed- use ("MU-2")
district subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Bars or taverns 2,000 square feet or less are allowed by right in the
MU-2 district.
   (b)   A conditional use permit shall be required if the bar or tavern is
larger than 2,000 square feet where alcohol is served or consumed.
   (c)   A bar or tavern that was lawfully in existence on the effective date
of this section shall be granted nonconforming status. The building official
shall maintain a register of all certificates of occupancy for bars and taverns
made nonconforming after the effective date of this section. The building
official shall determine maximum occupancy allowed where alcohol is served or
consumed for nonconforming bars and taverns.
   (d)   Nonconforming status shall be retained when:
      (1)   Renewing a Texas Alcohol and Beverage Commission (TABC) permit or
license; or
      (2)   The sale or transfer of the business/premise requires a new TABC
permit or license is required; or
      (3)   Maintaining, repairing or making alterations that do not exceed the
occupancy allowed in the registry maintained by the building official.
   (e)   Nonconforming status shall terminate when:
      (1)   The TABC permit or license is terminated and a bona fide
application for a new license or permit is not filed with TABC within two years
of the prior permit or license expiration; or
      (2)   The use has been changed to a conforming use in the MU-2 district;
or
      (3)   The use is altered or expanded such that the occupancy exceeds the
maximum allowed in the registry maintained by the building official; or
      (4)   Restoration of a building destroyed by fire, explosion or other
casualty, or act of God exceeds 75% of the building's reasonable value.
(Ord. 26445-09-2023, § 1, passed 9-12-2023, eff. 9-26-2023)
§ 5.155 SHELTER.
   A shelter may be permitted in accordance with the use tables of
Appendix A, Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided it shall not be located within a one-mile radius of existing
shelters on East Lancaster Avenue or within one-mile of the Historic Southside
Neighborhood (generally illustrated in Appendix B, Exhibit B.37). The board of
adjustment shall have no authority to grant any variance to the distance
limitation.
(Ord. 26652-12-2023, § 1, passed 12-12-2023, eff. 1-9-2024)
§ 5.156 BATCH PLANT, ASPHALT OR CONCRETE (PERMANENT).
   A permanent batch plant, asphalt or concrete, shall be limited to districts
designated “CUP*” in the use tables in Chapter 4, Articles 8 and 12.
(Ord. 27030-06-2024, § 4, passed 6-25-2024, eff. 7-23-2024)
ARTICLE 2: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 16118, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2004, amended the code by consolidating
the regulations of former §
23-18, which pertained to sexually oriented business offenses, and adding
provisions designated as §§
5.200 through 5.221 to Appendix A, Zoning. Former Art. 2, §§
5.200 through 5.202, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code
Comparative Table.
§ 5.200 REGULATIONS AFFECTING ALL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; PURPOSE AND
INTENT.
   The following are provided as guidelines for the construction,
interpretation and enforcement of this article.
   (a)   It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually
oriented business establishments so as to protect and promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and visitors thereto,
and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
   (b)   This article intends a balance of the right of the citizens of the
city to maintain a decent moral society and, on the other hand, the right of
individuals to express themselves freely in accordance with the guidelines of
the Constitution of the United States and United States Supreme Court rulings
pursuant thereto.
   (c)   This article is also intended to deter property uses and activities,
which directly or indirectly, cause or would cause adverse secondary effects,
including the deprecation of property values, on the stability of the immediate
neighborhood surrounding the sexually oriented business.
   (d)   This article has neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials.
   (e)   Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this article to restrict
or deny lawful access by adults to sexually oriented materials or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials to
their intended market.
   (f)   Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this article to impose
judgment on the content or merits of any constitutionally protected form of
speech or expression.
   (g)   It is the purpose of this article to generally charge operators of
sexually oriented businesses to comply with a policy of “keep it indoors and
under control” and to hold all operators first line answerability, directly or
indirectly, for all uses of the premises and activities conducted thereon.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.201 CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (a)   Adult arcades;
   (b)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
   (c)   Adult cabarets;
   (d)   Adult motels;
   (e)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (f)   Escort agencies;
   (g)   Adult model studios;
   (h)   Sexual encounter centers; and
   (i)   Any commercial venture whose operations include the providing,
featuring or offering of employees or entertainment personnel who appear on the
premises while in a state of nudity or simulated nudity and provide live
performances, services or entertainment for customers.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 20901-09-2013, § 1, passed 9-10-2013;
eff. 9-25-2013)
§ 5.202 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS OF ANY TYPE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (a)   A person, including an operator of a sexually oriented business,
commits an offense if he or she operates or permits the operation, or
establishment of a sexually oriented business in a zoning district that does
not expressly permit that type of use in said zoning district.
   (b)   In addition to being located in the proper zoning district, a person,
including an operator, commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
operation or establishment of a sexually oriented business in or within 1,000
feet of an existing:
      (1)   Religious institution;
      (2)   School;
      (3)   Public park;
      (4)   A residential district;
      (5)   The downtown tourism area (generally illustrated in Appendix B,
Exhibit B.3);
      (6)   The cultural district (generally illustrated in Appendix B, Exhibit
B.7);
      (7)   The Fort Worth stockyards national register historic district
(generally illustrated in Appendix B, Exhibit B.5);
      (8)   Other sexually oriented business within the city limits not located
on I-30 or I-35; or
      (9)   Areas that currently are, or within the last ten years were,
designated as neighborhood empowerment zones, tax increment finance districts
and public improvement districts.
   (c)   In addition to being located in the proper zoning district, a person,
including an operator, commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
operation or establishment of a sexually oriented business in or within 1,500
feet of an existing sexually oriented business located within the city limits
on I-30 or I-35.
   (d)   (1)   For the purpose of subsections (b) and (c) above, measurement of
the distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of an
existing religious institution, school or sexually oriented business, or from
the boundary line of a public park, residential district, designated
historical/cultural district, or areas currently or within the last ten years
were designated as neighborhood empowerment zones, tax increment finance
districts and public improvement districts to the nearest property line of the
property sought to be used as a sexually oriented business.
      (2)   If the sexually oriented business, school or religious institution
occupies greater than 50% of the total building square footage on a developed
site, parcel, tract or platted lot, then the measurement of the distance shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the property line.
      (3)   If the sexually oriented business, school or religious institution
occupies less than 50% of the total building square footage on a developed
site, parcel, tract or platted lot, then the measurement of the distance shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest wall.
      (4)   All other provisions of this section shall remain in full force and
affect.
   (e)   Also for the purposes of subsection (b) above, measurement of the
1,000 foot distance shall also include religious institutions, schools, public
parks, residential districts or other sexually oriented businesses, which are
located in an adjacent city, township or rural land area and which are within
the 1,000 foot distance of the nearest property line of the property sought to
be used as a sexually oriented business within the City of Fort Worth.
   (f)   A certified survey prepared by a licensed surveyor or licensed
engineer showing distance measurements in accordance with this section shall be
submitted to the development services director as part of the application for
the specialized certificate of occupancy. Any specialized certificate of
occupancy issued for a building or facility used to conduct a sexually oriented
business without submission of the required survey shall be null and void.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
establishment or operation of more than one sexually oriented business on the
same property, in the same building or structure, or any portion thereof.
   (h)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
after December 21, 1993 is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent
location of a religious institution, school, public park, residential district
or designated historical/cultural district within 1,000 feet of the sexually
oriented business.
   (i)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
prior to September 27, 2004 is not rendered a nonconforming use by the change
in zoning districts that expressly permits sexually oriented business in said
zoning district or by the increase in distance to 1,500 feet on I-35 or I-30.
Such businesses shall be allowed to remodel and repair their current operations
so long as the size of the building is not expanded and the remodel and repair
occurs within the same footprint of the building at the time of adoption of
this ordinance. All repairs and remodeling must be in compliance with the
current city codes.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
18130, § 1, passed 6-3-2008; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 5.203 SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   Specialized certificate of occupancy required.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she establishes, operates or
continues to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid specialized
certificate of occupancy expressly allowing the particular type of business
issued by the City of Fort Worth for the particular type of business and
activity to be conducted on the premises.
      (2)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining and
thereafter maintaining a valid specialized certificate of occupancy. A person
who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses other state or city
permits shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as
well as the requirements and provisions of the other applicable permits.
      (3)   A person shall not cause the establishment, operation or
continuation of a sexually oriented business establishment under any other form
of certificate of occupancy, such as a “lounge,” “nightclub,” “bar,” “tanning
salon,” etc., that does not also expressly provide for the sexually oriented
business and activity also conducted on the premises.
   (b)   Application for specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation or other
entity desiring to obtain a specialized certificate of occupancy for a sexually
oriented business shall make application on a form(s) provided by the city’s
planning and development department. The applicant shall also furnish any and
all necessary supporting documents as required by the application.
      (2)   An application for a specialized certificate of occupancy shall be
valid for a period of two years and shall expire on the second anniversary of
its date of filing with the city if the sexually oriented business is not open
for business under a valid specialized certificate of occupancy. A subsequent
application shall be subject to all the current ordinance requirements,
including, but not limited to, distance and zoning requirements, and any
amendments to the ordinance since the filing of the previous application.
      (3)   Only a person who is an officer of or who has at least a 20%
ownership interest in a sexually oriented business may apply for a specialized
certificate of occupancy for the business. Each applicant must be qualified
according to the provisions of this section and shall be considered an operator
if a specialized certificate of occupancy is granted.
      (4)   If an applicant is an individual, he or she must sign the
application form as “applicant.”
      (5)   If the applicant is other than an individual, each person or entity
who is an officer of the business or has a 20% or greater investment or
ownership interest in the business entity must sign the application as an
“applicant.” An application on behalf of a corporation or partnership must
provide sufficient documentation with the application to identify all corporate
shareholders and directors or partners who have a 20% or greater ownership
interest.
      (6)   If the enterprise is a Texas corporation, a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation, together with all amendments must be submitted.
      (7)   If the enterprise is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in this state, along with all
amendment must be submitted.
      (8)   If the enterprise is a limited partnership formed under the laws of
Texas, the applicant must submit a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership, together with all amendments filed in the office of the Secretary
of State of Texas. If the partnership is a foreign limited partnership, the
applicant must submit the certificate of limited partnership and the
qualification documents along with all amendments filed in the office of the
Secretary of State of Texas.
      (9)   Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which
the enterprise is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed or
binding lease for the premises on which the business would be operated.
      (10)   In addition to identifying those person required to sign an
application under this subsection (b), the application must identify all parent
and sexually oriented related corporations or entities of any person who will
own or operate the sexually oriented business and include the names of the
officers of each parent or related corporation or entity.
      (11)   Subsequent corporate sales, mergers, changes in shareholders or
changes in partners shall be registered with the planning and development
department immediately upon completion of the documentation evidencing the
transaction. All subsequent shareholders and directors or partners must be
identified and shall be subject to qualification and compliance with the
requirements for obtaining the specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (12)   The application must be accompanied by:
         a.   A sketch or diagram drawn to scale of the floor plan(s). A
professionally prepared sketch or diagram in the nature of an engineer or
architect’s blueprint is recommended but shall not be required. Each sketch or
diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
landmark. Each sketch or diagram shall be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various dimensions of all areas,
walls, doors, windows or other material aspects of the premises. Each sketch or
diagram shall include at least the following:
            1.   The internal and external configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the structure;
            2.   A statement fully describing the external signage to be
displayed on the premises, as well as signage intended to be displayed
elsewhere in the city to advertise the business;
            3.   The location of one or more manager’s stations or office;
            4.   The location of all electrical wiring and fixtures, including,
but not limited to, lighting fixtures, sound systems, special effects
equipment, video display equipment, video surveillance systems, etc.;
            5.   Designation of any portion of the premises in which customers
will not be permitted or in which sexually oriented business activities will
not be conducted;
            6.   A plan or description of the safety and security measures for
the inside and outside of the premises, its customers and employees;
            7.   A designation of the place(s) at which the specialized
certificate of occupancy, a copy of the floor plan(s), and other necessary
permits, licenses and signage will be conspicuously posted; and
            8.   The director of the planning and development department may
waive the foregoing sketch or diagram requirements only for renewal
applications if the applicant expressly adopts by reference a floor plan that
was previously approved and certifies that the configuration of the premises
has not been altered or enlarged since it was approved.
         b.   All new applications shall include a certified survey map
prepared by a licensed surveyor or licensed engineer which shows the required
minimum distances from properties with protected uses or protected zoning.
      (13)   A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany all applications.
An application shall not be considered filed until all applicable fees are paid
and all information required by the application form has been submitted.
      (14)   A copy of all applications and supporting documentation for
specialized certificates of occupancy shall be maintained in the planning and
development department.
      (15)   The operator of a sexually oriented business shall permit and
cooperate with the appropriate city enforcement personnel to lawfully inspect
the entire premises as well as all activity being conducted therein.
      (16)   Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form
authorizing the chief to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history
reports from the Texas department of public safety and any appropriate federal
agency.
      (17)   Each application shall contain the following statements signed by
applicant:
         a.   I represent that I have personal knowledge of all statements made
and information given in this application and that the information is true and
correct;
         b.   If required by law, that an outdoor sign was posted in
conformance with this article and state law not later than the sixtieth day
before the date the application was filed; and
         c.   The applicant has read the provisions of this article.
   (c)   Issuance of original specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   The planning and development department shall approve the issuance
of a specialized certificate of occupancy to an applicant within 30 working
days after all conditions required for the application have been satisfied.
      (2)   When issued, the certificate shall state on its face:
         a.   The full name, address and telephone number of the person(s)
(“the operator”) to whom it is granted;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the establishment;
         c.   A description of specifically what type of sexually oriented
business operation has been approved to be conducted on the premises; and
         d.   The expiration date.
      (3)   When issued, the specialized certificate of occupancy shall remain
the sole property of the city and shall be valid only as to the operator and
location for which it was originally issued and shall not be sold, loaned or
otherwise transferred to any other person, subsequent operator of the business
or to another location unless the sale, loan or transfer complies with the
provisions of this article.
      (4)   The specialized certificate of occupancy as well as a copy of the
currently approved floor plan shall be continually displayed in a conspicuous
place within the establishment so that it is visible to the public at all times
and may be easily read.
      (5)   It shall be an offense for any person to counterfeit, forge,
change, deface or alter a specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (6)   No increase of the floor area or modification in the internal
structural configuration of a sexually oriented business shall be made beyond
the area or configuration as shown in the floor plan as approved with the
issuance of the specialized certificate of occupancy unless an amended
specialized certificate of occupancy is issued by the planning and development
department per subsection (d) below.
   (d)   Issuance of amended or modified certificates of occupancy.
      (1)   In the event a lawfully operating sexually oriented business
desires to modify its operations by varying the type of entertainment or
activity provided to another type which is not authorized in the operator’s
current specialized certificate of occupancy, the operator shall notify the
planning and development department in writing 30 days in advance, apply for
and acquire prior written approval for the modification, up to and including an
amended or modified specialized certificate of occupancy, if necessary. The
planning and development department’s approval or denial shall be made within
30 days of receipt of said written request from the operator.
      (2)   A non-refundable processing fee equal to one-half of the original
application fee shall be required for obtaining an amended or modified
certificate. The amended or modified certificate shall expire on the same date
as the original certificate.
   (e)   Expiration and renewal of a specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   Each specialized certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a
period of one year and shall expire on the anniversary of its date of issuance,
unless sooner revoked or surrendered. Each specialized certificate of occupancy
shall be subject to renewal as of its expiration date by the filing of a
renewal application with the development services director.
      (2)   The operator holding a specialized certificate of occupancy issued
under this section may renew the certificate rather than reapply for an
original certificate if, not later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the
certificate, the operator files and receives approval of a renewal application.
      (3)   Application for renewal shall be made to the planning and
development department on the form(s) prescribed and accompanied with payment
of the nonrefundable processing fee equal to one-half of the original
application fee. All applications for renewal shall meet the same requirements
as set for an original application.
      (4)   A violation of a city ordinance or state law that would constitute
the basis for the denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate that occurs
before the filing of a renewal application shall be considered as the basis for
the denial of the renewal application.
      (5)   If the planning and development department denies an application
for renewal, the operator may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment as
provided in subsection (h) hereafter. Any action by the development services
director is stayed pending the decision of the board of adjustment and if
applicable, any appeal of the board’s decision.
   (f)   Denial of application for a specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   The planning and development department shall deny issuance of the
certificate if one or more of the following are found to be true:
         a.   The location of the establishment would be in violation of the
applicable zoning district classification for the intended property use;
         b.   The location would be in violation of the distance regulation as
set forth in §
5.202;
         c.   The application fees have not been paid;
         d.   An applicant has failed to make full disclosure or supply all of
the information requested on the application;
         e.   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for the issuance of the specialized certificate of occupancy or had
provided false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application, or is
attempting to acquire the certificate under false pretenses;
         f.   The configuration and layout of the proposed premises would be in
violation of the applicable provisions regarding accessibility, visibility and
inspection as set forth in this article;
         g.   The structure, configuration and layout of the premises would be
in violation of, or are not in compliance with, all other applicable city
ordinances, including fire code and building codes;
         h.   An applicant has not demonstrated lawful ownership of the
premises; or does not hold a binding lease for the premises upon which the
business would be operated, or has not demonstrated a legally enforceable right
to acquire the same;
         i.   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         j.   An applicant is under 21 years of age and the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages would be an aspect of the business;
         k.   If the location of the proposed sexually oriented business is
within a building, structure or portion thereof contains another sexually
oriented business;
         l.   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to
the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon
the applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a sexually oriented
business and has not paid the taxes, fees or penalties after submission of the
application and before the issuance of the specialized certificate of occupancy
by the planning and development department;
         m.   The applicant has been operating the proposed business as a
sexually oriented business without a valid specialized certificate of occupancy
issued under this article;
         n.   The applicant or the applicant’s spouse is required to register
as a sex offender under the provisions of Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure
Chapter 62;
         o.   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
criminal offense within the last ten years involving any of the following
offenses set forth in the Texas Penal Code:
            1.   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 21: Public lewdness, indecent
exposure, indecency with a child;
            2.   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 22: Sexual assault or aggravated
sexual assault;
            3.   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 25: Incest, solicitation of a child or
harboring a runaway child;
            4.   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 43: Prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution,
obscenity, display or distribution, sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to
minors, possession or promotion of child pornography; or
            5.   i.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit
any of the foregoing offenses;
               ii.   For which:
                  A.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from the terms of community supervision,
probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
                  B.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from the terms of community supervision,
probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony offense; or
                  C.   Less than five years since the date of conviction or the
date of release from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or
deferred disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction are of two or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination or misdemeanor offense occurring within any
24-month period.
      (2)   The applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of a criminal offense listed this section may obtain a specialized
certificate of occupancy only after the time period required for satisfactory
completion has elapsed and full release has been received from all conditions
imposed regarding confinement, parole or probation, whichever is the later
date.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse under this subsection
(f).
   (g)   Appeal of a denial of an application for a specialized certificate of
occupancy. If the planning and development department denies the application
and the issuance of a specialized certificate of occupancy, certified mail,
return receipt requested written notice shall be provided to the applicant(s)
of such action within 35 working days after receipt of the application.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the notice of denial the applicant may respond by
requesting reconsideration and providing appropriate documentation sufficient
to complete the application or otherwise address the department’s basis for the
denial.
      (2)   If a written request for reconsideration is received, the
application and supplemental information shall be reconsidered and a response
provided within ten working days after the request is received.
      (3)   Upon receipt of notice of denial of the reconsidered application,
the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the board of
adjustment within 30 days, but only for a determination as to whether the
application was denied through error or mistake.
      (4)   The written appeal to the board of adjustment shall provide a clear
and concise statement of the factual basis or grounds for the appeal. The
request for appeal shall also be accompanied with the non-refundable fee
pursuant to the adopted fee schedule.
      (5)   The appeal hearing shall be scheduled and conducted according to
the board of adjustment’s rules of procedure.
      (6)   The applicant shall bear the burden of proof of disputed factual
matters to produce a preponderance of the evidence to establish that the
application was erroneously or mistakenly denied by the planning and
development department.
      (7)   The board of adjustment may overturn the denial of the application
and thereafter approve the issuance of the certificate only if the application
was erroneously or mistakenly denied by the planning and development department
and is otherwise shown to comply with all other requirements for an
application. Unless the application was erroneously or mistakenly denied, the
board of adjustment shall affirm the department’s denial.
   (h)   Appeal of a denial of a renewal application for a specialized
certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   A denial of a renewal application for a specialized certificate of
occupancy may be appealed to the board of adjustment following the same
procedures as provided in subsection (g) above.
      (2)   The filing of any appeal under this subsection (h) stays the action
of the development services director until the board of adjustment makes a
final decision.
   (i)   Suspension of specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   The director of the planning and development department shall
suspend a specialized certificate of occupancy for a period not to exceed 30
days if it is determined that the operator has:
         a.   Violated or is not in compliance with the regulations set forth
in this article;
         b.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this article; or
         c.   Committed acts that constitute grounds for revocation as set
forth in subsection (j) below.
      (2)   A suspension may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided
in subsection (k) below.
   (j)   Revocation of a specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   The director of the planning and development department shall
revoke a specialized certificate of occupancy if the director of planning and
development determines that one or more of the following is true:
         a.   The operator gave false or fraudulent information in the
application or otherwise acquired the certificate under false pretenses;
         b.   The operator knowingly operated, provided or permitted sexually
oriented business activity or entertainment to occur on the premises during a
period of time when the specialized certificate of occupancy was suspended;
         c.   The operator knowingly allowed or participated in the unlawful
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
         d.   The operator knowingly allowed or participated in prostitution,
or its solicitation, or unlawful offenses of a similar nature to take place on
the premises;
         e.   The operator has been convicted of a criminal offense listed in
subsection(f)(1)o. above for which the time period required subsection (f)(2)
above has not lapsed;
         f.   An operator is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel
occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually
oriented business;
         g.   An operator has transferred the specialized certificate of
occupancy in violation of this article; and/or
         h.   Cause for suspension as provided in subsection (i) above has
occurred, and the certificate has been previously suspended for any reason at
least two times in the preceding 12-month period.
      (2)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
revocation of the specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   When the development services director revokes a specialized
certificate of occupancy, the revocation will continue for one year, and the
operator shall not apply for or be issued a specialized certificate of
occupancy for one year after the date of revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the development services director finds that the
basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the operator may apply
for and be granted a specialized certificate of occupancy if at least 90 days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the specialized
certificate of occupancy was revoked under subsection (j)(1)e. above, an
applicant may not apply for or be granted another specialized certificate of
occupancy until the appropriate period required by subsection (f)(2) above has
lapsed.
      (4)   A revocation may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided
in subsection (k) hereafter.
   (k)   Appeal of the suspension or revocation of a specialized certificate of
occupancy.
      (1)   If the development services director suspends or revokes a
specialized certificate of occupancy, the director of planning and development
shall send to the operator, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice of the action and the right to appeal.
      (2)   Upon receipt of written notice of the suspension or revocation, the
operator whose specialized certificate of occupancy has been suspended or
revoked has the right to appeal to the board of adjustment.
      (3)   An appeal to the board of adjustment must be in accordance with
subsection (g) above. The filing of any appeal under this subsection (k) stays
the action of the development services director in suspending or revoking a
specialized certificate of occupancy until the board of adjustment makes a
final decision.
      (4)   Any appeal of the decision of the board of adjustment must be filed
with the state district court within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the
decision of the board of adjustment. The operator shall bear the burden of
proof. The filing of any appeal under this subsection (k) stays any action of
the development services director.
   (l)   Transfer of specialized certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates a sexually
oriented business under a specialized certificate of occupancy in any name or
at any location other than the name and address designated on the face of the
certificate.
      (2)   Any person desiring to continue the operation of a sexually
oriented business after purchase or transfer must meet all requirements of a
new applicant and receive a new specialized certificate of occupancy in his or
her own name prior to continuing the business operation. Otherwise, the
certificate shall automatically be deemed revoked as of the date of the
transfer or purchase of the operator in whose name the certificate was issued.
      (3)   A person commits an offense if he or she wrongfully counterfeits,
forges, changes, defaces or alters a specialized certificate of occupancy. Any
certificate wrongfully altered shall automatically be deemed void and invalid.
      (4)   If corporations that have substantially similar ownership merge or
consolidate, a fee of one-half the original filing fee shall be paid for each
sexually oriented business holding a specialized certificate of occupancy that
is merged or consolidated into the surviving corporation. The surviving
corporation succeeds to all privileges of the prior corporation that held the
specialized certificate of occupancy if the owners of the surviving corporation
meet the qualifications for an applicant to acquire the certificate under this
section. For the purposes of this section, corporations have “substantially
similar ownership” if 90% or more of the corporations involved are owned by the
same person or persons, or by the same corporation or corporations, or if the
surviving corporation has maintained an ownership interest in the merged or
consolidated corporations since the date the original specialized certificate
of occupancy was issued.
      (5)   The city’s specialized certificate of occupancy is not property to
be inherited or otherwise transferred in cases of incapacity or death. If an
operator becomes legally incapacitated or dies, the executor or guardian of the
estate shall, as soon as reasonably possible but no event later than 30 days of
the death or incapacity, notify the planning and development department in
writing of the status of business operations, the persons controlling the
estate, and those heirs or other persons involved in settling the estate. Any
person desiring to continue the sexually oriented business must meet all
requirements of new applicants and receive a new specialized certificate of
occupancy in his or her own name prior to continuing the business operations.
otherwise, the certificate shall automatically be deemed revoked as of the date
of the death or incapacity of the operator in whose name the certificate was
issued.
      (6)   The city’s specialized certificate of occupancy is not property to
be listed as an “asset” or otherwise transferred for purposes of resolution in
bankruptcy. If an operator files a petition in bankruptcy seeking protection as
a failing business, the operator shall also immediately deliver true and
correct copies of documentation of same to the planning and development
department.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
17782, § 1, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 5.204 EMPLOYEE BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (a)   Prior to employment of any person by the sexually oriented business,
the owner or operator of the sexually oriented business shall conduct a
criminal background check on all prospective employees to ensure that no person
employed has any convictions or any time of service in jail or prison for any
of the following offenses:
      (1)   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 22: Sexual assault or aggravated sexual
assault;
      (2)   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 25: Incest, solicitation of a child or
harboring a runaway child;
      (3)   Tex. Penal Code Chapter 43: Prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution,
obscenity, display or distribution, sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to
minors, possession or promotion of child pornography;
      (4)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (5)   Public lewdness, indecent exposure, public intoxication, drink
solicitation or possession of a controlled substance.
   (b)   The operator shall maintain a current registration card or file on the
premises clearly identifying all managers, employees and/or entertainment
personnel currently on the premises or employed by the business. The
information contained on the registration card shall include at least:
      (1)   Full legal name;
      (2)   All aliases or “stage names;”
      (3)   Date of birth;
      (4)   Race;
      (5)   Color of hair and eyes;
      (6)   Current residence address and phone number;
      (7)   Texas driver’s license number (or Texas identification number);
      (8)   Social Security number;
      (9)   Color photograph of full-face view; and
      (10)   Date of criminal background check.
   (c)   Records.
      (1)   Within five days of employment of an employee, each manager shall
send a copy of the criminal background check (with redacted Social Security
number) and registration card to the Fort Worth police department.
      (2)   Each manager shall maintain on the premises and make available for
inspection upon request by city enforcement personnel the criminal background
information and current registration card for all current employees.
      (3)   A manager commits an offense if he or she fails to make the
criminal background information or current registration card available for
immediate inspection upon request by city enforcement personnel.
   (d)   For the purposes of subsection (b) above, an employee or entertainment
personnel commits an offense by:
      (1)   Providing false or deceptive information to the operator; or
      (2)   By failing to timely update and provide to the operator within 14
days any changes in the required information.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.205 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   All operators, managers, employees, entertainment personnel or other
persons, including customers shall permit the lawful inspection or enforcement
activities of city enforcement personnel on any portion of the premises or of
any aspect of the activities being conducted therein.
   (b)   All operators, managers, employees or entertainment personnel shall
furnish information or documentation requested by city enforcement personnel
pertaining to inspection or law enforcement activities on the premises or of
the activities being conducted therein.
   (c)   All operators, managers, employees or entertainment personnel shall
maintain any portion of the premises in a manner so as to permit the
inspections or enforcement activities by city enforcement personnel.
   (d)   The operator, manager, employee or entertainment personnel shall not
knowingly permit or allow any customer access to any area of the premises that
has been designated as an area not open to customers as per the floor plan
approved by the department of planning and development pursuant to this
article.
   (e)   All operators shall maintain a person on the premises while occupied
or open for business with the authority and responsibilities as “manager” over
all of the business operation, its activities, employees and entertainment
personnel. The “operator” and “manager” may be the same person.
   (f)   An operator may not knowingly employ or engage the service of any
person under 18 years of age as an employee or entertainment personnel for the
sexually oriented business.
   (g)   No customer or patron under the age of 21 of age may enter or remain
within the premises of a sexually oriented business while the establishment is
open for business and alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed.
   (h)   No person may appear in a “state of nudity” or engage in “specified
sexual activities” on any portion of the premises outside the building, which
is capable of being viewed from a public street or right-of-way.
   (i)   No operator shall operate or allow the operation of an internal video
surveillance system of persons or activity on the premises without prior
written approval from the police department. Internal video surveillance
systems may be used only to monitor the premises or activity for legitimate
security or safety purposes upon prior inspection and receipt of written
approval from the police department, which will not be unreasonably withheld.
This subsection (i) shall not apply to video projection systems.
   (j)   The operator shall maintain on the premises at all times a current
copy of all city ordinances regarding or regulating sexually oriented business
activity so as to keep all managers, employees and entertainment personnel duly
advised of the applicable city ordinances regarding the sexually oriented
business, and its permitted, as well as prohibited activities, so as to
minimize prospective violations and offenses on the premises.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 5.206 CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   No employee, while in state of nudity in a sexually oriented business
shall receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or allow
any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee
while that employee is in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business
other than by means of hand or garter tipping, a tip receptacle or paid as part
of the customer’s bill.
   (b)   No manager, owner or operator shall allow any patron or customer to
pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee while that employee is in a
state of nudity in a sexually oriented business other than by means of hand or
garter tipping, a tip receptacle or paid as part of the customer’s bill.
   (c)   All garters shall be located mid-thigh or lower.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.207 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   A sexually oriented business shall not be open to the public or allow
customers or patrons to enter or remain within the premises of a sexually
oriented business during the following hours:
      (1)   Sunday through Thursday: 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.; and
      (2)   Friday and Saturday: 3:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.; 4:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. if the sexually oriented business holds a valid food establishment permit
issued by the city health department.
   (b)   Hours of operation may not conflict with any other federal, state or
city laws, rules or regulations.
   (c)   This regulation shall not apply to adult motels.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.208 INTERIOR OF THE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   Subject to reasonable accommodations for legitimate security measures,
including approved internal surveillance video systems, the operator shall
maintain the entire premises so as to permit walk-through inspections without
interference by city enforcement personnel.
   (b)   The interior of the premises shall be arranged in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view into every area of the premises to which any
customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The operator
shall ensure that the ability to view into any area where customers are allowed
remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks
or other materials. This regulation shall not apply to adult motels.
   (c)   If the premises contain two or more separate rooms, the operator shall
maintain each room with at least one wall or door equipped with clear windows
or openings of at least three feet in width and two feet in height located no
less than three feet above the floor but no less than two feet below the
ceiling for viewing into the entire area and all activity therein. This
regulation shall not apply to adult motels.
   (d)   The operator shall maintain every portion of the premises where
customers are permitted access equipped throughout and illuminated at all times
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide
reasonably safe lighting conditions for patrons, employees or city enforcement
personnel walking throughout the premises.
   (e)   During hours of darkness when a sexually oriented business is in
operation, the operator shall maintain all parking and pedestrian areas of the
premises equipped and illuminated by overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
illumination to provide reasonably safe lighting conditions for persons or
vehicles traveling into, on and out of the property. Said lighting fixtures
shall be directed onto the property as much as is possible so as to avoid being
directed onto neighboring properties.
   (f)   The operator shall not utilize or allow restroom or employee dressing
rooms to be utilized for sexually oriented business purposes, video equipment
or for the offering of any sexually oriented merchandise to customers.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.209 EXTERIOR APPEARANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (a)   No exterior portions of a sexually oriented business shall have
flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the
provisions of this article.
   (b)   No merchandise or activities of a sexually oriented business shall be
visible from any point outside the establishment.
   (c)   (1)   All exterior portions and/or facades, including the roof, that
are to be painted shall be a single achromatic color with a single achromatic
color trim, both colors consisting of a neutral earth tone color only, however,
the trim and the building may be a different neutral earth tone color. Nothing
in this section requires the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior
portion of a sexually oriented business. All sexually oriented businesses with
a current specialized certificate of occupancy that are in compliance with the
regulations of this article and other applicable city codes will have five
years from the date of adoption of this ordinance to comply with this
subsection (c), however if any portion of the exterior of the building is
painted or repainted before this five-year period expires, all portions of the
exterior must be painted a single achromatic color with a single achromatic
color trim as provided by this subsection (c).
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to an enterprise if the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The enterprise is part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
         b.   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the enterprise, are
painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way as to be
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-center unit.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.210 SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Business requirements for posting sign concerning intent to locate
sexually oriented businesses.
      (1)   An applicant for a specialized certificate of occupancy for a
location for which a specialized certificate of occupancy has not previously
been issued shall post an outdoor sign at the location in compliance with Tex.
Local Government Code § 243.0075, as amended, not later than the sixtieth day
before submitting the application for a specialized certificate of occupancy to
the planning and development department.
      (2)   The sign shall comply with the following requirements:
         a.   The sign must be at least 24 by 36 inches in size;
         b.   All letters must be at least two inches in height and one and
one-half inches in width for each letter on the sign;
         c.   The sign shall state that a sexually oriented business is
intended to be located on the premises;
         d.   The sign shall provide the name and business address of the owner
and operator;
         e.   All required information must be presented in both English and
Spanish;
         f.   All required information must read horizontally from left to
right; and
         g.   The sign shall be prominently posted such that it is clearly
legible from the public right-of-way.
      (3)   The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall notify
the development services director, by certified mail or hand delivery, when a
sign is posted at the intended location of the business in compliance with Tex.
Local Government Code § 243.0075, as amended. The notification must be in the
form of a sworn statement indicating the location of the sign and the date it
was posted and must be received by the development services director within
five days after the posting of the sign. If the development services director
receives the notification within five days after the sign was posted, the 60-
day posting period required by § 243.0075 shall be deemed to begin on the
posting date. If the notification is received by the development services
director more than five days after the sign was posted, the 60-day posting
requirement shall be deemed to begin on the date the development services
director verifies the sign has been posted.
      (4)   When a sign is posted at an intended location of a sexually
oriented business and the intended location is not in violation of the distance
requirements set out in this article on the posting date, the sexually oriented
business will qualify as a conforming use with regard to the distance
requirements and will not be rendered nonconforming by any location, subsequent
to the posting of the sign, of a religious institution, school, public park or
residential district within 1,000 feet of the posted location.
      (5)   Subsection (a)(4) above does not apply if:
         a.   A completed application for a specialized certificate of
occupancy for a proposed sexually oriented business is not filed with the
planning and development department within 20 days after the expiration of the
60-day posting requirement under Tex. Local Government Code § 243.0075, as
amended;
         b.   The application for a specialized certificate of occupancy is
withdrawn or denied; or
         c.   The notification requirements of subsection (a)(2) above are not
met.
   (b)   Signs at each public entrance.
      (1)   The operator shall maintain at least one conspicuous permanently
mounted sign, presented in both English and Spanish, at each public entrance,
in accordance with the city’s sign codes, of a size of at least 18 inches in
height and 24 inches in width, easily visible and legible to all persons prior
to entry into the establishment, with all letters at least one-half inch in
height and three-quarters of an inch in width for each letter on the sign which
contains a statement to the effect:
         “THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY
FEATURES [description of the type of activity or merchandise as permitted
herein]. IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU, DO NOT COME IN.
NO PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY”
[If alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises] - “NO PERSON
UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY”
   (c)   Exterior signs.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of the City of Fort Worth code or any
other city ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, the owner or operator
of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if he
or she erects, constructs or maintains any on-premises sign for the
establishment other than one primary sign and one secondary sign as provided in
this section.
      (2)   A primary sign may have no more than two display surfaces. Each
display must:
         a.   Not contain any flashing lights;
         b.   Be a flat plane, excluding the lettering; and
         c.   Be rectangular in shape.
      (3)   A secondary sign may have only one display surface. The display
surface must:
         a.   Not contain any flashing lights;
         b.   Be a flat plane, excluding the lettering;
         c.   Be rectangular in shape; and
         d.   Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment.
      (4)   A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs,
silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations or any manner, and may
contain only the name of the establishment; and/or one or more of the following
phrases:
         a.   “Adult arcade;”
         b.   “Adult bookstore or adult video store;”
         c.   “Adult cabaret;”
         d.   “Adult motel;”
         e.   “Adult motion picture theater;”
         f.   “Escort agency;”
         g.   “Adult model studio;” and/or
         h.   “Sexual encounter center.”
      (5)   A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the
phrase, “movie titles posted on premises,” in addition to the phrases listed in
subsection (d)(4) above.
      (6)   Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be
of a solid color, and each letter must be the same print-type, size and color.
The background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or
secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color.
      (7)   Notwithstanding the sign requirements of this article and signs
lawfully operating sexually oriented business on September 27, 2004 may
continue to be maintained on the premises, until:
         a.   The sign is intentionally removed or destroyed by the owner or
operator of the sexually oriented business or abandoned by the owner or
operator of the sexually oriented business; or
         b.   The city requires removal, relocation or reconstruction of the
sign in accordance with state law.
      (8)   Any sign located on the premises of a commercial multi-unit center
containing an enterprise that displays the name or any portion of the name of
the enterprise, any name under which any enterprise was formerly operated on
the premises, or that contains any of the terms set for the in subsection (c)
(4) of this section or any other terminology that is commonly used to identify,
or is associated with the presence of a sexually oriented business, shall
comply with all restrictions of this section. The intent of this subsection (c)
(8) is to prevent the use of signage identifying the commercial multi-tenant
center itself from being used as a subterfuge to evade the restrictions on
sexually oriented business signs set forth in this section.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 5.211 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS.
   (a)   An employee of an adult entertainment cabaret, while appearing in a
state of nudity, commits an offense if he or she touches a customer or clothing
of a customer.
   (b)   A customer at an adult entertainment cabaret commits an offense if he
or she touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity or the clothing of an
employee
   (c)   No person shall appear in a state of nudity in an area of the adult
entertainment cabaret in an area of the premises that can be viewed from the
public right-of-way.
   (d)   An operator commits an offense if the operator fails to display the
signs on the interior of the premises as required by this article.
   (e)   An operator commits an offense if he or she permits any customer
access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager’s station or not
visible by a walk through of the premises without entering a closed area,
excluding a restroom.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.212 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years
of age.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees
to acts as an escort for any person under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.213 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR OUTCALL BUSINESSES.
   (a)   An operator shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years of
age for the purposes of acting as an outcall person or providing outcall
services for a customer.
   (b)   An operator, manager or employee commits an offense if he or she acts
as an outcall person for any customer less than 21 years of age.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.214 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODELING BUSINESSES.
   In addition to those offenses set forth in subsection (b) below, citations
may be issued for the following.
   (a)   An operator shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years of
age for the purpose of acting as a live nude model for customers.
   (b)   A person under 18 years of age commits an offense if he or she appears
for customers while in a “state of nudity” or “simulated nudity” on the
premises of a nude modeling business. It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection (b) if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to
public view or persons of the opposite sex.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of nudity
or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (d)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress
in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public.
   (e)   A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he or she
touches an employee who is exposing any specified anatomical areas or touches
the clothing of the employee.
   (f)   An operator or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense
if he or she permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible
from the manager’s station or not visible by walk through of the premises
without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.215 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT MOTION PICTURE
THEATERS.
   (a)   An operator shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years to
appear in a “state of nudity” or “simulated nudity” for customers on the
premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an
adult motion picture theater.
   (c)   A person under the age of 18 commits an offense if he or she appears
in “a state of nudity” or “simulated nudity” for customers’ on the premises of
an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
   (d)   It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection (d) if the person
under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the
opposite sex.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.216 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTEL.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as defined in this article.
   (b)   An operator, manager or the person otherwise in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment, commits an offense
if he or she rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten
hours from the time the room is first rented, he or she rents or subrents the
same sleeping room again.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.217 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT ARCADES.
   (a)   View from manager’s station.
      (1)   If an adult arcade or adult mini-theater has one manager’s station
designated pursuant to this article, then the interior of the adult arcade or
adult mini-theater shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of every area of the adult arcade or adult mini-theater to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from that manager’s
station. If an adult arcade or adult mini theater has two of more manager’s
stations designated pursuant to this article, then the interior of the adult
arcade or adult mini-theater shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the adult arcade or adult mini-theater to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection (a)(1) must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult
mini-theatre, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(1) above
remains unobstructed by any merchandise, display racks or other materials at
all times that any patron is present in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any of the adult arcade or
adult mini-theatre which has been designated as an area in which patrons will
not be permitted in the plan filed pursuant to this article.
   (b)   Wall penetrations.
      (1)   In addition to any other requirements of this article, no adult
arcade or adult mini-theater shall be configured in such a manner as to have
any opening in any partition, screen, wall or other barrier that separates
viewing areas for arcade devices or adult mini-theater devices from other
viewing areas for arcade devices or adult mini-theater devices. This provision
shall not apply to conduits or plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation
or electrical service, provided that such conduits shall be so screened or
otherwise configured as to prevent their use as openings that would permit any
portion of a human body to penetrate the wall or barrier separating viewing
areas.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult
mini-theatre to ensure that the premises is monitored to assure that no
openings are allowed to exist in violation of subsection (b)(1) above and to
ensure that no patron is allowed access to any portion of the premises where
any opening exists in violation of subsection (b)(1) above until the opening
has been repaired.
   (c)   Lighting.
      (1)   Each adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot-candle as measured at four feet above the floor level.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult
mini-theatre to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (c)(1)
above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the adult
arcade or adult mini-theatre.
   (d)   Occupancy of booths, rooms and cubicles. Only one individual shall
occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of a booth, room or
cubicle shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge
or litter while in the booth.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.218 DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to
person under the age of 17 years, he or she displays a book, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a
manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to
exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks or
that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or
      (c)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (b)   In this section DISPLAY means to locate an item in such a manner that,
without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment:
      (1)   It is a available to the general public for handling and
inspection; or
      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.219 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any city enforcement personnel may enforce the provisions of this article.
Additionally, the Fort Worth police department may enforce the offenses listed
in §
5.204, which occur on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time
the establishment is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.220 REVOCATION.
   Revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit imposition of a
criminal penalty and imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent
revocation or suspension of a permit.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
§ 5.221 INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid specialized certificate of occupancy or in violation of this
article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal
violations.
(Ord. 16118, § 1, passed 9-14-2004)
ARTICLE 3: ACCESSORY USES
§ 5.300 GENERAL.
   (a)   Uses. Accessory uses as regulated by this section are uses which are
clearly incidental to the use of the principal building/primary structure or
the primary use. Accessory uses include permanently installed detached
accessory structures such as porches supported by columns, greenhouses, garages
(greater than a six foot door), guest houses, studios, carports, private
workshops (six-foot door or less), play structures, swimming pools, pool
houses, gazebos/cabanas/pergolas, boat docks, outdoor kitchen facilities,
riding arena for the personal use of the resident owner, storage buildings,
dumpsters (nonresidential) or similar uses. Accessory uses not permitted in
residential districts include carports not permanently installed, portable
storage containers for permanent use, shipping containers, rail cars and the
like. Flagpoles are not considered an accessory use but must meet the height
requirement of the zoning district.
   (b)   Utility meters. Accessory structures that connect to utilities such as
water, electric and gas must receive service from meters serving the primary
structure.
   (c)   Size. Accessory structures shall not be a greater square footage than
the primary structure.
   (d)   Placement on platted lots. Accessory structures shall not be
constructed or placed on a lot without a primary use or across platted property
lines where the primary use does not cross the property line.
   (e)   Not permitted in more restrictive district. Buildings, structures or
uses that are accessory to the uses permitted in one district shall not be
permitted in a district of a more restrictive classification.
   (f)   Accessory structures not permitted in front yards. No attached or
detached accessory structures such as, porches supported by columns,
greenhouses, garages, swimming pools or similar uses shall be erected on
property within the minimum front yard, established front yard or projected
front yard. When the platted front yard or established front yard is less than
the minimum required front yard, the setback of the minimum required front yard
shall be met.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15927, § 3, passed 3-23-2004; Ord. 20454-
10-2012, § 1, passed 10-9-2012)
§ 5.301 ACCESSORY USES ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Any accessory building added to an existing legal nonconforming one
or two-family dwelling shall conform to the district standards applicable to
the residential use.
      (2)   Accessory buildings shall comply with the side and rear setbacks
for the primary structure of the zoning district applicable to the residential
use.
      (3)   The total area covered by all rooftops shall not exceed the maximum
lot coverage (percentage) for the district applicable to residential use.
      (4)   Accessory structures attached to a primary structure by a
breezeway, covered walkway or other structure whose roofline is not part of the
primary structure shall not be considered to be an extension of the primary
structure.
      (5)   For purposes of enforcing this section, the “MH” zoning district is
considered a residential zoning district.
   (b)   Non-habitable accessory structures.
      (1)   All accessory structures except private garages, private carports
or private porte cocheres.
         a.   Allowable square footage.
            1.   Non-habitable accessory buildings shall not exceed the maximum
square footage for each residential lot size as depicted in the following
table:
 
Lot Size                     Maximum Total Square Feet for Accessory Buildings
Less than 5,000 square feet  120 square feet
5,000 to 9,999 square feet   200 square feet
10,000 to 21,779 square feet 400 square feet
21,780 to 43,559 square feet 400 square feet
43,560 square feet or larger 2% of the total area of the lot
 
            2.   The maximum square footage limits shown above shall be
cumulative of all non-habitable accessory structures for each lot excluding
private garages, private carports and private porte cocheres. Private garages,
private carports and private porte cocheres shall not be included for the
purpose of determining allowable square footage of non-habitable accessory
structures on a residential lot.
            3.   The square footage within an attic or loft shall be excluded
from the calculation of maximum square footage of a non-habitable accessory
building or structure.
         b.   Non-habitable accessory buildings or structures shall be limited
to one story, but may have an attic or loft, provided the attic or loft does
not contain heated or air-conditioned floor space. The non-habitable accessory
structure may not exceed the height of the primary structure.
         c.   All non-habitable accessory structures must be located behind the
rear wall of the primary residential structure that is furthest from the street
or at least 75 feet from the front of the property line, whichever is the least
restrictive.
         d.   Non-habitable accessory structures shall be limited to a height
of ten feet. The height of the accessory structure may be increased to a
maximum height of 12 feet, provided that, for each additional foot in height
over ten feet, the accessory building is set back an additional two feet (2:1)
from the rear and side setback requirements of the district applicable to the
residential use.
         e.   Temporary portable storage containers and dumpsters may be
utilized for a maximum of 30 days unless associated with an unexpired building
permit, which may be allowed up to 180 days or the duration of the building
permit, whichever is less. One such container per building permit may be
allowed per address for each year. These units must be placed only on a
permanently paved driving or parking surface if in the front yard of a single-
family or two-family home and may not encroach into the street right-of-way.
      (2)   Private garages, private carports or private porte cocheres.
         a.   Non-habitable accessory buildings or structures shall be limited
to one story, may have an attic or loft provided the attic or loft does not
contain heated or air conditioned floor space. The non-habitable accessory
structure may not exceed the height of the primary residence.
         b.   No more than one garage and one carport or porte cochere per
residential unit on a single residential lot shall be permitted on lots less
than one-half acre. Additional garages or porte cocheres may be permitted
provided the garages and porte cocheres are:
            1.   An integral part of the primary residential structure;
            2.   Have the same roofline as the primary residential structure;
and
            3.   Share a driveway and/or motor court as the primary residential
structure.
         c.   On lots one-half acre or larger, two garages and one carport or
porte cochere per residential unit on a single residential lot shall be
permitted.
         d.   Private carports and private porte cocheres in rear setbacks.
            1.   The rear yard setback for a private carport or private porte
cocheres in one-family districts with a lot size of 7,500 square feet or less
shall be one and one-half feet when the following conditions are met:
               i.   The maximum square footage of the carport or porte cochere
is not greater than 400 square feet;
               ii.   The maximum height of the plate of the carport or porte
cochere is no higher than the plate height of the first floor of the main
residential structure; and
               iii.   The roof pitch of the carport or porte cocheres is no
steeper than the predominate roof pitch of the main residential structure.
            2.   Private carports and private porte cocheres in side yard
setbacks. The side yard setback for a private carport or private porte cochere
in one-family districts with a lot size of 7,500 square feet or less shall be
one and one-half feet when the following conditions are met:
               i.   The maximum total square footage of the carport or porte
cochere is not greater than 200 square feet;
               ii.   The maximum height of the plate of the carport or porte
cochere is no higher than the plate height of the first floor of the main
residential structure; and
               iii.   The roof pitch of the carport or porte cochere is no
steeper than the dominate roof pitch of the main residential structure.
            3.   Private carports and private porte cocheres in front yard
setbacks. No private carport or porte cochere shall be permitted within the
minimum required front yard, platted front yard or projected front yard of
residential dwellings except by special exception granted by the board of
adjustment in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Article 6. In reviewing a request for a private carport or porte
cochere within the minimum required front yard, platted front yard or projected
front yard, the board of adjustment shall consider the following:
               i.   The presence and/or absence of a functional garage on the
residential lot, parcel or tract;
               ii.   The viability of access to the side and rear yard;
               iii.   The size, height and design of the carport or porte
cochere and its impact on adjacent properties; and
               iv.   The incidence of other carports or porte cocheres on the
block face.
   (c)   Habitable accessory structures. In addition to the requirements set
out in subsection (a) above, habitable accessory buildings must comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Must meet all applicable City of Fort Worth building code for
habitable structures;
      (2)   May not exceed the height of the primary; and
      (3)   May be used only as an accessory dwelling unit and may not be used
as a separate independent residence for one-family districts.
(Ord. 15406, § 2, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 15830, § 2, passed 1-13-2004; Ord.
15927, § 1, passed 3-23-2004; Ord. 20454-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-9-2012)
§ 5.302 ACCESSORY USES ON NONRESIDENTIAL LOTS.
   (a)   General provisions. Accessory storage structures shall comply with the
side and rear setbacks for the primary structure of the applicable zoning
district.
   (b)   Non-habitable accessory uses.
      (1)   All non-habitable accessory uses must be located behind the front
wall of the primary structure that is furthest from the street.
      (2)   If adjacent to a residential district, the height of the accessory
structure shall be limited to a height of ten feet. The height of the accessory
structures shall be measured from the ground to the highest point of the
structure. The height of the structure may be increased to a maximum height of
12 feet, provided that, for each one foot in height over ten feet, the
accessory structure is set back an additional two feet (2:1 ratio) from the
rear and side yard setback requirements in the district applicable to the
nonresidential use.
      (3)   Refuse dumpsters and recycling collection containers shall be
installed on concrete pads and be screened on all sides from view of a public
street or residential area.
      (4)   Storage containers must not be placed on required parking spaces,
and must be located behind the primary structure on street frontages.
      (5)   Structures intended as a display of inventory for sale are not
regulated by this section.
      (6)   Job trailers/offices are allowed for construction personnel as part
of a building permit and tied to the building permit for the duration of the
job.
         a.   Two or more trailers must be spaced a minimum of ten feet apart.
A deck may be installed to connect multiple trailers.
         b.   If the trailer is located off the job site, the following
applies:
            1.   Must be in “E” Neighborhood Commercial or less restrictive
zoning district;
            2.   The office must have a dust free parking surface;
            3.   Landscaping and a screening fence/bufferyard is not required;
and
            4.   One sign is permitted indicating the nature of construction.
   (c)   Habitable accessory uses; security residence. One residence may be
permitted as an accessory use in nonresidential districts when part of a
business for security purposes. A structure classified as a security residence
is not intended to serve as a rental unit independent of the business. A
temporary structure, such as a mobile home or RV is not permitted as a
permanent security residence.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15406, § 3, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 20454-
10-2012, § 3, passed 10-9-2012)
§ 5.303 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20454-10-2012, § 4, passed October 9, 2012, repealed §
5.303, which pertained to accessory uses in unified residential developments.
See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 5.304 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 20454-10-2012, § 5, passed October 9, 2012, repealed §
5.304, which pertained to satellite antenna (dish). See the Code Comparative
Table.
§ 5.305 FENCES.
   (a)   Fences required. Fences are required as follows.
      (1)   Screening fences shall be provided in the “IP” industrial park
district in accordance with §
4.1104(b)(14) and (e).
      (2)   Inoperable automobiles upon which repairs are to be conducted in
connection with automotive repair or paint and body shop shall be enclosed by a
screening fence in accordance with §
5.104.
      (3)   Parking areas for bed and breakfast homes shall be screened from
view of adjacent residences by a solid screening fence or dense shrubs and
vegetation in accordance with §
5.106.
      (4)   Parking areas for bed and breakfast inns shall be screened from
view of adjacent residences by a screening fence or dense shrubs and vegetation
in accordance with § 5.107.
      (5)   Self-service and full-service car washes shall have a screening
fence or wall along any property line abutting a residential district in
accordance with §
5.108.
      (6)   Outdoor play areas for day cares shall be enclosed by a fence or
wall in accordance with §
5.111.
      (7)   Newspaper distribution centers shall be screened from adjacent
residential districts or properties with a screening fence in accordance with §
5.124.
      (8)   Permanent outdoor display, sales and storage areas and rear storage
areas for large retail stores shall be enclosed by a fence in accordance with §
5.134(a)(9).
      (9)   Telecommunications towers and support facilities shall be
surrounded by a security fence in accordance with §
5.137.
      (10)   Motor vehicle junk yards or used automobile junk areas in an “I”
light industrial, “J” medium industrial or “K” heavy industrial district shall
be enclosed by a screening fence in accordance with §
5.141.
      (11)   Certain dish satellite antennas shall be enclosed by a screening
fence.
      (12)   Off-site auxiliary parking lots shall have a screening fence and
bufferyard on all sides adjacent to a residential district in accordance with §
6.202.
      (13)   A screening fence shall be constructed between one- or two-family
residential districts and adjacent nonresidential districts in accordance with
§
6.300.
      (14)   Refuse handling facilities, mechanical equipment, loading docks
and truck berths shall be screened in accordance with §
6.301(d), which may include an opaque wall or wooden screening fence.
      (15)   A screening fence shall be constructed on property lines of
multifamily residential developments adjacent to a one- or two-family
residential district in accordance with §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712.
      (16)   Vehicles stored overnight for repair at automotive repair, paint
and body shops shall be stored in an enclosed building, enclosed by a minimum
six foot solid screen evergreen hedge or enclosed by a minimum six-foot
screening fence in accordance with §
5.104.
      (17)   Vehicles that have been accepted for repairs by automotive repair,
paint and body shops must be screened from view behind a six-foot solid
screening fence or six-foot solid screen evergreen hedge in accordance with §
5.104 if the automotive repair, paint and body shop is:
         a.   Adjacent to any one or two-family residential use; or
         b.   Within 200 feet from any one or two-family residential use.
      (18)   a.   Any property (except when located in a mixed use district)
that is platted into three lots or more for one- or two-family development
where the side or rear yard are adjacent to an arterial street as defined by
the city master thoroughfare plan, shall be required to provide a minimum six-
foot wall of brick, stone, masonry, decorative cast concrete, wrought iron,
tubular steel, durable composite board with top and bottom rails, or other
material with a projected life expectancy of 25 years or more along the entire
length of each property. Masonry columns shall be provided not greater than ten
feet on center. All fence posts must be placed at a depth of at least 24 inches
into the ground, filled and anchored with concrete footers or encasement. A
horizontal relief of the same height shall be placed parallel to the arterial
street at intervals not greater than 500 feet with a minimum off-set of three
feet in depth by 50 feet in length. The off-set section shall be wrought iron
type fence design or other such material as approved by the director of
planning and development, as referenced in subsection (c)(1) below. Required
fences may also be located within an easement dedicated to a home owners
association (HOA) or pubic improvement district (PID), or, a designated lot of
not less than five feet wide along the rear or side property line of the
residential lots adjacent to the arterial street right-of-way under the control
of an HOA or PID. No building permit shall be issued for lots required to
provide a masonry screen fence under this section until a building permit has
been provided for the fence.
         b.   Replacement of a portion of a fence shall match the existing
fence material and design.
   (b)   Height and front yard regulations.
      (1)   No fence or wall shall be erected within the minimum required front
yard, platted front yard or projected front yard except as provided in
subsection (b)(2) below for one-family and two-family residential dwellings,
subsection (b)(3) below for multifamily developments, subsection (b)(4) below,
for utility facilities, subsection (b)(5) below for automobile repair and body
shops and §
6.101(e) for through lots.
      (2)   One-family and two-family residential dwellings.
         a.   Up to four-foot open design fence consisting of wrought-iron,
tubular steel, picket or a similar type material designed for fencing
(excluding chain link) that does not obscure visibility and is no greater than
50% in density may be erected on property within the minimum required front
yard, platted front yard, established front yard or projected front yard of
one-family and two-family residential dwellings.
         b.   No solid fences and walls are permitted in the required front
yard, projected front yard or platted front yard of one-family and two-family
residential dwellings. The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to
allow a solid fence or wall up to four feet in height in the front yard,
platted front yard or projected front yard in accordance with the requirements
set forth for special exceptions in
Chapter 3, Article 3.
         c.   Up to a five-foot open design fence consisting of wrought-iron,
tubular steel, picket or a similar type material designed for fencing
(excluding chain link) that does not obscure visibility and is no greater than
50% in density may be permitted within the minimum required front yard, platted
front yard or projected front yard of one-family and two-family residential
dwellings as a special exception by the board of adjustment provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   The fence will be compatible with the existing use and
permitted development of the adjacent properties; and
            2.   The applicant obtains the consent of the property owners of
the properties adjacent to the applicant’s property and the property owners of
the property located directly across the street from the applicant’s property.
         d.   Fence designs may include columns to a maximum height of five
feet, six inches.
      (3)   (Reserved.)
      (4)   Up to an eight-foot open design fence consisting of wrought-iron,
tubular steel, picket or a similar type material designed for fencing
(excluding chain link) that does not obscure visibility and is no greater than
50% in density (excluding chain link) may be erected around utility facilities
within the minimum required front yard, platted front yard or projected front
yard.
      (5)   Fences required under §
5.104 for automotive repair and body shops may be erected within the minimum
required front yard, platted front yard or projected front yard. For newly
constructed automotive repair and body shops located in the “MU-2” district,
exterior security fences and gates located along public streets, along private
streets or walkways that are publicly accessible through a public use easement,
or along publicly accessible open space, shall not extend beyond building
facades; i.e., these fences shall not be located in the area between building
facades and the property line.
      (6)   Screening walls or fences in excess of four feet shall be allowed
in any front yard that is, in effect, the rear yard on a through lot adjacent
to an existing or proposed arterial street. If the platted front yard or
established front yard is less than the maximum required front yard, the
setback of the minimum required front yard shall be met.
      (7)   No fence over eight feet in height surrounding residential property
shall be allowed behind the front building setback line.
      (8)   No fence exceeding two feet in height shall be permitted on a
corner lot within or along a triangle formed by measuring 20 feet in each
direction from the point of corner of the property line at the street
intersection. This area is also known as a public open space easement
(P.O.S.E.).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7321.jpg]
      (9)   The height of any fence shall be measured from the highest adjacent
grade parallel to the fence to the highest point of the fence or any gates.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7323.jpg]
   Fence Height
   (c)   Screening fence specifications. All screening fences required by this
ordinance shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications.
      (1)   Screening fences shall be constructed of wood, brick, stone or
reinforced concrete products. The development services director or his or her
designee may approve other materials provided the material is expressly
designed for fence installation and is resistant to sunlight and moisture.
      (2)   The following construction specifications shall apply to required
screening fences over six feet in height.
         a.   Concrete fences.
            1.   Shall be designed by an engineer licensed by the State of
Texas;
            2.   Shall be either poured in place or lift slab construction; and
            3.   Shall be properly engineered to withstand wind load, special
load conditions and site drainage.
         b.   Wood fences.
            1.   Metal posts shall be used for the vertical fence supports. The
posts shall be set in concrete at least three feet into the ground;
            2.   Boards used in the construction shall be spruce, cedar,
redwood or other durable decay-resistant construction. The lumber grade of
boards shall be “select,” #1 or equal. Boards should be spaced one-eighth-inch
apart and shall face the residential district, unless the majority of the
residents whose property faces the fence request that the finished side face
the adjacent commercial or industrial property. The finished sides of all
fences constructed adjacent to a freeway or arterial street shown on the master
thoroughfare plan shall face the right-of-way; and
            3.   Wood fences using the stockade/picket/slat style fence shall
be prohibited.
         c.   Masonry fences.
            1.   Masonry fences shall be brick, stone or block;
            2.   Brick fences shall be of exterior grade brick; and
            3.   Block fences shall be Grade N, Type I.
   (d)   Specifications for other required fences. Fences required to be
constructed pursuant to the zoning ordinance, other than required screening
fences, shall be constructed of materials allowed for screening fences pursuant
to subsection (c)(1) above or from wrought iron, tubular steel or chain link.
Wood, concrete and masonry fences over six feet in height shall be constructed
in accordance with the construction requirements set out in subsection (c)(2)
above. The finished sides of all fences constructed adjacent to a freeway or
arterial street shown on the master thoroughfare plan shall face the right-of-
way.
   (e)   Specifications for all other fences adjacent to freeway or arterial
street. Except for screening fences and other required fences, which shall
comply with subsections (c) and (d) above, fences that are constructed adjacent
to a freeway or arterial street shown on the master thoroughfare plan shall be
constructed of wood, brick, stone, reinforced concrete products, masonry,
wrought iron, tubular steel or chain link. In addition, the development
services director or his or her designee may approve other materials provided
the material is expressly designed for fence installation and is resistant to
sunlight and moisture. The finished sides of all fences constructed adjacent to
a freeway or arterial street shown on the master thoroughfare plan shall face
the right-of-way.
   (f)   Maintenance. Maintenance requirements for fences are contained in the
minimum building standards code, §
7-87(r) of the city code. The maintenance requirements are set out below for
information purposes only. Violation of any of the following requirements shall
be a violation of the minimum building standards code, but not a violation of
the zoning ordinance.
      (1)   Fences, retaining walls, decorative walls and barriers shall be
maintained in good condition, and shall not be out of vertical alignment by
more than 18 degrees, unless designed as such.
      (2)   Rotted, fire damaged or broken wooden slats and support posts shall
be repaired or replaced.
      (3)   Broken or severely bent metal posts or torn, cut or ripped metal
fencing materials shall be repaired or replaced.
      (4)   Loose brick, stone, rock, mortar or similar materials on masonry
walls and barriers shall be rebonded or similarly repaired.
      (5)   The above requirements shall not prohibit a fence, retaining wall,
decorative wall or barrier from being removed if it is not otherwise required
by law.
      (6)   The above requirements shall only apply to a fence, retaining wall,
decorative wall or barrier adjacent to a public right-of-way.
   (g)   Indemnification. Where a fence is to be placed in an easement
containing underground utilities, the owner or occupant shall sign a release
indemnifying the city from any damages for removal of the fence and damage to
the fence as a result of the need to repair or replace said utilities.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14624, § 6, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 14713,
§§ 1, 2, passed 7-17-2001; Ord. 14911, § 3, passed 12-18-2001; Ord. 15166, § 2,
passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 15406, § 3, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 15827, § 2, passed 1-
13-2004; Ord. 15978, § 1, passed 5-11-2004; Ord. 16330, § 11, passed 3-8-2005;
Ord. 16521, § 6, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 16651-10-2005, § 2, passed 10-11-2005;
Ord. 17025, § 1, passed 6-20-2006; Ord. 17522, § 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
23495-12-2018, § 5, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 23738-08-2019, § 1, passed 8-6-2019,
eff. 9-8-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 27545-03-2025, §
5, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 5.306 STORAGE OR DISPLAY IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS, OUTDOOR.
   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any commercial use
(including air conditioning, ice and refrigerating plants purely incidental to
a main activity permitted on the premises) are permitted subject to the
following conditions. No use or accessory use shall be construed to permit the
keeping of articles, material or merchandise in the open or on the outside of
the building except as follows:
   (a)   Items permitted in “E” through “H” districts. The following items may
be displayed and/or stored year-round outside the main building subject to the
conditions contained in this section, provided, however, general merchandise
stores and home improvement stores are permitted to have outdoor storage,
display and sales in accordance with §
5.134(a)(9):
      (1)   Bagged grass seed;
      (2)   Bagged fertilizer;
      (3)   Bagged mulch;
      (4)   Bagged bark chips;
      (5)   Bagged play sand;
      (6)   Bagged potting soil;
      (7)   Bundled firewood;
      (8)   Living plants; and
      (9)   A maximum of ten portable boxes, bins or other such containers, not
to exceed 96-gallon capacity each, for the purpose of collecting aluminum cans,
glass, grocery bags or plastic bottles.
   (b)   General conditions. Outside storage and/or display of the above listed
items is subject to strict compliance with the following conditions.
      (1)   No merchandising, nor the storage or stacking of such merchandise
may exceed four feet in height (except Christmas trees displayed in vertical
position).
      (2)   No merchandise may extend more than five feet from the front wall
of the building except holiday sales items and temporary sales as set out in
subsections (c) and (d) below.
      (3)   A four-foot wide unobstructed walkway must be provided between the
curb, fire lane, maneuvering aisle or parking space and any stored and/or
displayed merchandise.
      (4)   No stored merchandise, goods or products may be situated such that
visibility of motor vehicle traffic lanes is obstructed.
      (5)   No area used for the outside storage or display of merchandise
shall be located within 25 feet of the rear or side of any residentially used
property.
      (6)   No area designated for required off-street parking may be used for
outside storage or display of merchandise (except holiday sales items).
      (7)   All city fire, building and other codes shall be strictly complied
with.
   (c)   Special conditions for holiday sales permitted in “E” through “H”
districts. Outside storage and/or display of holiday sales items, such as cut
trees, pumpkins and cut flowers are subject to strict compliance with the
following conditions.
      (1)   Cut trees and pumpkins may be displayed for up to 30 days preceding
and including the holiday but must be removed the day immediately following the
holiday.
      (2)   All other merchandise may be displayed for no more than ten days
preceding a holiday and must be removed the day immediately following the
holiday.
      (3)   Display area may not exceed 30% of the on-premises off-street
parking.
      (4)   If a tent is to be erected in conjunction with the sale, a permit
from the fire department is required.
   (d)   Special conditions for temporary outdoor tent sales permitted in “E”
through “H” districts. Outside storage and/or display of new, retail
merchandise for temporary tent sales are subject to strict compliance with the
following conditions.
      (1)   A permit from the fire department is required to erect a tent.
      (2)   Sales may last for no more than ten consecutive days and are
limited to two per business per year.
      (3)   Display area may not exceed 30% of the on-premises off-street
parking.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14331, § 6, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 15406, §
3, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 17907, § 1, passed 12-4-2007)
§ 5.307 LARGE ANIMALS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   If a large animal is kept in or confined by any building or
structure, such as a stable, barn, shed, pen or fence, the separation distances
required below shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of
such building or structure to the nearest point of any regulated structure.
      (2)   Pre-weaned animals will not be counted in calculating the pasture
land square footage for each animal.
   (b)   Allowed by right in “A” one-family and “B” two-family districts.
      (1)   A property owner with large animals must provide required pasture
land per animal, based on the type of animal to be kept:
         a.   Large animals, with the exception of those listed in subsection
(b)(1)b. below, shall require 10,000 square feet per animal; and
         b.   Miniature horses, sheep and goats require 5,000 square feet per
animal.
      (2)   A property owner must keep any large animals at least 50 feet away
from a regulated structure.
      (3)   A property owner must own a total of one-half acre of contiguous
land to keep a large animal. This land may be comprised of several individual
lots as long as all lots are under common ownership.
      (4)   A property owner must live on the property with the animals or
within one-quarter-mile of the property where the animals are being kept.
   (c)   Allowed by special exception in “A” one- family and “B” two-family
districts. Property owners who cannot meet the conditions listed in subsection
(b) above may apply to the board of adjustment for a special exception. In
granting the special exception, the board shall consider the following:
      (1)   The presence of other large animals being kept within the
neighborhood;
      (2)   The quality of the conditions in which the animal(s) are being
kept;
      (3)   The distance of the pasture and shelters from regulated structures;
      (4)   The conditions of the barns or stables and their impact on adjacent
properties;
      (5)   The provision of parking or storage for any trailers, in accordance
with city code;
      (6)   The provision of any additional setback or screening to mitigate
possible impacts to adjacent properties; and
      (7)   Whether the property owner was lawfully operating prior to the
adoption date of this ordinance
   (d)   Requirements in “AG” agricultural and “K” heavy industrial districts.
A property owner must either keep any large animals at least 50 feet away from
a regulated structure or provide the required pasture land as follows.
      (1)   Large animals, with the exception of those listed in subsection (d)
(2) below, shall require 10,000 square feet per animal.
      (2)   Miniature horses, sheep and goats require 5,000 square feet per
animal.
   (e)   Legal nonconforming status. A property owner wanting to claim legal
nonconforming status under
Chapter 7 Nonconformities must register with the City of Fort Worth, planning
and development department, within one year of the adoption date of this
ordinance. Such registration would include the number of large animals being
kept on the property, the amount of pasture land provided, and the distance
from any regulated structure. The large animal use may only be expanded if the
use is brought into full compliance with this section.
   (f)   Requirements for city-owned or operated property. City-owned or
operated property shall not be subject to subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e)
above. Large animals must either be kept at least 50 feet away from a regulated
structure or be kept on the required pasture land as follows.
      (1)   Large animals, with the exception of those listed in subsection (f)
(2) below, shall require 10,000 square feet per animal.
      (2)   Miniature horses, sheep and goats require 5,000 square feet per
animal.
(Ord. 18009, § 1, passed 3-4-2008)
§ 5.308 DOCKS, PIERS AND BOATHOUSES.
   (a)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate the construction and use
of residential docks, piers and boathouses (structure) to ensure the
preservation of water quality, habitat and the natural and scenic beauty of
Lake Worth as well as provide for the health and safety of its citizens and
visitors.
      (2)   A person who wishes to construct or improve a residential structure
or walkway must have a valid water use and access easement for Lake Worth
executed and granted by the City of Fort Worth.
      (3)   Commercial structures and slips will require a special exception
from the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall consider whether
the proposal will affect the water quality, habitat and the natural and scenic
beauty of Lake Worth or the health and safety of its citizens and visitors.
   (b)   Size and setback limitations.
      (1)   a.   One structure is permitted per property, and the maximum size
of any structure shall be as follows:
 
Shoreline Frontage Maximum Structure Size (square feet)
(linear feet)
Up to 80 feet      1,000 square feet
81 feet or more    Linear feet of shoreline x 15
                   Not to exceed 1,600 square feet
 
         b.   The area measured is to be the largest area at the end of a
walkway. The largest area may be either the outside corners of the structure or
the roofline if it has more than a two-foot overhang.
      (2)   One walkway, not to exceed six feet in width, shall be excluded in
the square footage calculation of the structure. If, however, the walkway
exceeds six feet in width, the difference shall count towards the maximum
allowed square footage of the structure. No walkway shall be allowed in excess
of eight feet in width or to extend to more than one structure. The distance
the walkway and the structure extend into the reservoir shall be kept as short
a distance as is practical so as not to impair navigation and to maintain
continuity with the shoreline.
      (3)   The minimum setback of a structure from a projected side yard line
(Exhibit 1) shall be based on the width of the property at the lakefront
property line as follows:
 
Shoreline Frontage (linear feet) Setback (feet)
Up to 50 feet                    5 feet
51—100 feet                    10% of shoreline frontage
101 feet or more                 10 feet
 
      (4)   Structures may extend:
         a.   To a point 100 feet from the lakefront property line into the
waters of Lake Worth regardless of the depth of the water at that point; or
         b.   1.   To the point at which the elevation of the land lying under
Lake Worth is not less than 584 feet above mean sea level, but in no case more
than 200 feet from the lakefront property line into the water of Lake Worth.
(See Exhibit 1.)
            2.   The depth shall be determined by the City of Fort Worth.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7325.jpg]
Exhibit 1
      (6)   No structure shall occupy more than one-third of the cove width and
in no case shall be located within ten feet of the centerline of the cove. (See
Exhibit 2.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7327.jpg]
Exhibit 2
      (7)   A structure will be permitted without an existing residential use
on the property.
      (8)   Where large undivided tracts or multiple lots are used to determine
the maximum area of a structure, the linear footage of shoreline for the
combined area shall be set aside and cannot be used for the future
determination of the size of other structures. With multiple lots, the primary
residence must cross over the center lot line(s) by at least one foot in order
for more than one lot width to be counted in determining the maximum area of a
structure.
   (c)   Enclosures and storage.
      (1)   Enclosed structures are prohibited. To protect a raised boat within
a structure from the elements, solid sides on the structure will be permitted
at a maximum of four feet measured downward from the point where the ceiling
joist meets the top plate. No additional materials may be installed below the
four-foot sidewalls.
      (2)   Structures shall be limited to two stories. A sundeck over the dock
shall not count towards the maximum dock size. Any area under a permanent roof
of the second level will be counted in the dock size measurement. If, due to
topography, the peak of the second level roof is lower than the foundation of
the primary house, then the maximum dock size may be increased by 50%. The
floor of the lower deck shall be no less than the 596-foot elevation, which
does not apply to floating docks.
      (3)   A maximum storage area of 48 square feet shall be allowed on the
first floor (lower deck) of a structure. The design of the storage area shall
be such that it does not close off any more than 50% of any wall length,
maintaining the required openness required in subsection (c)(1) above. Products
considered hazardous material or any material which has a warning label
prohibiting its use or storage near water and/or public water supplies may not
be stored in the storage area.
   (d)   Special exception. Requests for greater dock sizes, smaller setbacks
and enclosures may be permitted as a special exception by the board of
adjustment.
(Ord. 19515-01-2011, § 1, passed 1-4-2011)
ARTICLE 4: TEMPORARY USES
§ 5.400 AMUSEMENT, OUTDOOR (TEMPORARY).
   All temporary outdoor commercial amusement enterprises shall be permitted as
a special exception by the board of adjustment only for a specified number of
days. See city code
Chapter 20, Article II for additional permit requirements.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.401 BATCH PLANT, ASPHALT OR CONCRETE (TEMPORARY).
   (a)   A temporary batch plant (concrete or asphalt) for road and highway
construction may be located in any zoning district, provided that:
      (1)   The time period is no more than six months;
      (2)   The site is located 600 feet or more from properties upon which
dwellings are constructed; and
      (3)   A site plan has been filed in the planning and development
department, showing the location of the temporary batch plant, the distance
from improved residential properties, and the streets to be paved.
   (b)   A temporary batch plant may be permitted for a period exceeding six
months by special exception approved by the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 5.402 GARAGE OR OTHER OCCASIONAL SALE.
   In any residential district, occasional sales restricted to garages and
patios not to exceed two in number on the same premises in any one calendar
year, by a person who does not hold himself or herself out as engaging in, or
does not habitually engage in, the business of selling such property at retail
are permitted, provided that the following requirements are met.
   (a)   The sale shall be confined to the garage and/or patio of the premises.
   (b)   No new merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale on the
premises shall be sold at such occasional sale.
   (c)   The duration of each such sale shall not exceed three consecutive
calendar days.
   (d)   A permit shall be secured at least 72 hours prior to the sale and
shall be prominently posted on such premises during such sale.
   (e)   The permit fee amount shall be as established by the city council.
   (f)   Only one sign shall be permitted, not to exceed two square feet in
area, upon the premises where and when the sale is taking place. All other
signs relating to the sale, either on or off the premises, shall be violations
of this section.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.403 MODEL HOME.
   In any residential district, model homes used as show homes and/or sales
offices are permitted in a subdivision as approved by a final plat to which
they pertain and subject to the following conditions.
   (a)   No more than five model homes per builder per platted subdivision are
permitted.
   (b)   Model homes that are located more than 500 feet from an arterial or
wider street must be at 300 feet from any occupied residence and are subject to
a time limit of five years. Model homes that are located 500 feet or less from
an arterial or wider street are not subject to the residential distance
requirement or the five-year time limit of this section.
   (c)   A building initially permitted as a single-family residence and
converted to a model home must be at least 300 feet from any occupied
residence, regardless of distance to an arterial and is subject to a time limit
of five years.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14624, § 6, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 15825,
passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 16926, § 1, passed 5-2-2006; Ord. 20899-09-2013, § 1,
passed 9-10-2013; eff. 9-25-2013; Ord. 22491-11-2016, § 1, passed 11-1-2016,
eff. 12-1-2016)
§ 5.404 RESIDENCE FOR SECURITY PURPOSES, TEMPORARY.
   Manufactured housing as a place of residence when required for documented
security purposes at commercial and industrial sites or during the construction
phase of any permitted use may be permitted as a special exception by the board
of adjustment in accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 6 and
8, provided it is subject to such conditions as may be required by the board of
adjustment and provided that approval shall be granted for a limited period of
time to be specified by the board of adjustment, but not to exceed five years.
Upon application, time may be extended for successive periods of five years or
less, provided there shall be new notice and hearing before each extension.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 5.405 PORTABLE TRAILER - RESIDENTIAL SALES, CONSTRUCTION OR RELATED STORAGE.
   In any residential district, portable trailers used as sales offices,
construction offices or related storage trailers are permitted subject to the
following conditions.
   (a)   No more than one portable sales trailer and one portable construction
trailer per residential builder per platted subdivision is permitted.
   (b)   Portable construction trailers must be at least 300 feet from any
occupied residence and are subject to a time limit of two years.
   (c)   Portable sales trailers that are located more than 300 feet from an
arterial or wider street must be at least 300 feet from any occupied residence
within the same subdivision and are subject to a time limit of three years.
Portable sales trailers that are located 300 feet or less from an arterial or
wider street are not subject to the residential distance requirement or the
three-year time limit of this section.
   (d)   Portable construction and sales trailers must be skirted on the front
and sides, provide foundation landscape planting consisting of one five-gallon
shrub per four linear feet around the skirting, (excluding entrances) and must
comply with the bufferyard, screening and fence requirements of
Chapter 6, Article 3.
   (e)   Each construction trailer shall have at least four paved parking
places (two deep tandem parking is allowed). Each sales trailer shall have at
least two paved parking places (two deep tandem parking is not permitted).
   (f)   A manufactured home is not allowed as a portable trailer.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15825, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 22491-11-
2016, § 2, passed 11-1-2016, eff. 12-1-2016)
§ 5.406 MOBILE VENDORS.
   (a)   Required permits.
      (1)   Vendor certificate of occupancy.
         a.   All food and merchandise vendors shall obtain a vendor
certificate of occupancy for each specified location where sales are to take
place from a mobile vending unit. Except as otherwise provided herein; a vendor
certificate of occupancy is valid for one year from the date of issuance.
         b.   No vendor certificate of occupancy will be issued without written
authorization from the owner or person in control of the premises stating that
the mobile vending unit has permission to occupy the premises where the mobile
vending unit is located to sell merchandise, or sell or serve food.
         c.   No vendor certificate of occupancy will be issued without written
authorization from the owner or person in control of each premises stating that
the mobile vending unit has permission to use a commercially plumbed restroom.
         d.   Vendor certificate of occupancy permits issued to mobile vendor
units located between 50 feet and 100 feet from any single-family or
multifamily residential use are valid for six months from the date of its
issuance.
         e.   No vendor certificate of occupancy will be issued to a food
vendor without a health permit.
      (2)   Health permit.
         a.   Food vendors must obtain a permit from the code compliance
department to operate as a mobile vending unit.
         b.   Merchandise vendors are not required to obtain a health permit.
      (3)   General provisions.
         a.   A vendor certificate of occupancy may be denied if the mobile
vendor fails to provide a valid vehicle registration, motor vehicle operator’s
license, proof of vehicle liability insurance and a Texas sales tax permit.
         b.   A vendor certificate of occupancy is not transferable.
         c.   The vendor certificate of occupancy sticker must be displayed on
the upper left rear area of the mobile vending unit in a conspicuous location.
If such location is not practicable, the permit shall be located in a location
approved by the director of the planning and development department or his or
her assignee.
   (b)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   No mobile vending unit shall operate at any time between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (2)   Transient food vendors may not stop for more than 60 consecutive
minutes at any one location to sell or serve food provided however this shall
not apply to mobile vendor food courts.
   (c)   Operational requirements.
      (1)   Mobile vending units may only operate in locations as allowed by
the Fort Worth zoning ordinance.
      (2)   No mobile vending unit may operate within 50 feet from a single-
family or multi-family residential use, provided however, a fresh market mobile
vendor shall be permitted to operate within such 50 foot setback and on a lot
with an existing nonresidential use, such as but not limited to a church or
school. A fresh market mobile vendor shall not operate on a lot used for
residential purposes. Single-family or multi-family residential use shall not
include a residence that is part of a business or a mixed-use structure.
      (3)   All mobile vending units must park on an improved surface.
      (4)   No mobile vending unit may operate on a vacant lot, provided
however, a fresh market mobile vendor may operate on a vacant lot in
nonresidential districts (e.g. commercial, industrial, mixed use) with a valid
vendor certificate of occupancy. A fresh market mobile vendor shall not be
permitted to operate on a vacant lot that is residentially zoned.
      (5)   Neither the mobile vending unit nor any related displays of
merchandise, seating, or temporary shelters may obscure traffic.
      (6)   No mobile vending unit shall be allowed to sell merchandise, sell,
or serve food on any public street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way,
provided however, a fresh market mobile vendor may operate as a mobile vending
vehicle in accordance with Chapter 22 Motor Vehicles and Traffic, Article XI:
Mobile Vending Vehicles.
      (7)   All mobile vending units shall be equipped with a self-closing
lidded trash receptacle. The trash receptacle must be placed outside next to
the mobile vending unit for use by the patrons of the unit. The area around the
mobile vending unit shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage and
debris.
      (8)   The connection of a mobile vending unit to a source of electricity,
water and sewer at a mobile vending site is prohibited unless a permit has been
obtained from the planning and development department for each connection and
the connection has been inspected and found to comply with city codes. Each
permit shall be maintained in the mobile vending unit at all times and made
available upon request by city personnel.
      (9)   Merchandise and food vendors shall remove the mobile vending unit
daily from the property provided however this shall not apply to mobile vendor
food courts.
      (10)   All food vendors and transient food vendors handling potentially
hazardous food products shall report the mobile vending unit at least once a
day to its designated commissary for food, supplies, cleaning and servicing as
required by
Chapter 16, Health and Sanitation, of the city code of the City of Fort Worth.
      (11)   Except as otherwise limited by this ordinance or other city codes,
a vendor may utilize outside seating consisting of a portable table and a
seating capacity of four, provided however this shall not apply to mobile
vendor food courts.
      (12)   All mobile vending units handling or selling potentially hazardous
food products must be a commercially manufactured vehicle as defined in §
9.101, Definitions of the zoning ordinance and in
Chapter 16, Health and Sanitation of the Fort Worth city code.
      (13)   No more than one mobile vending unit per individual tract, parcel
or platted lot shall be allowed, provided however this shall not apply to
mobile vendor food courts.
         a.   A maximum of three mobile vending units shall be allowed on an
individual tract, parcel or platted on which a grocery store with a footprint
exceeding 60,000 square feet is located as a special exception by the board of
adjustment, provided, however, that in granting any such special exception, the
board shall consider the following:
            1.   The number of available parking spaces on the lot;
            2.   Whether an increased number of mobile vending units would be
compatible with the existing use and permitted development of adjacent
properties; and
            3.   Any other issues the board of adjustment considers to be
relevant.
         b.   More than one mobile vending unit shall be allowed on an
individual tract, parcel or platted located within the near southside zoning
district with a design plan approved by the urban design commission. The
commission shall consider the following:
            1.   The number of available parking spaces on the lot and other
parking areas within a quarter mile of the property;
            2.   Whether an increased number of mobile vending units would be
compatible with the existing use and permitted development of adjacent
properties; and
            3.   Any other issues the urban design commission considers to be
relevant.
   (d)   Additional requirements for mobile vending units located within 100
feet single-family or multifamily residential use.
      (1)   No mobile vending unit may operate within 50 feet from a single-
family or multifamily residential use. Single-family or multifamily residential
use shall not include a residence that is part of a business or a mixed-use
structure.
      (2)   a.   All mobile vending units between 50 feet and 100 feet from a
single-family or multifamily residential use must obtain the unanimous consent
of all the owners of the single-family or multifamily residential property
within a 100 foot radius around the mobile vending unit.
         b.   Consent from the property owners must be signed within 30 days
from the date the vendor submits an application for a vendor certificate of
occupancy.
         c.   Measurement shall be determined in a straight line (ignoring
intervening structures) from closest point of the mobile vending unit to the
closest point of the property line of the single-family or multifamily
residential use.
      (3)   No amplified music is allowed after 10:00 p.m.
      (4)   No portable chairs and tables are allowed after 10:00 p.m.
      (5)   The use of portable or vehicle mounted generators to supply
electricity to a mobile vending unit is prohibited.
   (e)   Exemptions. The provisions and requirements of this section do not
apply to:
      (1)   All events/activities/festivals approved by the board of adjustment
under §
5.400 of the zoning ordinance entitled “Amusement, outdoor (temporary);”
      (2)   All events/activities/festivals approved by the city council; and
      (3)   All events/activities/festivals lasting no longer than 14
consecutive days that are open to the public for the purpose of providing
entertainment/food and/or sales of merchandise and are in conjunction with a
single event or celebration.
   (f)   Mobile vendor food courts.
      (1)   Generally. Generally mobile vendor food courts may be permitted in
accordance with the use tables in
Chapter 4, Articles 8 and
12, subject to the following conditions.
         a.   Compliance. Each individual mobile vendor food court shall comply
with all regulations of
Chapter 16, Health and Sanitation of the Fort Worth city code and this section
except as noted above in subsection (c).
         b.   Commissary. If a commissary is provided on site and the mobile
vending unit is approved to use the site’s commissary, then the mobile vending
unit will not have to be removed from the site each day.
         c.   Hours. The mobile vendor food court shall not operate between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
         d.   On-site manager. There must be a designated manager of the site
that is responsible for the orderly organization of mobile vending units, the
cleanliness of the site and the site’s compliance with all rules and
regulations during working hours.
         e.   Restrooms. Permanent restrooms must be provided within the
boundaries of the mobile vendor food court. The number of water closets and
lavatories required shall be based on the occupant load for fixed seating of
the court, and Table 403.1 of the Fort Worth plumbing code. At a minimum at
least one restroom for each sex shall be provided within five hundred feet from
each mobile vending unit.
         f.   Water and electrical requirements. Each site is required to
provide water hookups and electricity access for each individual mobile vending
unit that operates at the site. Each individual mobile vending unit is not
allowed to operate a generator at the site unless emergency circumstances
necessitate the need for use of a generator.
      (2)   Site plan. A site plan shall be provided for review showing:
         a.   The land area included within the site, the zoning classification
of adjacent sites, and all public and private rights-of-way and easements
bounding and intersecting the site;
         b.   A legal description of the platted lots of the proposed site and
the boundaries thereof;
         c.   The location of each proposed permanent structure on the site and
pads for mobile vending units, and identification of any proposed outdoor
entertainment locations;
         d.   The location, width and surface material, including all curb cuts
of driving lanes and mobile vending unit pads, including a 20 foot fire lane
where required by the fire department, fire hydrants and including paving, turf
or gravel to be used;
         e.   The location of fire hydrants;
         f.   The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas;
         g.   Landscaping of all street frontages;
         h.   All pedestrian walks, patios and open areas for use by tenants or
the public;
         i.   The location and height of all walls, fences and screen planting
and landscaping;
         j.   The location, size, height, foot candle level and orientation of
all lighting and signs;
         k.   Location and screening of refuse containers, air conditioners and
outside storage or display;
         l.   Location and number of provided seating and eating areas,
including number of fixed seats and tables;
         m.   A schedule of the phasing of all improvements shown in the plan;
         n.   Location, height, separation of buildings, including location of
restrooms, and open space; and
         o.   Location and type of water supply and electrical outlet(s)
provided for each corresponding pad site.
      (3)   Placement; parking. Mobile vending units shall be placed on, at a
minimum, compacted gravel base. Mobile vending units shall not be parked on
unimproved surfaces.
      (4)   Signs. One on-premises sign is permitted at the entrance
identifying the mobile food court. Each mobile vending unit may have attached
signage. One temporary sandwich board sign is permitted per mobile vending unit
to be displayed within ten feet of the unit and within the boundaries of the
mobile vendor food court. Only one banner or temporary inflatable sign may be
permitted at one time per mobile vendor food court, in accordance with §
6.404.
      (5)   Location. The mobile vendor food court must be located at least 500
feet from a one- or two- family residential zoning district. Mobile vendor food
courts within 500 feet of a one- or two-family district, as measured at the
property line of the mobile vendor food court to the zoning district boundary,
are permitted only by special exception.
      (6)   Special exception. The board of adjustment may grant a special
exception for a period of up to five years. The board shall consider the
following:
         a.   The impact to adjacent properties;
         b.   The number of available parking spaces on the lot and other
pertinent parking areas within a one-fourth mile walking distance;
         c.   Whether the operation of a mobile vendor food court would be
compatible with the surrounding uses and zoning of adjacent properties; and
         d.   Any other issues the board of adjustment considers to be
relevant.
      (7)   Minimum parking. Minimum parking shall be required if the board of
adjustment grants a special exception that permits a mobile vendor food court
to be located within 250 feet of a one- or two- family residential district in
accordance with the table located in §
6.201.
(Ord. 20510-12-2012, § 1, passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-11-2012; Ord. 20752-05-
2013, § 1, passed 5-14-2013, eff. 5-23-2013; Ord. 22154-04-2016, § 1, passed 4-
5-2016, eff. 4-21-2016)
CHAPTER 6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
Article 1: General
   
6.100   Height
   
6.101   Yards
Article 2: Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
6.200   General requirements
   
6.201   Off-street parking requirements
   
6.202   Parking lot design standards
   
6.203   Off-street loading facilities
   
6.204   Bicycle parking
Article 3: Landscaping, Buffers and Urban Forestry
   
6.300   Bufferyard and supplemental building setback
   
6.301   Landscaping
   
6.302   Urban forestry
Article 4: Signs
   
6.400   Scope
   
6.401   Enforcement
   
6.402   Scenic preservation areas and corridors
   
6.403   Signs not requiring a permit
   
6.404   Temporary on-premise signs requiring a permit
   
6.405   Prohibited signs
   
6.406   Measurement of signs
   
6.407   Relation to zoning districts
   
6.408   Regulations governing on-premise attached signs in commercial and
industrial districts
   
6.409   Regulations governing on-premise detached signs in commercial and
industrial districts
   
6.410   Unified sign agreements for on-premises signs
   
6.411   Electronic changeable copy signs
   
6.412   Sales office and model home signs
   
6.413   Nonconforming signs
   
6.414   Kiosk signs
   
6.415   Noncommercial copy
Article 5: Residential Design Standards
   
6.500   Access through residential districts
   
6.501   Lot area where not served by sanitary sewer
   
6.502   Two detached dwelling units on one lot
   
6.503   Reserved
   
6.504   Reserved
   
6.505   Reserved
   
6.506   Reserved
   
6.507   One-family dwelling unit design standards
   
6.508   Entry features
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL
§ 6.100 HEIGHT.
   The height, area and setback requirements in the various districts in
Chapter 4 shall be subject to the following exceptions and regulations.
   (a)   Except for multifamily developments in §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712, the height of a building in the “A” through “F” districts, and “I”
district, may be increased when the front, side and rear yard dimensions are
each increased above the minimum requirements by one foot for each foot such
building exceeds the height limit of the district in which it is located.
   (b)    Except for multifa mily dwelli ngs develo ped in accord ance with §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712, the height of a buildin g shall be the vertical distance measured from
the curb level to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, however, that where buildings
are set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured
from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the
building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7329.jpg]
   Building Height
   (c)   Height in multifamily residential developments constructed in
accordance with §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712 shall be measured from the top of the finished slab to top of the highest
wall top plate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10272.jpg]
   (d)   Except for multifamily dwellings developed in accordance with §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712 on through lots 150 feet or less in depth, the height of a building may
be measured from the curb level on either street. On through lots more than 150
feet in depth the height regulations and basis of height measurements for the
street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not more than
150 feet from that street.
   (e)   Elevator penthouses or bulkheads; mechanical equipment rooms; cooling
towers; tanks; enclosed stairwells; and ornamental cupolas and domes; signs and
spires may be erected on buildings to any height not prohibited by any other
law, code or regulation.
   (f)   Nothing in this ordinance shall interfere with limitation on height of
structures included in the airport zoning regulations in §§
3-260 et seq. of the city code.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 16330, § 12, passed 3-8-2005; Ord. 27545-
03-2025, § 2, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 6.101 YARDS.
   (a)   Yards to remain unobstructed. Every part of a required yard shall be
open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except that:
      (1)   Ordinary sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, bay windows,
buttresses and ornamental features may project not more than six inches into a
required yard;
      (2)   Eaves may project not more than 36 inches into a required yard;
      (3)   A terrace garage in any residential district may be located in a
front or side yard, provided that it is completely recessed into the terrace,
and that the height of the terrace is sufficient to cover and conceal the
structure from above, and further provided that the doors when open, shall not
project beyond the property line, and that the structure shall be set back at
least five feet from any property line; and
      (4)   The front yard setback shall be measured from the front property
line to the main wall of the structure. An open porch or patio that has a
vertical roof support may not be set closer than 15 feet from the front
property line on a local street and ten feet on a limited local street.
   (b)   Multifamily/nonresidential districts adjacent to residential
districts.
      (1)   For corner lots in multifamily and nonresidential districts that
abut the front yard of a lot with residential zoning, the exterior minimum side
yard requirements shall be the same as the front yard requirements of the
adjacent residential lot.
      (2)   Structures are not permitted to be located in this yard area, nor
can such area be used for signage, garbage collection, loading and/or parking
of vehicles, any type of storage, or any nonresidential activity.
      (3)   This required yard area shall not be graveled or hard-surfaced, but
shall be maintained as open green space, save and except for necessary
driveways.
   (c)   Multifamily/nonresidential districts across the street from
residential districts.
      (1)   Zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) and townhouse/cluster (“R2”)
districts. For zero lot line/cluster (“R1”) and townhouse/cluster (“R2”)
districts that fronts a public or private street classified as a residential or
collector street and that are across the street from a one-family residential
or a multifamily district, the front, side and rear setback requirements shall
be the same as the setback requirements for the residential or multifamily
district.
      (2)   Nonresidential districts. Property located in “FR” through “K”
districts that fronts a public or private street classified as a residential or
collector street and that is across the street from a one-family residential or
a multifamily district, the front, side and rear setback requirements shall be
the same as the setback requirements for the residential or multifamily
district.
      (3)   Setback requirement. The setback requirement shall apply to the
entire front, side or rear yard and shall not be limited to the portion of the
property that is directly across the street from a residential district. The
setback requirement shall extend through the entire block face.
   (d)   Front yard setbacks.
      (1)   The front yard setback in residential districts shall be the
greatest of:
         a.   The platted building line;
         b.   The setback for the applicable zoning district; or
         c.   The setback of the nearest building on either side that is the
closest to the street, up to a maximum setback of 50 feet, provided that said
setback is not the result of a variance granted by the board of adjustment.
This requirement is applicable only if homes have been constructed on at least
40% of the lots within the blockface. This requirement does not apply to
properties within a cul-de-sac.
      (2)   Where 60% of the existing block face has been built such that the
setbacks of existing structures are less than the minimum required setback, an
infill structure may be constructed consistent with the setback of the nearest
building on either side that is closest to the street, regardless of whether
said setback is the result of a variance granted by the board of adjustment.
   (e)   Through lots. If the rear frontage of a through lot is on an arterial
or wider street, the rear yard setback standards for the applicable district
apply. If the rear frontage of a through lot is located on a local or collector
street, the front yard setback standards of the applicable district shall
apply.
   (f)   Projected front yard setbacks.
      (1)   Corner lot.
         a.   Where a corner lot abuts on the side of a lot facing the other
intersecting street, there shall be a side yard on the corner lot equal to the
front yard required on the lot adjacent to the rear of the corner lot or
separated only by an alley.
         b.   Where a corner lot abuts the rear of a lot with a greater side
yard setback, there shall be a side yard on the corner lot equal to the side
yard required on the lot that abuts to the rear of the corner lot or separated
only by an alley.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7333.jpg]
   Picture 6.3 Projected Front Yard Setback, Corner Lot
      (2)   Interior lot. Where an interior lot abuts another zoning district,
there shall be a projected front yard equal to the most restrictive front yard
required on any lot in the same block face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7335.jpg]
   Picture 6.4 Projected Front Yard Setback, Interior Lot
   (g)   Rear yard exception adjacent to railway. No rear yard shall be
required in the “ER” to “K” districts inclusive on any lot used for business or
industrial purposes, the rear line of which adjoins a railway right-of-way or
which has a rear railway track connection.
   (h)   Yards and official line for future rights-of-way. Where an official
line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which
a lot abuts, then the width of a yard shall be measured from such official line
to the nearest line of the building. No commercial or industrial building shall
be located closer than 30 feet to the centerline of the street.
   (i)   Historic overlay district setbacks. Where the historic district has
been built such that the setbacks of existing structures are less than the
minimum required setback, an infill structure may be constructed consistent
with the setbacks established in the historic district, regardless of whether
said setback is the result of a variance granted by the board of adjustment.
   (j)   Administrative authority. The development director or designee may
administratively approve a greater maximum setback to accommodate mature trees
and utility conflicts in the Urban Residential (“UR”) zoning district, Low
Intensity Mixed-Use (“MU-1”), High Intensity Mixed Use (MU-2) zoning district
and the form-based districts in
Appendix A, Chapter 4, Article 13.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15816, § 3, passed 1-6-2004; Ord. 15826,
§§ 2, 3, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 15926, § 1, passed 3-23-2004; Ord. 16393, § 1,
passed 4-19-2005; Ord. 16651-10-2005, § 1, passed 10-11-2005; Ord. 16924, § 5,
passed 5-2-2006; Ord. 18902-11-2009, §§ 1, 2, passed 11-3-2009; Ord. 20984-10-
2013, § 1, passed 10-7-2013; eff. 11-5-2013; Ord. 26599-11-2023, § 1, passed
11-14-2023, eff. 1-9-2024)
ARTICLE 2: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Editor’s note:
   For parking requirements in the “AG,” “CF,” “MH,” “A,” “AR,” “”B,” “R1,”
“R2,” and “ER” districts, see the “other development standards” section for the
district.
§ 6.200 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Generally. The regulations in this article shall apply to required
parking spaces and non-required parking spaces with the exception of public
parks. Nothing in this article shall require additional parking spaces to be
furnished for an existing building that is repaired, altered, maintained or
modernized, where no structural alterations have been made and the size of the
building is not increased.
   (b)   Enlargement or change in use.
      (1)   For existing buildings that are enlarged, additional parking spaces
shall be required for the enlarged portion only.
      (2)   Parking spaces furnished for a building constructed prior to March
1, 1953, that are in excess of the requirements for the building under the
provisions of Ord. 3041, may be counted toward the additional spaces required
for a change in use, expansion of an existing use or a new building on the
premises.
      (3)   When the occupancy of any building is changed to another use,
parking shall be provided to meet the requirements of this article for the new
use.
      (4)   Nothing in this article shall require the furnishing of additional
parking spaces for existing buildings which are not enlarged or changed to a
new use.
   (c)   Plan required. Where off-street parking is required, except for one-,
two-, three- or four-family dwellings, a plan approved by the city traffic
engineer, showing the location and arrangement of spaces, shall be furnished to
the planning and development department, accompanied by sufficient proof of
ownership, lease or other arrangement as will show that the spaces contemplated
will be permanent. Any future changes in parking arrangements must be approved
by the planning and development department.
   (d)   District “H” exempt from parking requirements. No off-street parking
shall be required for development in the “H” district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord.
18208-07-2008A, § 1, passed 7-29-2008)
§ 6.201 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Calculation of parking.
      (1)   Where permanent seating is not provided in any public assembly
area, the occupant load shall be computed in accordance with the
appropriate section of the building code in effect at time of occupancy, except
as otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance.
      (2)   All parking requirements applying to a stated unit of measurement
shall be understood to include a parking space for each unit or fraction
thereof.
   (b)   Required off-street parking.
      (1)   Minimum parking requirements. The following table establishes the
minimum parking requirements for uses located in residential zoned property or
within 250 feet of one- or two-family zoned property. This regulation shall not
include properties adjacent to one- or two-family districts that are used as
utilities, waterways, railroad right-of-way or other nonresidential public use.
When a property
zoned and used for one- or two-family residential purposes is located within
250 feet but is separated by one of the above uses, parking is not required
only if access is not possible to the residential area. For all other uses, no
minimum parking spaces shall be required.
      (2)   Maximum parking requirements. The maximum number of parking spaces
shall not exceed 125% of the minimum parking requirement for all uses listed in
the table set out below. Parking in excess of the maximum shall be allowed by
meeting the requirement of one tree above the minimum required under
Chapter 6, Article 3, for every additional ten parking spaces beginning with
the first additional parking space and for each ten spaces thereafter.
Use Requirement
Use                                                                        Requirement
Residential
Residential unit: one-family up to four family                             1 to 4 spaces per dwelling unit (see individual districts for details)
                                                                           1 space per bedroom plus 1 space per 250 square feet of common areas, offices
Multifamily residential                                                    and recreation (less laundry rooms and storage); 2 spaces may be tandem if
                                                                           assigned to the same unit and restricted from use for storage
Public and Civic
                                                                           1 space per 2 teachers and administrative staff plus 1 space per 4 additional
College or university                                                      employees plus 1 space per 3 students residing on campus plus 1 space per 5
                                                                           students not residing on campus
Day care, kindergarten                                                     1 space per facility plus 1 space per 10 children (as licensed by the state)
                                                                           in back of front building line
Fraternity, sorority                                                       1 space per 2 residents
Hospital                                                                   1 space per bed for patients/visitors/doctors plus 1 space per 4 nurses/other
                                                                           employees
Medical clinic, health services facility, assisted living facility         1 space per doctor plus 1 space per 4 employees plus 4 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                                           feet of gross floor area
Nursing home or medical care facility                                      1 space per 4 beds for visitors/doctors plus 1 space per 4 nurses/other
                                                                           employees
                                                                           1 space per 4 seats in sanctuary or worship area in residential districts
Place of worship                                                           1 space per 5 seats in sanctuary or worship area in nonresidential and mixed-
                                                                           use districts
School, elementary and junior high (public or private)                     2.5 spaces per classroom
School, high school (public or private)                                    1 space per 2 students plus 1 space per 5 stadium seats (may be double
                                                                           counted)
Commercial
Banks                                                                      4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Bed and breakfast home                                                     2 spaces per owner/operator
                                                                           1 space per bedroom for guests
Bed and breakfast inn                                                      2 spaces per owner/operator plus 1 space per bedroom for guests plus 1 space
                                                                           per 2 employees plus 1 space to service additional traffic
Boarding or lodging house                                                  1 space for proprietor plus 1 space per 2 boarding/lodging sleeping rooms plus
                                                                           1 space per each 4 employees
Bowling alley                                                              4 spaces per lane/alley plus 1 space per 4 seats of restaurant or café plus 1
                                                                           space per 4 employees
Commercial business, retail sales and service (except large retail see §  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet (25% reduction for conversion from a more
5.134(a)(10))                                                              restricted use)
Construction sales office                                                  2 spaces per unit behind front property line
Farmers’ markets                                                         2 spaces per table/booth
Hotel                                                                      1 space per bedroom unit plus 1 space per 4 patron seats in rooms open to
                                                                           public plus 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of display/ballroom area
Mobile vendor food court                                                   2 spaces minimum per vendor/truck
                                                                           4 spaces maximum per vendor/truck
Model home                                                                 2 spaces per unit behind front property line
Office, professional building                                              2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor amusement (for more than 3 days)                                   1 space per 5 participants/spectators based on maximum capacity
                                                                           1 space per guest room or suite plus 1 space per 4 seats plus 5 spaces per
Private club, cocktail lounge                                              1,000 square feet of ballroom available to nonresidents plus 1 space per 4
                                                                           employees
Restaurant, cafeteria                                                      1 space per 100 square feet (25% reduction for conversion from a more
                                                                           restricted use)
Retail store, large                                                        See §
                                                                           5.134(a)(10)
Theater, auditorium, place of public assembly                              1 space per 4 seats in main auditorium plus 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                                                                           ballroom/similar area plus 1 space per 4 employees
Walkup business                                                            4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Industrial
Industrial building                                                        2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area or 1 space per 3 employees,
                                                                           whichever is greater
Warehouse building                                                         1 space per 4 employees
                                                                           4 spaces minimum
 
      (3)   Exception. Properties designated as historic and cultural landmark
or highly significant endangered or listed on the National Register of Historic
Places are not subject to the required off- street parking requirements set
forth in this section.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14331, § 7, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 15911, §
2, passed 3-11-2004; Ord. 16086, § 1, passed 8-17-2004; Ord. 17024, § 1, passed
6-20-2006; Ord. 18129, § 1, passed 6-3-2008; Ord. 20453-10-2012, § 1, passed
10-9-2012; Ord. 20510-12-2012, § 2, passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-11-2012; Ord.
20666-03-2013, § 2, passed 3-19-2013, eff. 4-9-2013; Ord. 22255-06-2016, § 1,
passed 6-7-2016; Ord. 23930-11-2019, § 1, passed 11-12-2019; Ord. 27545-03-
2025, § 3, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 6.202 PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Space size. The following minimum standards shall apply to the width
and length of parking spaces.
 
Type             Width  Length
Standard parking 9 feet 18 feet*
space
Parallel parking 8 feet 22 feet
space
*   Parking spaces adjacent to landscape areas may project into the
landscape area and be reduced to 16 feet in length when separated from the
landscape area by curbing or approved wheel stops.
 
   (b)   Angle parking size. The standards for the minimum width of parking
spaces plus the aisle are shown in the following table. These standards apply
to a single row of head-in parking or two rows of head-in parking sharing an
aisle. See the illustrations below.
 
Angle                   Width: 1 Row Sharing Aisle Width: 2 Rows Sharing Aisle
90 degree angle parking 42.0 feet                  60.0 feet
60 degree angle parking 34.6 feet                  54.7 feet
45 degree angle parking 31.1 feet                  50.0 feet
30 degree angle parking 28.8 feet                  45.6 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7337.jpg]
   Parking Lot Layout Dimensions
   (c)   Driveways.
      (1)   When driveways are less than 20 feet in width, marked separate
entrances and exits shall be provided so that traffic shall flow in one
direction only.
      (2)   Entrances and exits to an alley may be provided if prior approval
is obtained in writing from the transportation and public works department.
      (3)   The location of ingress and egress driveways shall be subject to
approval of the city traffic engineer under curb cut or laid down curb permit
procedures.
      (4)   Except for multifamily residential developments developed in
accordance to §§
4.710,
4.711,
4.712, driveways designated as fire lanes shall meet the standards of the fire
code.
   (d)   Maneuvering space.
      (1)   Maneuvering space shall be located completely off the right-of-way
of a public street, place or court, except for on-street parking approved by
the traffic engineer.
      (2)   Parking areas that would require the use of public right-of-way for
maneuvering shall not be acceptable as required off-street parking spaces other
than for one- and two-family dwellings, except for on-street parking approved
by the traffic engineer.
      (3)   Parking parallel to the curb on a public street shall not be
substituted for off-street parking requirements, except as provided for in an
“MU-1” or “MU-2” mixed-use district.
   (e)   Parking surface.
      (1)   Minimum required parking spaces must be hard-surfaced and dust
free, except in instances where the adjacent street is unpaved, in which case
the drives and parking spaces shall be hard-surfaced within one year after all
adjacent streets are paved. Fire lanes and ADA spaces may not be constructed
with porous surfaces.
      (2)   [Reserved.]
      (3)   [Reserved.]
      (4)   a.   Hard surface parking is not required for:
            1.   Non-passenger vehicles and tractor trailers for industrial
uses; and
            2.   Motor vehicle inventory for sale.
         b.   All parking must be, at a minimum, on a compacted gravel base.
      (5)   Minimum required parking spaces must be hard-surfaced and dust
free, except in instances where the adjacent street is unpaved, in which case
the drives and parking spaces shall be hard-surfaced within one year after all
adjacent streets are paved. Fire lanes and ADA spaces may not be constructed
with porous surfaces.
      (6)   All driveways must be hard-surfaced and dust free. Driveways for
one- and two-family uses may, at a minimum, consist of compacted gravel base.
Any base product must be contained within a border and maintained, including
circular and ribbon drives.
      (7)   No parking for one- and two-family uses shall be permitted within
the front yard, as measured between the front property line and the closest
location on the structure, other than as provided on the driveway. Driveway
coverage, including ribbon drives, shall not exceed 50% of the front yard, and
any additional parking on the property shall be provided on the driveway.
Circular drives shall not exceed 65% maximum coverage. Parking pads are
permitted if they are attached to the primary driveway and constructed of the
same material, and shall be included in the calculation of driveway coverage.
   (f)   Off-site auxiliary parking. If sufficient parking is not available on
the premises, a private parking lot may be provided within 500 feet, either on
property zoned for that purpose or on approval as a special exception by the
board of adjustment subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The parking must be subject to the front yard setback requirements
of the district in which it is located.
      (2)   The parking area must be hard surfaced and dust free (except as
provided in subsection (e) above).
      (3)   A six-foot screen fence and bufferyard must be provided on all
sides adjacent to a residential district in accordance with §
6.300.
      (4)   Area lights must be directed away from adjacent properties.
      (5)   The lot, if adjacent to a residential district, must be chained and
locked at night.
   (g)   Accessible parking.
      (1)   Number of spaces required. When parking lots or garage facilities
are provided, either in accordance with parking requirements or voluntarily,
accessible parking spaces shall be provided according to the table below,
except for the following uses.
         a.   For general and long term hospitals, nursing and care homes, and
philanthropic medical care uses, any of which specializes in the treatment of
persons with mobility impairments, 20% of the parking spaces provided shall be
accessible.
         b.   For offices, professional and commercial uses, eleemosynary
institutions and doctors’ clinics, any of which provides outpatient medical
care, 10% of the parking spaces provided shall be accessible.
         c.   For multifamily dwellings and apartment hotels containing
accessible or adaptable dwelling units as specified by the building code, 2% of
the parking spaces shall be accessible. Where parking for such uses is provided
within or beneath a building, accessible parking spaces shall also be provided
within or beneath the building.
Total Parking Spaces in Lot or Garage Minimum Required Accessible Spaces*
Total Parking Spaces in Lot or Minimum Required Accessible Spaces*
Garage
1—25                         1
26—50                        2
51—75                        3
76—100                       4
101—150                      5
151—200                      6
201—300                      7
301—400                      8*
401—500                      9*
501—1,000                    2% of total spaces*
Over 1,000                     20 spaces plus 1 space for every 100
                               spaces, or fraction thereof, over 1,000*
*   One van accessible parking space shall be provided for every 8
accessible parking spaces or fraction thereof.
 
      (2)   Variances. The board of adjustment’s authority is limited to
considering variances from the number of accessible parking spaces and van
accessible parking spaces required. Accessible parking spaces, van accessible
parking spaces and passenger loading zones shall be located and installed as
specified in the building code. Variances, as to these items, must be addressed
through the process described in the building code.
      (3)   Restriping parking areas. When parking areas are restriped, the
provisions of this subsection (g)(3) shall apply. When restriping is done
voluntarily to existing parking for the purpose of installing accessible
spaces, city staff may allow a reduction in the number of parking spaces
required by this section in accordance with the table below when necessary to
provide the accessible spaces. Plans for the restriping must be submitted to
the planning and development department for review and approval before work
begins.
 
Total Required Parking Spaces Allowed Reduction Not to Exceed
1—50                        1 space
51+                           2% of total spaces
 
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15827, § 1, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 15924,
§§ 1, 2, passed 3-23-2004; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 18208-
07-2008A, § 2, passed 7-29-2008; Ord. 18208-07-2008B, § 1, passed 7-29-2008;
Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 6, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
Editor’s note:
   For additional restrictions on auxiliary parking in the “ER” district, see §
4.900(d).
§ 6.203 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   (a)   Applicability. All buildings (except one-family, two-family, three-
family or four-family dwellings) hereafter erected, reconstructed or enlarged
so as to require additional parking spaces, except in district “H,” shall have
adequate permanent off-street facilities providing for the loading and
unloading of merchandise and goods within or adjacent to the building, in such
a manner as not to obstruct the freedom of traffic movement on the public
rights-of-way.
   (b)   Loading facility design standards.
      (1)   The minimum distance from the loading dock to the right-of-way line
shall be 60 feet. Such space shall be submitted on a plan and approved by the
director of traffic engineering and the planning and development department.
      (2)   The minimum distance above may be reduced by the approval of the
director of traffic engineering and the planning and development department
under unusual circumstances.
      (3)   Loading space shall be in addition to all required vehicular
parking.
      (4)   All loading facilities shall be screened in accordance with §
6.301(d).
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 6.204 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (a)   Locations.
      (1)   Bicycle parking shall be located as close as or closer than the
nearest car parking space to the building entrance, other than those spaces for
persons with disabilities.
      (2)   Bicycle parking facilities shall not interfere with accessible
paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
      (3)   A minimum of four feet from the required rack dimension shall be
provided for pedestrian clearance when a rack is placed within a sidewalk or
pedestrian right-of-way.
      (4)   Bicycle racks shall be located in highly visible and well-lit areas
to minimize theft and vandalism.
      (5)   When automobile parking spaces are provided in a structured parking
garage, all required bicycle spaces shall be located inside the garage on the
ground level. Alternative layout and design of racks to maximize space may be
administratively approved by the zoning administrator.
      (6)   Bicycle racks shall be protected by a physical barrier to prevent
parked bicycles from damage by motor vehicles; such barriers include but are
not limited to curbs, bollards, curb stops and similar objects.
      (7)   Alternative locations. In the event that compliance may not be
feasible because of demonstrable hardship, the zoning administrator may approve
an alternative locationsubject to the following conditions:
         a.   Alternative locations shall be well lit and secure.
         b.   All bicycle parking spaces shall be located within a 100 foot
diameter of the primary building entrance.
         c.   Bicycle racks may be placed in the public right-of-way provided
that the building owner obtains an encroachment permit for the installation of
racks in the public right-of-way.
   (b)   Layout and design.
      (1)   Bicycle rack design. Structures that require a user-supplied
locking device shall be designed in conformance with the following:
         a.   Each bike rack shall be designed to accommodate two bike parking
spaces using the allowed bike rack designs depicted below.
         b.   Racks shall be designed to accommodate “U”-shaped locking devises
and to supports the bicycle horizontally in two places.
         c.   The racks shall be constructed of durable materials to withstand
permanent exposure to the elements such as powder-coated metal or stainless
steel.
         d.   All bicycle parking spaces must be hard-surfaced and dust free
and consist of at minimum a compact gravel base.
         e.   A wave or loop style bicycle rack may be used in public and
private K-12 schools provided the installation provides a minimum of three feet
pedestrian clearance on all sides.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7339.jpg]
      (2)   Bicycle parking space size, access aisles and vertical clearance.
         a.   Racks shall provide clearance from other objects by using layout
dimensions of at least four feet wide by six feet long as depicted below.
         b.   A property requiring a change of use permit may provide a reduced
three feet wide by six feet long clearance from other objects.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7341.jpg]
      (3)   Signage. In cases where bicycle parking spaces are not visible from
the primary street, signage shall be used to direct cyclists safely to bicycle
parking areas. (Manual for Uniform Traffic Devices sign D4-3)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7343.jpg]
      (4)   Securely anchored. All bicycle racks and lockers shall be securely
anchored to the ground using a concrete footing and tamper-proof spike anchors.
   (c)   Bicycle parking requirement. The number of bicycle parking racks shall
be based on the required automobile parking spaces and shall be provided in
accordance with the following with fractional requirements for bike parking
over one-half to be rounded up:
                                                                         0—40 required auto spaces = 1 rack
                                                                         minimum
                                                                         41—60 required auto spaces = 2 rack
                                                                         minimum
New nonresidential and change of use permits (enlargement, expansion or  61—80 required auto spaces = 3 rack
conversion of an existing building of 5,000 square feet floor area or    minimum
greater)                                                                 81—100 required auto spaces = 4 rack
                                                                         minimum
                                                                         101—300 required auto spaces = 5 rack
                                                                         minimum
                                                                         over 300 required auto spaces = 2% or 8
                                                                         rack maximum
Change of use permits (enlargement, expansion or conversion of an        1 rack minimum
existing building) between 1,000—4,999 square feet of gross floor area
                                                                         0.10 spaces for every bedroom mixed-
Multi-family residential (5+ dwelling units)                             use, urban residential and form-based
                                                                         districts
Public and private K-12 schools                                          1.5 bicycle parking spaces for every 20
                                                                         students of planned capacity
 
      (1)   The following uses are exempt from this section: accessory uses;
agricultural; industrial uses; lodging; one to four-family dwelling units;
temporary uses; utilities; vehicle sales and service and multi-family (4+
dwelling units) outside of Mixed-Use, Urban Residential and Design Districts,
Urban Residential, Urban Villages and Mixed-Use Zoning districts (from 4.800).
      (2)   Bicycle parking for health care facilities shall be calculated
using required employee automobile parking.
      (3)   Land uses not exempted from this requirement which have no minimum
parking requirement shall provide bicycle racks based on actual automobile
parking spaces provided.
      (4)   Bicycle parking shall not count toward the tree requirement for
exceeding maximum allowable parking.
      (5)   The number of required and provided automobile parking spaces and
bicycle parking racks should be shown in a chart format on the building permit
site plan. A reduction in the minimum required automobile parking is allowed
equal to the percentage of bicycle spaces provided, with a five percent maximum
reduction.
      (6)   In all cases where bicycle parking is required, no fewer than two
spaces (one rack) shall be required.
      (7)   Bicycle parking is not required in the Central Business (“H”)
District if the property falls within 500 feet of an existing bicycle rack.
(Ord. 19428-11-2010, § 1, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 21358-08-2014, §§ 1—3, passed
8-5-2014, eff. 8-12-2014)
ARTICLE 3: LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS AND URBAN FORESTRY
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 18615-05-2009, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009, amended the title of Art. 3
to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Article 3 was
entitled, “Landscaping and Buffers.” See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.300 BUFFERYARD AND SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING SETBACK.
   (a)   When required. A bufferyard consisting of an open space of grass and
other landscaping and a masonry wall or wood fence in combination with design
features that screen or block vision, noise pollutants and other negative by-
products shall be provided and maintained along the entire length of the
boundary line between any one- or two-family district, and adjacent
nonresidential districts. A bufferyard shall be required even when an alley is
located between a nonresidential district and an adjacent one- or two-family
district. Temporary buildings, utility facilities and additions to primary
structures placed on the site that are less than 30% and under 3,000 square
feet are exempted from the bufferyard requirements of this subsection (a).
References in this section adjacent to one- or two-family districts shall not
include uses described in subsection (k)(4) below.
   (b)   Restrictions of the use of bufferyard and/or building setback areas.
These areas are intended to serve as a buffer between potentially incompatible
uses. Structures are not permitted to be located in these areas, nor can such
areas be used for signs, dumpsters or other garbage containers, any type of
storage or any nonresidential activity. Passenger car parking, automobile and
truck access and loading or unloading of goods during the daylight hours shall
be permitted within the building setback areas exclusive of the landscaped
areas.
   (c)   Area requirements.
      (1)   Except as noted in subsection (c)(3) below, when a nonresidential
use is initially established, a residential use is converted to a
nonresidential use, or the zoning district classification of property is
changed to a less restrictive nonresidential district after April 12, 1988,
then in each instance where the nonresidential use is located on a lot or
premises adjacent to a one- or two-family district, a bufferyard and
supplemental building setback shall be provided and maintained by the owner
and/or occupant of the nonresidential use in accordance with the following
standards.
District Building Setback Bufferyard Width
District Building Setback Bufferyard Width
“ER” 20 feet          5 feet
“E”  20 feet          5 feet
“FR” 25 feet          5 feet
“F”  35 feet          5 feet
“G”  40 feet          5 feet
“I”**50 feet          5 feet
“J”**50 feet*         5 feet
“K”**50 feet*         5 feet
Inactive Districts
“O-M”20 feet*         5 feet
“E-P”20 feet          5 feet
“IP” 50 feet*         5 feet
*   Plus five feet for each additional story above three stories in height
**   45 degree transitional height plant applies above 45 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less. See Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2, and explanatory language
below.
***   Refer to Section 6.300(k) when adjacent to one- or two-family zoning
districts.
 
      (2)   When there is an expansion of any parking area or the square
footage of a nonresidential use that is located on a lot or a premises that is
adjacent to a one- or two-family district, then the development shall be
subject to the supplemental bufferyard and building setback requirements, as
set forth in this section.
      (3)   When the zoning district classification of vacant property is
initially established as a nonresidential use or changed to a less restrictive
nonresidential district, the required screen fence and bufferyard shall not be
required until such time as the property is actually used as a nonresidential
use.
   (d)   Screening requirements. The owner and/or occupant of the use shall
also erect and maintain a solid masonry wall, wood fence, or combination
thereof, to a height that is a minimum of six feet above the grade of adjacent
property along the entire adjacent property line except for minimum required
front yards and visibility triangles. For construction standards, see §
5.305(c). Temporary buildings, utility facilities and additions to primary
structures placed on the site that are less than 30% and under 3,000 square
feet are excepted from the screening requirements of this subsection (d);
however dumpsters, loading docks and ground level mechanical equipment shall be
screened with a six-foot screening fence. For construction standards, see §
5.305(c).
   (e)   Irrigation requirements. All bufferyards required under this section
must be irrigated by an underground automatic irrigation system. Provided,
however, that, when the total area of the bufferyard is less than 1,000 square
feet, an irrigation system shall not be required if there is a working water
faucet located no more than 100 feet from every part of the bufferyard.
   (f)   Landscaping requirements. The bufferyard shall be sodded with turf
grass or ground cover that will provide the appearance of a finished planting.
Minimum landscaping and buffering must be provided as outlined in subsection
(g) below. The landscaping in the bufferyard shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment by curbs, railroad ties, concrete retainers or other permanent
barriers.
   (g)   Point system requirements. Bufferyards must earn a minimum of 25
points that are awarded for providing and maintaining specific landscaping and
design features. The points are accumulated as follows:
Feature Points
Feature                                                             Points
Solid wood screening fence
   6 feet in height, single-faced                                5
   6 feet in height, double-faced                                10
   8 feet in height, single-faced                                10
   8 feet in height, double-faced                                15
Solid masonry wall
   6 feet in height                                              15
   8 feet in height                                              20
Combination masonry wall/double-faced solid wood screening fence
   6 feet in height                                              15
   8 feet in height                                              20
Each additional 5 feet in bufferyard width beyond required minimum* 5
3 small ornamental trees for every 50 lineal feet of bufferyard     5
3 small ornamental trees for every 25 lineal feet of bufferyard     10
5 ornamental shrubs for every 25 lineal feet of bufferyard          15
1 tree for every 25 lineal feet of bufferyard (minimum 12 feet in   10
height, minimum trunk caliper of 2-1/2 inches above root ball)
*   For commercial and institutional uses, a 30-foot grass bufferyard
shall meet the point system requirements of this section without providing
for a screening fence or irrigation system
 
   (h)   Permit requirements. In order to determine compliance with this
section, an application for a building permit for property that abuts a one- or
two-family district shall include a landscaping plan with a planting schedule
and a written statement indicating the options that were selected in order to
meet the minimum “point” requirements.
   (i)   Installation and maintenance. The owner and/or occupant shall be
jointly and severally liable for installing and maintaining all masonry walls,
fences and landscaping in a healthy, neat, orderly and physically sound
condition and replacing it when deemed necessary by the planning and
development department.
   (j)   Bonus provisions. The minimum building setback in rear yards can be
reduced by five feet in “ER,” “E,” and “O-M” districts and ten feet in all
other commercial and industrial districts provided that a minimum ten-foot
landscaped front yard is provided on the site in accordance with the standards
specified in subsections (e) and (f) above.
   (k)   The below additional standards apply in "I" light industrial, "J"
medium industrial and "K" heavy industrial when adjacent to one-family or two-
family districts as measured at the property line. The standards shall not
apply when the industrial districts and one- and two-family districts are
separated by a street.
      (1)   Within the required 50 foot supplemental setback and in addition to
the required screening fence or wall, a 20 foot landscaped bufferyard shall be
installed along the length of the boundary of the one- or two-family district
to include minimum 2½ caliper trees and shrubs in order to provide a vegetated
screen. Medium trees shall be planted every 15 feet on center or large trees
planted every 30 feet on center. Shrubs that are indicated to grow to a minimum
of eight feet tall shall be planted in between the trees. Activity within this
supplemental setback shall comply with §
6.300(b). The 20 foot bufferyard will not apply to properties less than 500
feet in depth as measured perpendicular to the primary public street.
      (2)   If visible from one- or two-family districts, storage and dumpsters
shall be screened from view from the residential property by an eight foot
screening masonry wall surrounding the storage area. If a building is between
the storage or dumpster area and the one- or two-family district boundary, and
the area is not viewable from adjacent the residential uses, no screening wall
is required.
      (3)   Exterior portions and/or facades of buildings must use colors
consisting of neutral earth tone; trim and may be a different neutral earth
tone color.
      (4)   Exterior entrances shall consist of storefront glass, canopies and
masonry articulation or similar architectural features.
      (5)   Any outdoor lighting within 150 feet of a one- or two-family
district shall not create any ambient light that trespasses onto adjacent
residential uses and shall be zero foot candles on the side adjacent to a
residential property with appropriate cutoffs installed. Lighting in this area
shall not exceed 20 feet in height including attached wall fixtures.
      (6)   No illuminated signage shall face the one- or two-family district.
   (l)   Exemptions and exceptions.
      (1)   Remodeling work that does not increase the existing floor area or
the restoration of a building that has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed
shall be exempt from the supplemental bufferyard and building setback
requirements.
      (2)   When a legal use exists on property and subsequent to establishing
such legal use, adjacent property or property across an alley is rezoned to a
one- or two-family district, the construction of new buildings and the
addition, remodeling, alteration or total restoration due to involuntary
destruction of existing buildings on the property are exempt from the
requirements of a bufferyard, screening fence and supplemental building
setback.
      (3)   When a residence is converted to a nonresidential use or when an
existing nonresidential use expands the building square footage and/or parking
area, then the minimum required bufferyard points shall be reduced to 15
points. If a masonry wall is used to satisfy the minimum point requirements,
there shall be no bufferyard width requirement.
      (4)   Nothing herein shall require a bufferyard to be placed on a
nonresidential use site where such nonresidential use site is immediately
adjacent to a waterway, railroad right-of-way, power transmission or other
easement where such right-of-way or easements are at least 50 feet in width, or
public street right-of-way at least 300 feet in width.
      (5)   Any area located within an airport operating area, defined as those
areas associated with aircraft movement, shall be exempt from the supplemental
bufferyard and supplemental building setback requirements.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14556, § 8, passed 3-20-2001; Ord. 14713,
§ 3, passed 7-17-2001; Ord. 15828, § 1, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 16184, § 1,
passed 10-19-2004; Ord. 16521, § 8, passed 7-19-2005; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed
4-24-2007; Ord. 20453-10-2012, § 2, passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 6,
passed 8-1-2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23587-03-2019, § 2, passed 3-5-2019)
§ 6.301 LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to preserve the existing
and natural environment, conserve water, moderate air temperatures, reduce
pollution and filtration of stormwater best practices whenever possible and to
provide landscape amenities, setbacks and screening with Texas native and
adaptive plants. This section is also intended to promote a positive urban
image by promoting quality development, enhancing property values, providing
landscape improvements in all parts of the city, and promoting orderly growth
and aesthetic quality in the city.
   (b)   Delineation of artificial lot. If a developer wishes to develop a
portion of a one acre or larger tract, the developer may request that the
development services director delineate the portion of the tract to be
developed as an artificial lot, for purposes of calculating landscape
requirements for the development. Artificial lots may be delineated in any type
of development, including schools and places of worship. All artificial lots
shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Contain the entire area on which the development is to occur,
including all paved areas;
      (2)   Contain a land area of less than 50% of the entire tract, or, if
the proposed artificial lot contains more than 50% of the entire tract, the
director must determine that a substantial amount of the tract is not affected
by the proposed development; and
      (3)   Be delineated on the landscape plan as required in subsection (c)
below.
   (c)   Submittal of landscape. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the
development services director together with the application for a building
permit. The following information shall be shown on the required landscape
plan:
      (1)   Calculation of net site area showing all existing and proposed
structures, parking and access, other paved areas and all required bufferyard
areas pursuant to this section;
      (2)   Calculation of required landscape area;
      (3)   Location and dimensions of areas to be landscaped and total amount
of landscape area;
      (4)   Location, number and planting size of all shrubs and groundcover
including both required and actual materials provided;
      (5)   Location and coverage of required irrigation system; and
      (6)   Delineation of artificial lot, if applicable, including depiction
of all proposed and existing structures, access drives, appurtenant parking and
other paved areas proposed for the expansion or new construction.
   (d)   Screening for commercial and institutional uses. Screening for
commercial/institutional uses shall include screening of loading docks, truck
berths, refuse handling facilities (including refuse disposal and recycling)
and ground level mechanical equipment visible from public right-of-way and is
required per the following.
      (1)   Loading docks and truck berths.
         a.   Opaque walls, wooden screening fences, landscaped berms or
landscape areas all of which must be a minimum of eight feet in height and must
screen loading dock areas from view from the public street right-of-way with
the greatest pavement width parallel to the trailer berths. Screening shall be
of sufficient length to screen the maximum size trailer which can be
accommodated on-site and shall be parallel to trailer berths.
         b.   Example: Docks and berths that accommodate a 50-foot trailer
shall be screened with a 50-foot wall parallel to the berth.
      (2)   Refuse handling facilities and mechanical equipment. Opaque walls
or wooden screening fences of not less than the height of the facilities or
equipment to be screened are required to screen the view from any public street
right-of-way. Permanent walls are required on three sides with an opaque gate
allowed on the fourth side.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7353.jpg]
   Frontage on One Street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7355.jpg]
   Facing Alley
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7357.jpg]
   Facing Street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7359.jpg]
   Frontage on Two Streets of Equal Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7361.jpg]
   Frontage on Major and Minor Streets
   (e)   No paving of parkway allowed. After October 1, 1998, no portion of a
parkway shall be paved, except for sidewalks or driveways permitted by
transportation and public works department.
   (f)   Applicability of landscape requirements. These landscape requirements
shall be applicable to the following construction, subject to the exemptions in
subsection (g) below:
      (1)   Construction of new structures for which a building permit is
required for any commercial/institutional and industrial uses;
      (2)   Expansions of structures used for commercial/institutional and
industrial uses that increase the footprint of existing structures by at least
30%, and that add at least 3,000 square feet to existing structures. Expansions
that do not meet both the 30% and the 3,000 square foot criteria are not
subject to these landscape requirements; and
      (3)   Construction of manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle
parks for which a permit is required pursuant to §
13-2 of the city code and private recreation facilities located in manufactured
home subdivisions.
   (g)   Exemptions from landscape requirements. The following are not subject
to these landscape requirements:
      (1)   Structures that do not create or expand building square footage and
temporary structures such as job shacks associated with construction
activities;
      (2)   Construction or expansion of one-family and two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Construction or expansion of multifamily and mixed use
developmentsin §§
4.710,
4.711, and
4.712;
      (4)   Change in use of an existing structure, unless the structure is
expanded in accordance with subsection (f)(2) above;
      (5)   Construction or expansion of structures in the “H” central business
district bounded by Henderson Street on the west, Vickery Boulevard on the
south, I-35 on the east and Bluff Street on the north, except for the area
between Henderson Street and the extension of Grove Street, where the northern
boundary shall extend to the center of the Trinity River; provided, however,
the project may be subject to the Downtown Urban Design Standards adopted in
accordance with §
4.402;
      (6)   Temporary buildings in place for a maximum of five years and
erected as accessory buildings for elementary and secondary schools and
institutions of higher education; and
      (7)   Any area located within an airport operating area, defined as those
areas associated with aircraft movement.
   (h)   Landscape area required. Construction projects subject to this section
shall provide landscape areas calculated as follows.
      (1)   Commercial and institutional uses.
         a.   A minimum of 10% of net site area shall be landscaped by using
one of the following methods:
            1.   One shrub, a minimum of five gallons in size, for every 50
square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscape; or
            2.   For every 75 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required
landscape area, a cluster of native shrubs and or grasses, consisting of a
minimum of five plants, three gallon in size and grouped with similar watering
requirements from the approved native plant list found in Table A. below.
Plants may not exceed four feet in height in the required front yard. Existing
natural vegetation shall be preserved when possible.
Table A.
Recommended List of Native Plants for Landscape Use in North Central
Texas
Native Plants
Common Name Key           Scientific Name
            E D P S B F X
Table A.
Recommended List of Native Plants for Landscape Use in North Central
Texas
Native Plants
Common Name            Key            Scientific Name
                       E D P S B F  X
Grasses                                
Switchgrass                P   B F    Panicum virgatum
Big Bluestem             D P   B F    Andropogon gerardii
Buffalograss             D            Buchloe dactyloides
Bushy Bluestem             P   B F    Androphgon gloeratus
Eastern Gamagrass          P S        Tripsacum dactyloides
Gulf Muhly                 P   B F    Muhlenbergia capillaris
Indiangrass              D P   B F    Sorghastrum natans
Inland Seaoats           P S B F      Chasmanthium latifolium
Lindheimer Muhly         D P   B F    Muhlenbergia lindheimeri
Little Bluestem          D     B FF   Schizachyrium scoparium
Seep Muhly               D P S B      Muhlenbergia reverchonii
Sideoats Gama            D     B F    Bouteloua curtipendula
Splitbeard Bluestem      D P     F  X Andropogon ternarius
Shrubs                                 
Agarito                E D     B F    Mahonia trifoliolata
American Beautyberry       P S B F    Callicarpa americana
Apache Plum              D     B F    Fallugia paradoxa
Autume Sage              D     B F    Salvia greggii
Canyon Senna             D       F    Cassia wislizenii
Coralbean                D     B F    Erythrina herbacea
Coralberry                   S B F    Symphoricarpus orbiculatus
Dwarf Wax Myrtle       E   P S B      Myrica pussila
Flame Acanthus           D     B F    Anisacanthus wrightii
Fragrant Sumac           D     B F    Rhus aromatica
Indigobush                 P   B F    Amorpha fruticosa
Mountain Sage                S B F    Salvia regla
Pale Leaf Yucca        E D   S B F    Yucca pallida
Red Yucca              E D P S B F    Hesperaloe parviflora
Smooth Sumac             D     B FF   Rhus glabra
Texas Barberry         E D     B F    Mahonia swaseyi
Texas Mock Orange                F    Philadelphus texensis
Texas Sage/Cenizio     E D       F    Leucophyllum frutescens
Turk’s Cap             D P S B F    Malvaviscus drummondii
Virginia Sweetspire        P S B F    Itea virginica
White Honeysuckle Bush       S B F    Lonicera albiflora
Groundcover                            
Cedar Sage                   S B F    Panicum virgatum
Frogfruit                D P   B      Phyla nodiflora
Golden Groundsel         D   S   F    Senecio obovatus
Horseherb                    S        Calyptocarpis vialis
Lyreleaf Sage          E   P S   F    Salvia Lyrata
Missouri Violet              S   F    Viola missouriensis
Pigeon Berry               P S B F    Rivina humilis
Virginia Creeper           P S B F    Parthenocissus quinquefolia
Wood Fern                    S        Thelypteris kunthii
Vines                                  
Carolina Jessamine     E   P   B F    Gelsemium sempervirens
Climbing Prairie Rose      P   B F    Rosa setigera
Coral Honeysuckle          P   B F    Lonicera sempervirens
Crossvine              E   P S B F    Bignonia capreolata
Passion Flower             P S B S    Passiflora incarnata
Virginia Creeper           P S B F    Parthenocissus quinquefolia
Adaptive                               
White Yarrow           E D P   B F    Achillea millifollium
Butterfly Bush                 B F    Buddleja spp
Mexican Bush Sage        D     B F    Salvia leucantha
Mexican Oregano        E D     B F    Poliomentha longiflora
Ox-Eyed Daisies        E   P   B F    Chrysanthemum leucanthemum
Key:
   E = Evergreen
   D = Drought resistant in full sun with reflected heat
   P = Tolerates poor drainage, can be used in parkways and other
places where roots are confined and drainage periodically may be poor
   S = Shade tolerant
   B = Attracts birds or butterflies
   F = Very showy in flower, fruit or fall foliage
   FF = Indicates more than one showy characteristic
   X = Cross Timbers or Trinity sands only, not in the Blacklands or
limestone
Source: North Central Texas Council of Governments
 
         b.   All landscaped areas shall:
            1.   Be located outside the perimeter of the footprint of a
building or structure;
            2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas; and
            3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch or low maintenance
groundcover.
         c.   A minimum of 75% of all required landscape area shall be located
in the front yard between the building line and the front property line. For
lots with multiple street frontages, a minimum of 75% of all required landscape
shall be located in the yard adjacent to the street with the greatest pavement
width. The planning and development director may approve a 5% modification to
the percentage requirement. When an artificial lot or a building expansion is
separated from property adjacent to a street frontage, the required landscape
areas may be located anywhere on the subject to the perimeter footprint of a
building or structure.
         d.   Landscaped bioretention areas are encouraged for natural drainage
channels to reduce runoff and increase infiltration of water into the soil.
         e.   The minimum percentage of the landscape area required in the
front yard between the building line and the front property line may be reduced
to 50% provided that native/adapted plants are used in conjunction with
stormwater quality facilities as approved by the department of transportation
and public works and as provided in the Stormwater Quality Manual.
      (2)   Industrial uses and manufactured home uses.
         a.   A minimum of 4% net site area, or, at the option of the
developer, a landscape area of at least 30 feet in depth along the length of
the property line frontage on all public right-of-way adjacent to the property
shall be landscaped by using one of the following methods:
            1.   For every 50 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required
landscape area, one shrub a minimum of five gallons is required; or
            2.   For every 75 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required
landscape area, a cluster of native shrubs and or grasses, consisting of a
minimum of five plants, three gallon in size and grouped with similar watering
requirements, from the approved native plant list found in Appendix F.
Landscaping, of the city’s Stormwater Manual. Plants may not exceed four feet
in height in the required front yard. Existing natural vegetation shall be
preserved when possible.
         b.   All landscaped areas shall:
            1.   Be located outside the perimeter of the footprint of a
building or structure;
            2.   Protected by wheel stops, curbs or other physical barriers
where adjacent to vehicle use areas; and
            3.   Be covered with grass, organic mulch or low maintenance ground
cover.
         c.   A minimum of 75% of all required landscape area shall be located
in the front yard between the building line and the front property line. For
lots with multiple street frontages, a minimum of 75% of all required landscape
shall be located in the yard adjacent to the street with the greatest pavement
width. The development services director may approve a 5% modification to the
percentage requirement. When an artificial lot or a building expansion is
separated from property adjacent to a street frontage, the required landscape
areas may be located anywhere on the subject to the perimeter footprint of a
building or structure.
         d.   Landscaped bioretention areas are encouraged for natural drainage
channels to reduce runoff and increase infiltration of water into the soil.
         e.   The minimum percentage of the landscape area required in the
front yard between the building line and the front property line may be reduced
to 50% provided that native/adapted plants are used in conjunction with
stormwater quality facilities as approved by the department of transportation
and public works and as provided in the stormwater quality manual.
   (i)   Irrigation.
      (1)   A permanently installed irrigation system shall be installed to
provide total water coverage to all plant materials installed.
      (2)   A temporary irrigation system shall be installed for new native
plantings for up to one year in order to establish root systems.
      (3)   A drip irrigation system as required by the city’s water department
(Water Conservation Manual, §
35-162 of the city code) shall be installed for native and adaptive plant
material in new commercial and industrial planting beds less than five feet in
width.
   (j)   Modification of landscape requirements. The development services
director or a designee may approve minor variations in the location of required
landscape materials due to unusual topographic constraints, sight restrictions,
siting requirements, preservation of existing stands of native trees or similar
conditions, or in order to maintain consistency of established front yard
setbacks. These minor changes may vary the location of required landscape
materials, but may not reduce the amount of required landscape area or the
required amount of landscape materials. The landscape plan shall be submitted
and shall specify the modifications requested and present a justification for
such modifications.
   (k)   Installation and maintenance.
      (1)   All landscape materials shall be installed within 90 days after
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such 90-day period may be extended for
an additional 90 days by the development services director. Upon completion of
installation of all plant materials, the owner or agent shall notify the
planning and development department of completion of installation and shall
request inspection. Verification by the planning and development department of
installation in compliance with this section shall be required.
      (2)   The owner shall maintain all landscape materials in good condition
in accordance with the terms of this section.
   (l)   Variances by board of adjustment.
      (1)   As provided by state law, the board of adjustment may grant
variances to the provisions of this section only if the variance is not
contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the section would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of the section is observed and substantial justice is done. As
provided by state law, a “hardship” does not include financial hardship
resulting from compliance with the landscape provisions.
      (2)   The city manager or a designee shall report monthly to the city
council any variances granted to this section.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 13931, § 2, passed 9-8-1999; Ord. 14557, §
2, passed 3-20-2001; Ord. 14894, § 4, passed 12-11-2001; Ord. 14987, § 2,
passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 15850, § 1, passed 1-27-2004; Ord. 16184, § 2, passed
10-19-2004; Ord. 16270, § 1, passed 1-18-2005; Ord. 17228, § 1, passed 10-3-
2006; Ord. 17367, §§ 1—3, passed 1-9-2007; Ord. 17522, §§ 5, 6, passed 4-24-
2007; Ord. 18615-05-2009, § 2, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 18746-08-2009, §§ 1, 2,
passed 8-4-2009; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 27545-03-2025,
§ 4, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025)
§ 6.302 URBAN FORESTRY.
   (a)   Purpose. Trees have a positive economic effect on the city by
enhancing property values, mitigating drainage and flooding issues, improving
air quality, helping save energy, and improving health and quality of life,
making the city a more attractive place in which to live, visit and do
business. It is the purpose of this section to achieve 30% tree canopy coverage
citywide and to promote a multi-aged urban forest. This may be accomplished by
addressing the preservation and protection of healthy and significant trees,
providing for the replacement and replanting of trees that are removed during
development, and establishing additional tree canopy.
   (b)   Penalties for violations.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who intentionally or knowingly
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance may be issued a citation and
upon conviction thereof may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. In
cases of offenses involving the illegal removal of trees or noncompliance with
an approved permit or urban forestry plan, the removal of each tree constitutes
a separate offense. In cases of continuing violation, each separate day that a
violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any
provision of this ordinance may be subject to a civil penalty in accordance
with §
2-322 of the city code for the removal of trees. The civil penalty authorized
by this subsection may be imposed by the director in addition to the
misdemeanor penalty in paragraph (1) of this subsection. The imposition of a
civil penalty may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal must be made in
writing and must be filed with the director within ten calendar days following
the date of the initial written decision of the director. The director shall
refer the appeal to the city council and the decision of the city council shall
be final. The appellant shall bear the burden of proof to show why, by
preponderance of the evidence, the civil penalty should not be assessed. The
imposition of a civil penalty under this section suspends all permits or permit
applications issued to or for the benefit of the property and all work under
any such permits until the civil penalty is fully paid.
      (3)   Where illegal tree removal has occurred and the physical evidence
has been removed from the site, the civil penalty will be assessed based on
calculations using any remaining physical evidence, photos and documents
available to the city, calculated in accordance with §
2-322 of the city code for significant trees removed or damaged.
      (4)   a.   The owner of a single lot within a one-family or two-family
residentially zoned district who removes or causes to be removed trees without
first obtaining the required permit may be issued an after-the-fact permit. An
after-the-fact permit shall be issued if:
            1.   The applicant can demonstrate that the criteria for removal in
the after-the-fact application would meet the regulations in effect at the time
the tree was removed: and
            2.   The applicant has paid the fee for an after-the-fact permit
which shall be double the fee for an urban forestry permit.
         b.   A citation may be issued in accordance with subsection (b)(1) for
the removal or damage of each tree and any other violation of this section.
         c.   If the applicant cannot demonstrate that the criteria for removal
in the after-the-fact application would have met the current regulations, then
an after-the-fact permit shall not be issued and the person shall be in
violation of this subsection, and the person shall be subject to both criminal
and civil penalties.
         d.   A second after-the-fact permit shall not be issued if:
            1.   The person who committed the violation has previously been
issued an after-the-fact permit: or
            2.   An after-the fact permit was previously issued for the same
property within the previous five years of the date of the second violation.
   (c)   Enforcement. Any code compliance officer or the urban forestry
administrator shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (d)   Applicability of urban forestry requirements. The requirements in
Section
6.302 shall be applicable to all development as described below, unless subject
to the exemptions in subsection (e) below:
      (1)   Removal of any trees of six inches or greater in diameter;
      (2)   Construction of new structures for which a building permit is
required;
      (3)   Expansion of structures used for commercial/institutional and
industrial uses that increase the footprint of existing structures by at least
30% or add at least 3,000 square feet to existing structures;
      (4)   Clearing of all or a portion of property, including grading or
construction of a parking lot;
      (5)   Subdivision of land greater than one acre for the construction of
one- or two-family dwellings, including contiguous lots with the same owner
that total more than one acre;
      (6)   Construction of manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle
parks for which a permit is required and private recreation facilities located
in manufactured housing subdivisions;
      (7)   Mixed use ("MU") zoned properties. These properties must provide,
through either preservation or planting, 50% canopy coverage of required open
space;
      (8)   New agricultural development that requires tree removal; and
      (9)   Public projects that will physically change the surface or will
include removal of trees six inches or greater.
   (e)   Exemptions from urban forestry requirements. The following are not
subject to urban forestry requirements:
      (1)   Structures that do not create or expand building square footage or
temporary structures such as job shacks associated with construction
activities, when no trees greater than six inches are removed;
      (2)   Any single residential lot with a one- or two-family dwelling that
is one acre or less in size;
      (3)   Change in use of an existing structure, unless the structure is
expanded in accordance with subsection (d)(3) above;
      (4)   Any area within a design overlay district or form-based code unless
the standards do not address urban forestry;
      (5)   Construction or expansion of structures in the "H" central business
district;
      (6)   Any area located within an airport operating area as defined by §
3-1 of the city code;
      (7)   Panther Island and work associated with the Trinity River Vision
Project, including but not limited to, valley storage projects;
      (8)   Any tree that is deemed to be in unsafe condition, or is injurious
to common good, or to electrical, gas or water utilities, or sewer pipes,
pavement or improvements, or is infested and dangerous to other trees or
conflicts with other ordinances or regulations as determined by the urban
forestry administrator; and
      (9)   Gas well sites and natural gas pipeline compressor stations, except
as outlined in
Chapter 15, gas drilling of the city code.
   (f)   Relief provisions. The purpose of this subsection is to grant a waiver
to certain height and setback requirements if the urban forestry regulations,
as applied to a development, would unreasonably burden the development of the
property. The director or the director's designee may grant relief in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   Criteria for approval. In deciding whether to grant relief, the
director or the director's designee shall determine that:
         a.   All or a part of the urban forestry regulations may deprive the
applicant of economically viable use of the property;
         b.   The proposed design has minimized the loss of trees and canopy to
the extent possible;
         c.   The relief requested will not injure the existing or permitted
use of adjacent conforming property, will not make the property substantially
different from properties within the same zoning category, has no adverse
effects on adjacent properties, and would not result in an adverse effect on
traffic circulation, drainage or utilities; and
         d.   That tree preservation or mitigation unduly burdens the
development of the property due to a unique physical circumstance son the
property or by reducing the developable portion of the property to 25% of the
property.
      (2)   Relief provided shall be limited to the following:
         a.   An increase in building height for properties zoned C, CR, CF, E,
and ER, up to a maximum of 14 additional feet above the height allowed in the
applicable zoning district for the property, subject to compliance with all
requirements for building setbacks and bufferyards adjacent to applicable
residential districts; and
         b.   Up to a 50% reduction to the required front, rear or side yard
setbacks.
      (3)   In instances where relief is granted, all requirements for tree
preservation and canopy in the urban forestry ordinance must be complied with.
      (4)   The director, and the director's designee, may decline to grant
relief pursuant to this subsection.
   (g)   General requirements. The following requirements apply to all
development:
      (1)   Tree protection and maintenance.
         a.   Procedures required prior to development activities.
            1.   Protective fencing. Prior to development activities, the
contractor or subcontractor shall construct and maintain, for each preserved
tree or tree cluster on a tract, a protective fence which encircles the outer
limits of the critical root zone of the tree to protect it from development
activities. All protective fencing shall be in place prior to commencement of
any site work and remain in place until all exterior work has been completed.
Fencing shall meet the state minimum standards of a four-foot orange plastic
mesh net with T-posts. Significant trees shall be protected with a minimum
four-foot chain link fence with support cables and T-posts.
            2.   Signage. All fencing shall have signs attached every one
hundred feet which read "Keep Out, Tree Protection Area" written in contrasting
colors in both English and Spanish with letters at least two inches in height.
All signs must be at least ten inches high and fourteen inches wide.
            3.   Bark protection. In situations where a preserved tree remains
in immediate area of intended construction and the urban forestry administrator
determines the tree bark to be in danger of damage by development activities,
the contractor or subcontractor shall protect the tree by enclosing the entire
circumference of the tree with two-inch by four-inch lumber encircled with wire
or other means that does not damage the tree. The intent is to protect the bark
of the tree against incidental contact by large construction equipment.
            4.   Canopy coverage protection. All trees being preserved for
canopy coverage under subsection (j)(4) below or a significant tree covered
under subsection (j)(5) below due to size will be protected during any
development activities.
         b.   The protective measures in subsection (g)(1)(a) must occur on all
trees located within 50 feet of development activities.
         c.   The protective measures in subsection (g)(1)(a) are required
within the critical root zone radius from the trunk at one foot per inch
diameter measured at DBH.
         d.   The following activities within the critical root zone are
prohibited:
            1.   No material intended for use in construction or waste material
accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within the limits
of the critical root zone of any preserved tree;
            2.   No equipment shall be cleaned or other liquids deposited or
allowed to flow overland with the limits of the critical root zone of a
preserved tree. This includes, without limitations, paint, oil, solvents,
asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials;
            3.   No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those of a
protective nature, shall be attached to any preserved tree;
            4.   No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or parking
shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any preserved
tree other than on existing street pavement;
            5.   No heavy equipment, including, but not limited to, trucks,
tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat tractors, trenchers, compressors and
hoists shall be allowed inside the critical root zone of any preserved tree on
any construction site without the specific approval of the urban forestry
administrator;
            6.   No grade change within the critical root zone of any preserved
tree without submission of a certified arborist/forester report dealing with
protections and the report acceptance by the urban forestry administrator; or
            7.   No filling activity in the critical root zone of any preserved
tree may occur as a permanent condition which may damage the tree. Tree wells
may be used to ensure that the root zone is protected.
         e.   Replacement of any preserved tree which dies within five years
due to construction or development activities will be the responsibility of the
property owner. Replacement will be new trees with a minimum of three inches
each in diameter and equal to five times the lost canopy. Tree replacement will
be guaranteed for an additional period of two years.
      (2)   Construction methods.
         a.   Boring. Boring of utilities under preserved trees shall be
required in those circumstances where it is not possible to trench around the
critical root zone of the preserved tree. When required, the length of the bore
shall be the width of the critical root zone at a minimum and shall be a
minimum depth of 48 inches.
         b.   Grade change. In situations where the urban forestry
administrator approves a grade change within the critical root zone of a
preserved tree, procedures and special conditions shall be approved by the
urban forestry administrator in advance of any work.
         c.   Trenching. All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching
across the critical root zone of any preserved tree, unless otherwise approved
by the urban forestry administrator. All work within the critical root zone
requires advance approval by the urban forestry administrator. The placement of
underground utility lines such as electric, phone, gas, etc., is encouraged to
be located outside the critical root zone of preserved trees. Trenching for an
irrigation system shall be placed outside the critical root zone, except into
the critical root zone perpendicular to the tree trunk and in the manner that
has the least possible encroachment into the critical root zone. Boring is
required for all underground utility lines that cross the critical root zone.
         d.   Root pruning. All roots two inches or larger in diameter which
are exposed as a result of trenching or other excavation shall be cut off
square with a sharp medium tooth saw and covered with pruning compound within
two hours of initial exposure.
         e.   Underground utilities. All onsite underground utilities with
backfill other than onsite material shall have a clay dam every 200 feet for
the entire length of the utility placement.
         f.   Paving. No paving is allowed within the critical root zone of any
preserved tree unless otherwise approved by the urban forestry administrator.
Approvals will be based upon best management practices for tree preservation.
      (3)   Tree planting to achieve canopy coverage.
         a.   Trees planted to provide canopy coverage shall be a minimum of
two and one-half to three inches each in diameter and each tree planted will be
credited canopy coverage at normal maturity as follows, with canopy coverage
credit being reduced at the discretion of the City if not meeting the minimum
spacing requirements:
            1.   Large canopy tree with typical crown width of 50 feet in
diameter. Two thousand square feet (minimum spacing of 40 feet on center);
            2.   Medium canopy tree with typical crown width of 30 feet in
diameter. Seven hundred square feet (minimum spacing of 24 feet on center); and
            3.   Small canopy tree with typical crown width of ten feet in
diameter. One hundred square feet (minimum spacing of eight feet on center).
         b.   Tree planting requirements: Table B is a list of protected
species for the Fort Worth area. Trees other than those listed in Table B will
be considered by the urban forestry administrator and granted on a case-by-case
basis. The approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability, long-
term health and growth characteristics of the tree type.
         c.   The minimum size of tree planted will be two and one-half to
three inches in diameter. The caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken
at a point six inches above the ground if the resulting measurement is no more
than four inches in diameter. If the resulting measurement is more than four
inches, the measurement of the caliper shall be taken at 12 inches above the
ground. If the tree is multi-trunk, the main stem will be given full credit for
its diameter and all other stems will receive one-half credit. The total of all
must be three inches or greater.
         d.   All newly planted trees that die within two years of the date of
project completion must be replaced by the current property owner. Any
replacement tree that dies within two years of the date the replacement tree is
planted must be replaced by the current property owner. The requirement to
replace the trees shall run with the land.
         e.   A minimum of 16 square feet of permeable surfaces must be
provided for all tree plantings.
         f.   Expansion of structures used for commercial/institutional and
industrial uses: Tree plantings to achieve canopy coverage will be based only
on the square footage of the expansion footprint rather than the entire site to
ensure at least minimal tree replacement. Only tree removal permits for trees
greater than six inches in diameter are required for expansions under 3,000
square feet.
      (4)   Warranty/replacement. Any preserved tree that dies or becomes
hazardous and a threat to public safety or property due to construction
activities within five years following the date of issuance of the certificate
of occupancy shall be replaced following the criteria outlined above for tree
preservation and significant tree replacement by the original applicant or
assigned party.
      (5)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the
requirements of subsection (j) below are met.
   (h)   Specific requirements based on land use. The city's goal to achieve a
city-wide tree canopy cover of at least 30% and to promote the functional
distribution of that canopy throughout various land uses as development occurs
through a combination of planting and retention goals and requirements for tree
canopy cover. In support of the overall goal of tree canopy cover for the city,
the following land use requirements shall apply.
      (1)   One- and two-family residential land uses.
         a.   Minimum retained or planted canopy coverage shall be 40%;
         b.   Canopy for new subdivisions: the 40% canopy coverage requirement
for one- and two- family residential land uses will be reduced to 25% if:
            1.   One tree per residential lot is planted on all lots up to
5,000 square feet in area;
            2.   One additional tree for each additional 5,000 square feet of
lot area, or fraction thereof is planted, up to a maximum of nine trees per
residential lot; and
            3.   The remaining portion of the 25% canopy coverage may be
provided in public rights- of-way, parks, homeowner's association lots or
boundary street parkways.
         c.   Phased development of residential subdivisions: residential
subdivisions that are to be developed in phases must provide a plan that
complies with the retention requirements at full buildout as approved on the
preliminary plat. If a final plat requests credit for trees in undeveloped
phases or units that are planned for future development, it will be necessary
for all subsequent plats to identify trees for retention or provide mitigation
as needed to obtain the required canopy coverage percentage. Updated plans must
be provided to urban forestry as the subdivision is developed.
         d.   Canopy for existing platted residential lots over one acre:
            1.   Retained canopy coverage of 25%; and
            2.   Overall canopy coverage of 40%.
      (2)   Multifamily land uses. Minimum retained or planted canopy coverage
shall be 50% of open space.
      (3)   Institutional land uses. Minimum retained or planted canopy
coverage shall be 30%.
      (4)   Commercial land uses. Minimum retained or planted canopy coverage
shall be 30%.
      (5)   Mixed use land uses in "MU'" mixed-use zoning. Minimum retained or
planted canopy coverage shall be 50% of open space.
      (6)   Industrial land uses. Minimum retained and planted canopy coverage
shall be 20%.
      (7)   Surface parking areas.
         a.   Minimum canopy coverage shall be 40%;
         b.   The canopy coverage shall be achieved through preservation of
existing trees or tree planting within the parking field and drives;
         c.   No requirement for one- and two-family residential uses; and
         d.   1.   Credit shall be given for preserved or planted trees located
outside the subject property within the parkway of adjacent streets.
            2.   Trees planted to provide canopy coverage shall be a minimum of
three inches each in diameter and will be credited its canopy coverage at
normal maturity as follows with canopy coverage credit being reduced at the
discretion of the City if not meeting the minimum spacing requirements:
               i.    Large canopy tree with typical crown width of 50feet in
diameter. Two thousand square feet (minimum spacing of 40 feet on center);
               ii.    Medium canopy tree with typical crown width of 30 feet in
diameter. Seven hundred square feet (minimum spacing of 24 feet on center); and
               iii.    Small canopy tree with typical crown width often feet in
diameter. One hundred square feet (minimum spacing of eight feet on center).
      (8)   Public projects (e.g., water, sewer, street or drainage).
         a.   Minimum retained and planted canopy coverage shall be 30%; and
         b.   Public projects may elect to mitigate required canopy coverage
through payment into the tree fund at a rate of $600 per required tree. No
mitigation or payment in to the tree fund shall be required if the public
project does not prevent the surface from being restored to its original
condition or where the public project will not require tree removal.
      (9)   Agricultural land uses.
         a.   Minimum canopy retention shall be 25%.
         b.   New agriculture development will require documentation of the
existing canopy coverage and a detailed tree survey of the property prior to
clearing or grading of the property. The tree survey will include the location,
size and species of tree. At the time of development a payment of $200 per
diameter inch will be required for up to 25% of the removed trees over six
inches in diameter. The canopy coverage and total diameter inch total will run
with the land provided approved documentation is recorded in the applicable
county deed records.
   (i)   Delineation of artificial lot. If a developer wishes to develop a
portion of a one acre or larger tract, the developer may request that the
Director of the development services department, or the director's designee,
delineate the portion of the tract to be developed as an artificial lot, for
purposes of calculating urban forestry requirements for the development.
Artificial lots may be delineated in any type of development, including schools
and places of worship. All artificial lots shall meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   Contain the entire area on which the development is to occur,
including all paved areas;
      (2)   Contain a land area of less than 50% of the entire tract, or, if
the proposed artificial lot contains more than 50% of the entire tract, the
Director, or the director's designee, must determine that a substantial amount
of the tract is not affected by the proposed development; and
      (3)   Be delineated on the urban forestry plan as provided in subsection
(j) below.
   (j)   Urban forestry plan/permits. No activity subject to the urban forestry
requirements shall be conducted without the required permit for such activity,
as further described below.
      (1)   Permits.
         a.   Tree removal permit is required:
            1.   Prior to the removal of a single tree. No permit shall be
issued if the remaining canopy coverage is less than the 25% minimum retention;
or
            2.   For the removal of any tree six inches or greater in diameter.
         b.   Urban forestry permit is required:
            1.   For the removal of more than one tree;
            2.   For construction of new structures on properties where a
building permit is required, unless exempted under subsection (e) above.
         c.   An urban forestry plan is required to be submitted with the urban
forestry permit.
         d.   An approved urban forestry permit will run with the land. If the
project scope or configuration changes prior to any disturbance of the land,
the approved urban forestry permit is invalid and the owner/developer shall
apply for a new permit.
         e.   An urban forestry permit shall expire on the fifth anniversary of
the date the permit was issued if no progress has been made toward
implementation of the urban forestry plan.
      (2)   Urban forestry plan.
         a.   Submission of an urban forestry plan is required for the issuance
of an urban forestry permit and is required before or at the time of
application for building permit. At the time of submission of the urban
forestry plan, the applicant shall elect a method of preservation of existing
canopy under subsection (j)(4) below.
         b.   If no trees exist on the site, the applicant shall document the
existing conditions and comply with urban forestry plan application
requirements below.
      (3)   Urban forestry plan application requirements. Prior to any platting
activity, site plan preparation and submission for development, demolition,
disruptive activities (including clearing and grading) or tree removal, the
following information must be submitted through a two-part process.
         a.   Part One: documentation of existing conditions.
            1.   The first submittal shall include two copies of a scaled
diagram of the subject property in which development, disruption or tree
removal is proposed. The scaled diagram may be an engineered drawing, survey,
air photo or other illustration. Part One will reflect the existing conditions
by including the following information:
               i.    Boundaries of the property and its calculated area, i.e.,
acres, square feet;
               ii.    Location map showing the proximity of the property to the
nearest streets;
               iii.    Outline of the existing tree canopy area on the property
and the calculated area (square feet or acres) of existing canopy coverage,
differentiating between the canopy of protected and unprotected tree species
using Tables A and B in subsection (n) of this Section. Properties with no
existing protected canopy shall indicate such conditions;
               iv.    Scaled existing or proposed utilities regulated by the
public utility commission and/or Texas railroad commission. Indicate the
calculated area (square footage or acres) for these rights-of-ways or
easements;
               v.    Location of each significant tree as defined in §
9.101, its species and canopy area; and
               vi.    Tables C, D, E and F in subsection (n) below.
            2.   Upon completion and approval of Part One documentation, tree
removals will be granted if a minimum of 50% of the existing protected tree
canopy is retained. The documentation of pre-development canopy coverage shall
be maintained with the property until development occurs. The required
retention indicated in Part One documentation will be achieved within the area
remaining after the initial clearing.
            3.   Part One documentation shall expire on the second anniversary
of the date of approval if no progress has been made toward completion of a
Part Two submission. If tree removals occur after approval of Part One
documentation, but the Part One documentation subsequently expires, the new
Part One application shall be based on the conditions on the property when the
original Part One application was submitted to the City.
         b.   Part Two: Components of the urban forestry plan. Part Two will
overlay the proposed improvements and removals/preservations/ plantings. Two
copies shall be provided and shall include the following information:
            1.   Scaled site plan depicting the location of proposed
structures, parking areas, drives, amenities, construction material storage
areas, and other construction impacts;
            2.   Tree canopy areas that are desired to be removed;
            3.   Location and description of trees (large, medium or small
canopy crown) that will be planted from Table B to reach the minimum canopy as
stated in subsection (h) above; and
            4.   Tables G and H in subsection (n) below.
      (4)   Preservation requirements for protected tree species canopy.
         a.   Existing canopy coverage of protected species shall be retained
as follows:
            1.   A minimum of 25% of the tree canopy of protected trees listed
in Table B of subsection (n) on the property being developed must be retained;
            2.   A minimum of 50% of the tree canopy of post oaks and blackjack
oaks on the property must be retained and shall be credited towards the 25%
minimum tree canopy required for protected trees set forth in subsection (j)(4)
(l); and
            3.   In addition to the requirements in subsections (j)(4)(l) and
(j)(4)(2), significant trees must be preserved as outlined in subsection (j)(5)
below.
         b.   If only unprotected tree species exist on the property being
developed, no preservation requirement will apply, but the applicant shall
provide additional documentation to verify the existing conditions, including
but not limited to, photographs or a report by an arborist. The property may be
inspected to verify the existing conditions.
         c.   An onsite tree survey noting the location, size and species, and
canopy coverage of each protected tree with a diameter of six inches or greater
will be required. This survey shall be completed and signed/sealed by one of
the following: Texas licensed landscape architect, certified arborist, Texas
licensed landscape contractor or Texas certified nurseryman.
      (5)   Preservation of significant trees.
         a.   Significant protected trees listed in subsection (n), Table B,
that are 24 inches in diameter (75.36 inches in circumference) and post oaks
and blackjack oaks that are 18 inches in diameter (56.55 inches in
circumference) can only be removed by permit issued by the urban forestry
administrator. Preservation of a significant tree will be credited to the
required preserved canopy cover one and one-half times the actual canopy size.
         b.   Significant trees may be removed if one of the following
conditions is met:
            1.   An area one and one-half times the area of the canopy of the
tree identified for removal is retained on the same site or offsite when
designated as part of the associated urban forestry permit. If a significant
post oak or blackjack oak is being removed, the retained canopy must be a post
oak or blackjack oak. For any other significant protected tree, the retained
canopy may be any protected species. The retained canopy shall be in addition
to the required tree canopy coverage on the site/tract;
            2.   Planting of new trees from the protected tree list (see Table
B of subsection (n) below) at five times greater in canopy area than the
removed specific tree canopy. The additional planting of five to one (5 to 1)
will be in excess of the required tree coverage on the site or offsite when
designated as part of the associated urban forestry permit;
            3.   Payment into the tree fund in accordance with Section
2-322 of the City Code for the mitigation fee for removal of significant trees;
or
            4.   The Urban Design Commission approves a plan that mitigates the
removal of significant trees.
      (6)   Urban forestry plan amendments.
         a.   Minor amendments. Minor amendments to an approved urban forestry
plan may be approved administratively if one of three conditions below is met:
            1.   An increase in the total canopy;
            2.   Adjustments in the type of tree to be planted, considering
that trees from the protected tree list in Table B must be replaced with trees
from the protected tree list in Table B; or
            3.   Any adjustments in planting location required due to site
specific issues including traffic circulation, safety, drainage or utilities,
given that the adjustments include only the relocation of trees of the same
type and size as provided on the approved urban forestry plan. These
adjustments cannot include the removal or transplantation of a tree not
considered in the approved urban forestry plan.
         b.   Amendments that do not meet any of the conditions in subsection
(j)(6)a. of this section must be submitted to and approved by the urban design
commission before construction begins.
   (k)   Urban forestry development agreement.
      (l)   The urban forestry development agreement ("agreement”).
         a.   The agreement is intended to facilitate the development of large
tract developments, other than single-family or two-family developments, under
common ownership which would meet or exceed an overall canopy coverage of 30%
for all properties included in the agreement. The intent of a development
agreement is to allow areas with more extensive canopy to remain and contribute
to the 30% overall coverage while allowing the canopy in other development
areas to be reduced. Individual properties that are subject to the agreement
are required to maintain canopy coverage requirements for different land use
types as outlined in subsection (k)(l)(c). below.
         b.   The original application for an agreement shall include an
initial spreadsheet of minimum canopies and acreages, the form of which is
provided in Table I of subsection (n) below. Thereafter, Table J of subsection
(n) below shall be completed with the provided canopies and acreages included
at the time of each subsequent submittal as property/tracts are being
developed. These updates shall be provided at the time of submittal of each
individual Part One document. No approval shall be granted nor tree removals to
be completed without the submission of the Table J form as set forth in
subsection (n) below.
         c.   The agreement must be presented to the city council for approval
prior to its execution. Any amendments may be approved administratively if the
regulations of this subsection (k) are satisfied. The initial submission for
approval of an agreement shall include:
            1.   A map all of the properties to be included in the agreement,
identified by land use and acreage;
            2.   Individual maps of each land use-type (commercial, industrial,
etc.); and
            3.   Table I of subsection (n) below.
      (2)   Overall Part One permit. An overall Part One permit as part of an
agreement will be issued if the following conditions are met:
         a.   Minimum acreage allowed shall be 1,000 acres with all of the
acres to be located within the same watershed. Applicant shall provide an
exhibit depicting all of the property/tracts and acreages that will be subject
to the agreement;
         b.   The property/tracts subject to the agreement shall be separated
by land use type, but shall not include single-family or two-family
development. Applicant will provide exhibits for each land use type for the
initial submittal and will update for subsequent submittals. Canopy
requirements will be tracked by land use type;
         c.   The minimum canopy coverage for each tract described in an
agreement shall be:
 
Commercial         15% Parkin g 40%
Industrial         10% Parkin g 20%
Airport industrial 5%  Parkin g 20%
Multifamily        25% of required open space
 
         d.   All of the acreage to be included in an agreement shall be under
common ownership at the time of the agreement, under a currently approved
overall Part One, or part of an approved concept plan or preliminary plat. A
list shall be provided of any separate corporations to be included in an
agreement documenting that all are part of the same parent company. The list
shall be provided with the initial overall Part One submission and shall
provide the filing number associated with the articles of incorporation filed
with the Texas Secretary of State.
         e.   The overall Part One permit shall not expire for a period of 15
years and may be renewed for additional ten-year periods. Renewals will be
approved administratively if the permit remains under the same terms and
conditions of the original agreement approved by the city council or with
amendments approved administratively. Progress shall be defined as the
platting, permitting or vertical construction on the properties. The expiration
period in subsection (j)(3)a.3. above shall apply to the individual Part One
submissions. Individual Part One permits shall be defined as property/tracts
that are submitted for approval after the date of execution of the agreement.
         f.   The agreement shall run with the land and properties which are
included in the original agreement and subsequently sold shall remain under the
terms of the agreement regardless of future ownership. The agreement shall be
recorded in the real property records in the county which the property subject
to the agreement is located. Recordation shall be the responsibility of the
applicant, including the cost of recording fees. Within 14 days after execution
and recordation, a copy of the recorded documentation shall be provided to the
city. The Part One permit shall not be issued until the recorded copy is
received.
         g.   Future acquired properties by the original applicant of the
agreement may be included in the agreement after a recalculation of the canopy
coverage and approval by staff if the conditions of this section are met.
Acquired properties not included in the agreement shall be subject to the
regulations of this section. Additional properties may not be included into the
agreement within three years of the end of the initial term of the agreement.
No properties shall be allowed to be added to the agreement during any renewal
terms.
   (l)   Conservation Easements. A conservation easement to ensure the
continual preservation of the trees being planted or preserved may be granted
to a land trust or other public agency approved by the City in accordance with
this subsection under the following conditions: 1) when approval is granted by
the urban forestry administrator for trees to be preserved or planted on a
separate property from the property being developed; and 2) the form of the
easement is acceptable to the City Attorney's Office.
   (m)   Appeals.
      (1)   If the urban forestry administrator, or other city official,
refuses to accept or issue an urban forestry plan/permit, or if the applicant
disagrees with the decision of city staff, the applicant may request an appeal
of the decision to the urban design commission within ten days after the
decision of city staff. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be transmitted
to the executive secretary of the urban design commission within ten days after
receipt of notification that the urban forestry administrator will not accept
the urban forestry plan/permit.
      (2)   The urban design commission shall consider the appeal within 30
days after the appeal is received by the board's executive secretary or as soon
thereafter as reasonably practical, unless the applicant requests a later
hearing in writing. The urban design commission shall not release the applicant
from the requirements of this ordinance, unless the applicant first presents
credible evidence from which the urban design commission can reasonably
conclude application of this ordinance to the applicant would be likely to
deprive the applicant of rights protected by law.
      (3)   The urban design commission may take the following actions on an
appeal:
         a.   Deny the appeal, in which case the urban forestry plan/permit
shall not be accepted or granted;
         b.   Grant the appeal and direct the urban forestry administrator to
accept and approve the urban forestry plan/permit; or
         c.   Grant the appeal subject to such provisions, conditions or
limitations as deemed appropriate by the urban design commission.
      (4)   In no event shall acceptance of an application guarantee that the
city will issue the urban forestry plan/permit, unless the permit application
is in compliance with all applicable codes, laws and regulations.
      (5)   Appeals of the urban design commission will be heard in accordance
with Section
2.102(g) of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (n)   Tables.
Table A. Unprotected Tree Species
Table A. Unprotected Tree Species
Ash                                  Fraxinus sp.
Ash juniper                          Juniperus ashei
Bradford pear                        Pyrus calleryana
Chinaberry                           Melia azeoarach
Chinese Tallow                       Triadica sebifera
Cottonwood                           Populus deltoides
Golden raintree                      Koelreuteria paniculata
Hackberry/ Sugarberry                Celtis laevigata
Ligustrum                            Ligustrum sp.
Mesquite                             Prosopis glandulosa
Mimosa                               Albizia julibrissin
Mulbery                              Morus alba
Osage Orange/ Bois de'Arc (fruiting) Maclura pomifera
Siberian elm                         Ulmus pumila
Silver maple                         Acer saccharinum
Tree of Heaven                       Ailanthus altissima
Willow                               Salix sp.
* Any species of tree, shrub, vine or grass listed in the Normative Invasive
Plants of Southern Forests, published by the United States Department of
Agriculture Forest Service.
 
Table B. Protected Species
Table B. Protected Species
Large Canopy Trees (over 40 feet tall and 20 inches or more in diameter
when mature)
American elm        Ulmus americana          Not recommended for parking
                                             lots
Baldcypress         Taxodium distichum       Not recommended for parking
                                             lots
Black walnut        Juglans nigra             
Bur oak*            Quercus macrocarpa        
Cedar elm*          Ulmus crassifolia         
Chinquapin oak*     Quercus muhlenbergii      
Lacebark elm        Ulmus parvifolia          
Live oak*           Quercus virginiana        
Pecan               Carya illinoinensis      Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Pond cypress        Taxodium ascendens        
Post oak            Quercus stellate         Must preserve 50% if on site
Red oak             Quercus shumardii        Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Medium Canopy Trees (25 to 50 feet tall, 10 to 20 inches in diameter when
mature)
Afghan pine*        Pinus elderica            
Arizona cypress*    Hesperocyparis arizonica  
Blackjack oak       Quercus marilandica      Must preserve 50% if on site
Bigtooth maple*     Acer grandidentatum       
'Caddo' maple*      Acer saccharum 'Caddo'    
Chinese pistache*   Pistache chinensis        
Eastern redcedar*   Juniperus virginiana      
Ginkgo              Ginkgo biloba             
Japanese Black Pine Pinusthun bergiana        
Lacey oak           Quercus laceyi            
Monterrey oak*      Quercus polymorpha        
Shantung maple      Acertruncatum             
Shin oak (Bigelow)  Quercus sinuata var.      
                    breviloba
Southern magnolia   Magnolia grandiflora     Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Texas red oak       Quercus buckleyi          
Trident maple       Acer buergerianum         
Western soapberry*  Sapindus saponaria        
Small Canopy Trees (less than 25 feet tall or 10 inches in diameter when
mature)
American smoketree  Cotinus obovatus          
Carolina buckhom    Frangula caroliniana     Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Cherry-laurel       Prunus caroliniana        
Crapemyrtle*        Lagerstroemia indica      
Desert willow*      Chilopsis linearis        
Eve's necklace*     Styphnolobium affine      
Indian cherry       Frangula caroliniana      
Japanese maple      Acer palmatum            Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Mexican buckeye     Ungnadia speciosa         
Mexican plum        Prunus mexicana           
Possumhaw holly     Ilex decidua              
Rough-leaf dogwood  Cornus drummondii        Not recommended for high heat
                                             areas
Rusty blackhaw      Viburnum rufidulum        
Texas persimmon*    Diospyros texana          
Texas redbud        Cercis canadensis var.    
                    texensis
Vitex               Vitex agnus-castus        
Waxmyrtle           Myrica cerifera           
Yaupon holly*       Ilex vomitoria            
* Drought tolerant species
 
 
Table C. Net Urban Forestry Area
Net Urban Forestry Area                                    Square Feet Acres
Gross area of property                                                 
Utility rights-of-way or easements regulated by the public -           -
utility commission/Texas railroad commission
Net urban forestry area                                                
 
Table D. Required Tree Canopy Area
Table D. Required Tree Canopy Area
                                                                   Square Acres
                                                                    Feet
Net urban forestry area                                                    
Land use/canopy coverage ratio
   One- or two-family (40% coverage)
   One- or two-family with trees planted on individual lots (25% X
coverage)
   Commercial (30% coverage)
   Industrial (20% coverage)
Required canopy coverage                                                   
      
 
Table E. Minimum Canopy Retention
                                                       Square Feet Acres
Existing tree canopy area                                           
Preservation requirement                                X 0.25      X 0.25
Preservation requirement for post oak and blackjack oak X 0.5       X 0.5
Minimum retention                                                   
      
Table F. Significant Tree Removal
Table F. Significant Tree Removal
                                    Calculation      Inches DBH Canopy Sq. Ft.
All Post Oaks/Blackjack Oaks                                    
18inches DBH
All other trees 24 inches DBH                                   
Total of significant trees to be                                
preserved
Significant tree preservation credit (sq. ft. x 1.5)             
Total of significant trees to be     ( )                         
removed
Removal options (choose one):                                   
Retention of existing canopy 1.5X
the canopy of removed significant    (sq. ft. x 1.5)             
trees-in excess of minimum retention
Planting additional trees 5X the
canopy of removed significant trees- (sq. ft. x 5)               
in excess of total planting
Payment into tree fund for total
inches DBH of significant trees      (sq. ft. x $300)            
removed per inch DBH in accordance
with Section 2-322 of the City Code
Urban design commission approved
plan that mitigates the removal of                              
the significant tree(s)
         
Table G. Tree Preservation and Planting Area
Table G. Tree Preservation and Planting Area
                                                        Square feet Acres
Area of existing tree canopy retained                                
Planting                                                             
         large canopy trees @ 2,000 square feet p  tree      
(minimum spacing of 40 feet on center)                               
         medium canopy trees @700 square feet per ree        
(minimum spacing of 24 feet on center)                               
         small canopy trees @100 square feet per  ee         
(minimum spacing of 8 feet on center)                                
         additional trees                                    
Total preservation and planting                                      
      
 
Table H. Parking Canopy Area
Parking Areas for Commercial or Industrial Uses Square Feet Acres
Area of parking and drives                                  
Required canopy coverage of parking areas       X 0.4       X 0.4
Required canopy coverage                                    
Area of canopy coverage being provided                      
   
Table I. Initial Urban Forestry Development Agreement
Overall Canopy
(enter Land Use Type) - Part 1
Table I. Initial Urban Forestry Development Agreement
Overall Canopy
(enter Land Use Type) - Part 1
Net Urban Forestry Area                                  Square Feet Acres
Gross area of property
Utility easements
Net urban forestry area
Required Tree Canopy Area                                Square Feet Acres
Net area
Canopy ratio
Required tree canopy coverage
Preservation/Retention of Existing Canopy                Square Feet Acres
Existing tree canopy
Preservation requirement (20, 30, 40%)
Minimum retention of existing tree canopy
Area of existing tree canopy retained
Preservation ratio
Retention of Canopy for Significant Tree Canopy Removal  Square Feet Acres
Significant tree canopy to be removed                                
Preservation requirement (150%)                                      
Minimum retention of existing tree canopy for removal of             
significant tree canopy
Area of existing tree canopy retained for removal of                 
significant tree canopy
 
 
Table J. Urban Forestry Development Agreement Canopy Tracking
                                    Canopy    Off Site    Beginnin g Ending
UFC # Project Project Site    Usage Coverage  Mitigation? Land       Land
      Name    Address Acreage Class Required  (Y/N)       Balance    Balance
                                    (sq. ft.)
                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
 
(Ord. 18615-05-2009, § 3, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020; Ord. 24838-05-2021, § 1, passed 5-11-2021, eff. 5-27- 2021; Ord. 27615-
04-2025, § 1, passed 4-22-2025, eff. 5-9-2025)
ARTICLE 4: SIGNS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, adopted November 6, 2007, amended Art. 4, in its
entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art.
4 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.400 SCOPE.
   (a)   This article is enacted to provide uniform standards for the location,
spacing, height, lighting and other regulation of signs within the City of Fort
Worth. The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, welfare,
convenience and enjoyment of the general public from injury which may be caused
by the unregulated construction of signs.
   (b)   It is the intent of these regulations to achieve the following:
      (1)   Enhance the economic value of the landscape by avoiding visual
clutter which is potentially harmful to property values and business
opportunities:
      (2)   Promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs
do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, weather or decay;
      (3)   Protect the safety and efficiency of the city’s transportation
network by reducing the confusion or distraction to motorists and enhancing
motorists’ ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles and traffic
signs;
      (4)   Enhance the impression of the city which is conveyed to tourists
and visitors;
      (5)   Protect adjacent and nearby properties from the impact of lighting,
size, height and location of signs;
      (6)   Preserve, protect and enhance areas of historical, architectural,
scenic and aesthetic value, regardless of whether they be cultural, natural or
human-made; and
      (7)   Encourage the removal of off-premises signs from designated scenic,
cultural, architectural or historic districts or corridors.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 1, passed 8-
4-2009)
§ 6.401 ENFORCEMENT.
   This article is adopted with specific reference to the regulations contained
in the Fort Worth sign code,
Chapter 29, city code, and shall be enforced in conjunction with such code.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 2, passed 8-
4-2009)
§ 6.402 SCENIC PRESERVATION AREAS AND CORRIDORS.
   (a)   Scenic preservation areas established. The following scenic
preservation areas are hereby established based on their scenic, cultural,
architectural or historic character. Generalized maps of these areas appear in
Appendix B. For official maps of the districts, please contact the planning and
development department. (See §§
2.102 and
6.413(b).)
      (1)   Fort Worth stockyards national register historic district;
      (2)   Central business district scenic preservation area;
      (3)   Cultural district scenic preservation area;
      (4)   Medical district scenic preservation area;
      (5)   Fairmount/Southside historic district;
      (6)   Elizabeth Boulevard national register historic district;
      (7)   Circle Park conservation district;
      (8)   Grand Avenue national register historic district;
      (9)   Masonic widows orphans home historic district; and
      (10)   Kenwood Court historic district.
   (b)   Scenic preservation area boundaries. All scenic preservation area
boundary lines shall be measured to the centerlines of all public or railroad
rights-of-way bordering the areas.
   (c)   Scenic preservation corridors established. In addition to the areas
established above, the following scenic preservation corridors are designated
based on their scenic, cultural, architectural or historic character. (See
Chapter 3, Article 5 and §
6.413(b)).
      (1)   Arterial scenic corridors. Arterial scenic corridors shall be
measured 200 feet from each side of the public right-of-way of the following
roadways:
         a.   North Main Street from the historic stockyards to downtown;
         b.   Lancaster Avenue from Camp Bowie Boulevard to South Beach Street;
         c.   University Drive/North Side Drive/Oakhurst Scenic Drive from
Granbury Road to Belknap Street;
         d.   Camp Bowie Boulevard from University Drive to I-30 (West
Freeway);
         e.   Hemphill Street from Allen Avenue south to Felix Street;
         f.   Jacksboro Highway from Lake Worth (100-year floodplain, 600 feet
elevation above sea level) to the southerly end of Nine Mile Bridge Road and
from 500 feet north of the Municipal Golf Course to North Side Drive;
         g.   Randol Mill Road/1st Street from Haltom Road east to Bridgewood
Drive and from 0.25 miles east of Loop 820 East to John T. White Road;
         h.   East Berry Street from Mitchell Boulevard to Old Mansfield
Highway;
         i.   South Hulen Street from Vickery Boulevard south to Loop 820
South;
         j.   Bryant Irvin Road from Vickery Boulevard south to Oakmont
Boulevard;
         k.   Angle Avenue/Marine Creek Parkway from Loop 820 West (Jim Wright
Freeway) to Northwest 28th Street;
         l.   Evans Avenue from Terrell Avenue to East Berry Street;
         m.   Horne Street from I-30 to Vickery Boulevard;
         n.   Amanda Avenue from Ramey Street to East Rosedale Street;
         o.   South Riverside Drive from I-30 (East Freeway) to Wichita Street;
         p.   4th Street from Downtown to South Riverside Drive;
         q.   East and West Rosedale from University Drive to Loop 820 East;
         r.   Seminary Drive from I-35W (South Freeway) to Wichita Street;
         s.   Vickery Boulevard from I-35W (South Freeway) to South Ayers
Avenue;
         t.   White Settlement Road from University Drive to the city limits of
Westworth Village; and
         u.   Trinity Railway Express corridor from the east Fort Worth city
limit line west to Downtown.
      (2)   Freeway scenic corridors. Freeway scenic preservation corridors
shall be measured 660 feet from each side of the public right-of-way of the
following roadways:
         a.   I-35W (North Freeway) from 28th Street exit south to the
centerline of the Trinity River;
         b.   I-30 (East Freeway) from Downtown east to Loop 820 East;
         c.   U.S. Hwy. 287 (Martin Luther King Freeway) from downtown
southeast to Village Creek Road;
         d.   Loop 820 West (Jim Wright Freeway) from .25 miles north to .25
miles south of Lake Worth (100-year floodplain, 600 feet elevation above sea
level);
         e.   Loop 820 East from .25 miles north of the first bridge abutment
north of Mosier Lake to the southerly boundary of the 100-year floodplain of
the West Fork of the Trinity River (approximately 150 feet); and
         f.   S.H. 121 (Chisholm Trail Parkway) from I-30 downtown to the
southerly boundary of the city limits.
      (3)   Future scenic corridors. It is the intent of this section that in
the event Jacksboro Highway (U.S. Hwy. 199) is widened, the width of the scenic
corridor along Jacksboro Highway shall be increased to 660 feet wide from each
side of the final alignment of the public right-of-way, after notice and
hearing in accordance with §
2.102.
   (d)   Scenic preservation corridor boundaries. When a corridor designated
under this section ends at an intersection with a right-of-way that is not
designated as part of a corridor, the corridor shall terminate at the
centerline of the non-designated right-of-way.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 21271-06-2014, § 1, passed 6-
3-2014)
§ 6.403 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   The following signs are exempted from the requirements of this article and
may be erected or constructed without a permit:
   (a)   Signs on vehicles or trailers, provided, however, signs on vehicles or
trailers that are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying the
sign are prohibited pursuant to §
6.405;
   (b)   Temporary signs, as follows:
      (1)   Temporary decorative flags; and
      (2)   Temporary signs erected in accordance with temporary banner policy
administered by the transportation and public works department for signs in the
public right-of-way, large banner policy administered by the park and
recreation department for signs on park property, policy governing erection of
banners on Main Street, and other temporary banner policies administered by
city departments or their designees.
      (3)   a.   One temporary sign is permitted per business during its
business hours subject to the following conditions:
            1.   The sign shall be displayed on private property within ten
feet of the front door of the business or tenant space;
            2.   The sign shall not exceed eight square feet;
            3.   The sign shall not exceed 42 inches in height;
            4.   The sign shall be constructed of rigid weather resistant
materials, and be kept in good condition;
            5.   The sign shall not be illuminated;
            6.   The sign shall not contain any moving elements;
            7.   The sign may not be located in the public open space easement
(P.O.S.E.); and
            8.   The sign shall not impede, obstruct or interfere with the flow
of pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk or access to entrance of a business.
         b.   Provided however, a temporary sign may be displayed in the public
right-of-way without the necessity of obtaining city council approval under the
following conditions:
            1.   There is not adequate space on the private property to place
the sign;
            2.   The front door of the business is less than ten feet from the
sidewalk edge or the curb, whichever is the closest to the business; and
            3.   The sign meets all of the criteria listed in subsection (b)
(3)a.2. through (b)(3)a.8. above.
   (c)   Warning, security and directional signs for parking or vehicle access;
   (d)   Government signs, flags, insignia, legal notices or informational,
directional or traffic signs;
   (e)   Political signs referring to the candidates or issues involved in a
public election, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The sign is located on private real property with the consent of
the property owner;
      (2)   The sign does not exceed eight feet in height;
      (3)   The sign may not have an effective area greater than 36 square
feet;
      (4)   The sign shall not be illuminated; and
      (5)   The sign shall not contain any moving elements.
   (f)   Signs in windows subject to the following:
      (1)   Window signs may occupy a maximum of 25% of the window area on each
building facade. However, signs exceeding 10% of the window area shall be
included in the calculation of the maximum square footage of on-premise signage
allowed as described in §
6.408(f);
      (2)   Window signs shall be limited to the first floor of a multi-story
building; and
      (3)   Window area shall be calculated as described in §
6.406(c).
   (g)   Other than electrical, all signs not visible from off the property;
   (h)   Nameplate and street address signs not exceeding one square foot in
area;
   (i)   One non-illuminated real estate sign, temporary in nature, advertising
the sale or lease of real property on which the sign is located or announcing
contemplated improvements of real property on which the sign is located;
provided, however, that said sign shall not exceed eight square feet in area in
any one- or two-family dwelling district or 60 square feet in area and eight
feet in height in any other district; provided, further, however, on corner
lots and through lots, one such sign, shall be allowed for each street on which
the lot has frontage. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after the sale
or occupancy of the property;
   (j)   One non-illuminated estate or garage sale sign, not to exceed two
square feet in area, temporary in nature, advertising the sale of items on
property for which a garage sale permit has been obtained. The sign shall be
removed within 24 hours after the sale ends;
   (k)   One construction sign, not exceeding four square feet in area in any
one- or two-family dwelling district or 40 square feet in area and 12 feet in
height in any other district, denoting the owner, architect, financial
institution, general contractor, subcontractor or any statement pertaining to
the project on the real property on which the sign is located; provided,
however, on corner lots and through lots, one such sign shall be allowed for
each street on which the lot has frontage. The sign shall be removed within 30
days after completion of the project;
   (l)   “No Dumping,” “No Trespassing,” and “No Solicitation” signs;
   (m)   Noncommercial residential signs. In addition to the other
noncommercial signs permitted by this article, a maximum of four signs not
exceeding a total of 16 square feet in area may be erected on any lot used for
residential purposes and may contain noncommercial copy. No one sign shall
exceed eight square feet in area;
   (n)   Signs depicting or relating to a national, local or religious holiday
or season if installed maintained or displayed for not more than 45 consecutive
days;
   (o)   Signs designed and used in conjunction with aircraft;
   (p)   Signs of not more than two square feet with a ground clearance of not
more than four feet within 20 feet of a driveway or other ingress/egress to
private property which restricts parking on said property. Corners of this type
of sign shall be mitered or rounded corner signs; and
   (q)   Signs erected by a public utility or transportation organization
operating pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city, where such signs are
erected or displayed for the purpose of public instruction, traffic control and
similar uses incidental to the public interest.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 3, passed 8-
4-2009; Ord. 19227-07-2010, §§ 1, 2, passed 7-13-2010)
§ 6.404 TEMPORARY ON-PREMISE SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   (a)   All temporary signs not previously exempted under §
6.403, including inflatable or balloon signs, portable signs on trailers and
banners shall require a permit. Temporary signs are permitted only in the “CF”
community facilities and “ER” neighborhood commercial restricted or less
restrictive districts. Temporary signs must meet all requirements of the sign
code (
Chapter 29 of the city code), including permitting requirements:
      (1)   Signs, with the exception of inflatable or balloon signs, shall be
a maximum size of 60 square feet;
      (2)   Only one such sign shall be allowed per business, not to exceed two
signs per platted lot. On lots with more than 300 feet of street frontage, one
sign shall be allowed per business, not to exceed three signs;
      (3)   No temporary signs shall be located within 100 feet of another
temporary sign;
      (4)   One temporary portable sign or banner shall be permitted for a
period of 30 consecutive days, provided only one sign or banner shall be
permitted during the 30-day period and there must be at least 30 days between
the display of each sign or banner; and
      (5)   Inflatable or balloons shall be allowed. Only 60 square feet of
advertised message area shall be allowed on an inflatable or balloon regardless
of the size of the inflatable or balloon. Only one inflatable or balloon sign
shall be permitted for a period of 30 consecutive days, provided only one
inflatable or balloon sign shall be permitted during the 30-day period and
there must be at least 30 days between the display of each inflatable or
balloon sign.
   (b)   For new residential developments, temporary subdivision signs shall be
permissible, for the marketing of the residential subdivision, subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   Signs shall be a maximum size of 64 square feet with no more than
two support posts;
      (2)   Sign shall be no taller than 20 feet; and
      (3)   Only one sign shall be located at an entrance to the subdivision,
with a maximum of two signs allowed per residential subdivision.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18078-05-2008, § 1, passed 5-
6-2008; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 4, passed 8-4-2009)
§ 6.405 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are expressly prohibited within the City of Fort Worth:
   (a)   Off-premise signs, unless provisions for such signs are contained
within these regulations;
   (b)   Signs erected in violation of city building, electrical or sign codes
or other applicable local regulations;
   (c)   Signs erected in violation of federal or state law;
   (d)   Pole signs;
   (e)   Portable signs, except those allowed under §§
6.403 and 6.404;
   (f)   Animated signs, flashing signs, running message, twinkle or running
light signs, and revolving signs or any other sign that moves. Electronic
changeable copy signs may be permitted by special exception from the board of
adjustment in accordance with §
6.411 below;
   (g)   Signs illuminated to such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or
impair vision. Lighting shall be shielded upward to prevent beams or rays from
being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied residential
area. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the lighting of signs near
airports which would conflict with any regulations adopted by the Federal
Aviation Administration in the furtherance of air safety. This requirement
shall not apply to internally lit signs with a lighting intensity of less than
150-foot lamberts;
   (h)   Signs erected in or projecting into the public right-of-way unless an
encroachment agreement is executed in accordance with the requirements of the
sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) and any other ordinances regulating encroachments;
   (i)   Signs on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the
primary purpose of displaying the sign. It shall be prima facie evidence that
the primary purpose of a vehicle or trailer is to display a sign if the vehicle
or trailer is parked on a site for a continuous period exceeding 72 hours;
   (j)   “V” type signs with a face that protrudes from the opposite face at an
interior angle greater than 25 degrees. This restriction shall not be construed
to prevent oval, cylindrical or box type signs; and
   (k)   Signs with sign structure larger than is reasonably necessary to
support the sign.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 19227-07-2010, § 3, passed 7-
13-2010)
§ 6.406 MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS.
   (a)   Measurement of detached signs. The sign area for a detached on-
premises sign shall be the area included within vertical and horizontal line
projections of the furthermost points of any logos, letters or other symbols,
composed of the total area of the message, and any border, trim or surface upon
which the message is displayed. One sign area will be calculated for a detached
sign no matter how the message is displayed. The sign structure shall not be
included in the sign area unless there is a sign displayed thereon.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7363.jpg]
   Box Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7365.jpg]
   Cylinder Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7367.jpg]
   Multi-Panel Flat Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7369.jpg]
   Multi-Surface Sign
   (b)   Measurement of attached signs. The sign area for an attached on-
premise sign shall be the area included within the vertical and horizontal line
projection of any logos, letters or other symbols intended to be read together,
composed of the total area of the message and any border, trim or surface upon
which the message is displayed. There may be several sign areas on the wall of
a building depending upon how a sign is displayed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7373.jpg]
   Single Panel Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7371.jpg]
   Multiple Panel Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7375.jpg]
   Painted Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7377.jpg]
   Individual Letter Sign
   (c)   Measurement of window area for window signs. The window area for
window signs shall be calculated by:
      (1)   Multiplying the window width times the height of the window, with a
maximum calculated height of 15 feet; and
      (2)   Determining the area of all glazed openings within a building’s
exterior wall including the mullions but excluding building cladding. Curved or
angled facades may be split or combined with the adjacent facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7379.jpg]
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 19227-07-2010, § 4, passed 7-
13-2010)
§ 6.407 RELATION TO ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Signs in “AG,” “CF,” “MH” and residential districts. On-premises signs
in agricultural, community facilities, manufactured housing and residential
districts are governed by the district regulations set out in the respective
district regulations in
Chapter 4 of this zoning code.
   (b)   Signs in commercial and industrial districts. Signs located in
commercial and industrial districts shall conform to the regulations in §§
6.408 and
6.409.
   (c)   Signs in planned development districts. Signs located in planned
development districts shall conform to the regulations in §
4.300.
   (d)   Signs in conservation overlay districts. Regulations for signs located
within conservation districts shall be in accordance with §
4.400. However, unless indicated otherwise the most restrictive sign
regulations shall be followed.
   (e)   Signs in urban design districts. Signs located within the boundaries
of an urban design district shall be generally exempt from the regulations of
this article and shall be in accordance with the pertinent district standards
of the zoning ordinance. However, the most restrictive sign regulations
contained in this article shall apply unless otherwise indicated in the
pertinent district standards. No off-premises signs shall be allowed.
   (f)   Signs in special purpose districts.
      (1)   Agricultural districts. On-premise signs are permitted as follows.
         a.   An illuminated nameplate bearing the family name of the occupants
residing in the residence not to exceed one square foot in area.
         b.   A non-illuminated sign for those uses that are not residential.
The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, shall be no higher than 25
feet above grade, and shall be placed a minimum of ten feet behind the property
line. Such sign shall not be placed within 20 feet of drives providing ingress
and egress to the property.
      (2)   Community facilities. Identification signs shall be permitted
subject to the following provisions.
         a.   Signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the
property on which displayed.
         b.   A sign or combination of signs shall have a maximum allowable
area of exposure along each dedicated street frontage of not more than one
square foot of sign area for each ten linear feet of frontage along said
street; provided, however, a minimum of at least one sign shall be allowed
having an area of 12 square feet.
         c.   Not more than 50% of the total allowable sign area may be located
in the required yard space along a dedicated street. However, no individual
sign in such required space shall exceed 20 square feet in sign area.
         d.   Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building
structure and symbols which are not visible or readable from the public street
shall not be limited by the above regulations.
         e.   Signs located across the street from a one-family or two-family
district shall not be illuminated. The source of light for illuminated signs
shall not be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing. Revolving signs
shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Manufactured housing. An identifying sign shall be permitted at
each major entrance to the manufactured home park except that no more than
three signs shall be permitted for one park, and such shall be subject to the
following provisions.
         a.   Each sign shall contain only the identifying name of the park and
its street address.
         b.   Signs may be illuminated but the source of light shall not be
visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing; revolving signs shall not be
permitted. Signs shall not be lighted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
         c.   Such signs may be freestanding but shall have not more than two
supports and the top of each sign shall be no more than eight feet above the
grade.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 6.408 REGULATIONS GOVERNING ON-PREMISE ATTACHED SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Unless exempted under the provisions of §
6.403, the following regulations shall apply to all attached on-premise signs
erected in districts “E” through “K,” except for signs for large retail stores
which are subject to §
5.134(a)(7).
   (a)   The following size limits apply to buildings occupied by a single
tenant and to individual tenant spaces in buildings with multiple tenants. One
or more attached signs may be erected on each facade of the occupied space. The
signs may have a total area of 10% of the area of the facade to which the signs
are attached, with a maximum aggregate area of 500 square feet per facade.
Doors and windows shall be included in the calculation of the facade area. The
facade area shall be calculated by multiplying the width times the height, with
a maximum calculated height of 15 feet. For structures exceeding 15 feet in
height, allowable sign square footage shall be calculated as one and one-half
square feet per linear foot of building facade.
   (b)   Length of an attached sign is limited to 75% of the lineal footage of
the building or commercial space, whichever is less.
   (c)   The entire length and height of backlit awnings in which the lighting
causes the illumination of the awning, of which the length will be limited to
subsection (b) above, will be counted toward the allowed square footage of
attached signs.
   (d)   Signs shall not project more than three feet from the building or
canopy. No sign projection shall encroach over public property except as
permitted by the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code).
   (e)   Signs may be installed upon the roof subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the
closest wall of the building above which the sign is placed;
      (2)   The sign shall not exceed four feet above the roof or top of the
parapet wall at the roof, whichever is higher; and
      (3)   All roof signs placed upon a building or buildings upon one platted
lot shall be similar in size, shape, area and design.
   (f)   A maximum of 1,340 square feet of attached on-premise signage shall be
allowed, regardless of the number of facades or buildings associated with a
single business or tenant.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 6.409 REGULATIONS GOVERNING ON-PREMISE DETACHED SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Unless exempted under the provisions of §
6.403, the following regulations shall apply to all detached on-premise signs
erected in districts “E” through “K,” except for signs for large retail stores
subject to §
5.134(a)(8) and for signs in mixed-use districts which are additionally subject
to §§
4.902(d)(3), 4.903(d)(3), 4.1300(d)(3), 4.1301(d)(3), 4.1302(d)(3) and 4.1303
(d)(3).
   (a)   Types of detached signs.
      (1)   Monument signs are permitted by right.
      (2)   Pylon signs are only permitted as part of a unified sign agreement,
per §
6.410.
      (3)   Freeway signs are only permitted on property immediately adjacent
to a designated freeway. Provided however, freeway signs are prohibited along
the Chisholm Trail Parkway (SH 121) freeway scenic corridor.
   (b)   Monument signs.
      (1)   Maximum height. Eight feet.
      (2)   Maximum width. Sixteen feet.
      (3)   Maximum advertised message area. Ninety-six square feet.
      (4)   Minimum ground contact. Seventy-five percent of structure’s width.
   (c)   Pylon signs.
      (1)   Maximum height. Eight feet at the right-of-way line and one
additional foot in height for each one foot of setback, up to 20 feet. Setback
sign one foot for each foot in height from all adjacent property lines.
      (2)   Maximum width. Twelve feet.
      (3)   Maximum advertised message area. Two hundred square feet.
      (4)   Minimum ground contact. Fifty percent of structure’s width.
   (d)   Freeway signs.
      (1)   Maximum height. Twenty-five feet allowed at the right-of-way line
and one additional foot in height for each one foot of setback, up to 35 feet.
Setback sign one foot for each foot in height from all adjacent property lines.
(Administrative approval allowed for up to 50 feet in height to allow sign to
be 20 feet above adjacent main travel lanes of freeway.)
      (2)   Maximum width. Twenty-four feet.
      (3)   Maximum advertised message area. Three hundred and twenty square
feet.
      (4)   Minimum ground contact. Twenty-five of structure’s width.
   (e)   Detached signs. One detached sign may be erected on each platted lot
or on property which is subject to a unified sign agreement executed in
accordance with §
6.410. Additional signs may be erected under the following circumstances:
      (1)   On corner lots and through lots and on corner tracts and through
tracts that are subject to a unified sign agreement, one sign shall be allowed
on each street on which the property has frontage;
      (2)   On lots having more than 100 feet of street frontage, more than one
detached sign may be installed provided that such signs are at least 100 feet
apart and the total area of all signs does not exceed the maximum allowable
sign area set forth in subsection (f) below; and
      (3)   On property subject to a unified sign agreement having more than
300 feet of street frontage, more than one detached sign may be installed
provided that such signs are at least 300 feet apart and the total area of all
signs does not exceed the maximum allowable sign area set forth in subsection
(b) above.
   (f)   Maximum allowable sign area.
      (1)   The maximum allowable sign area shall be the lesser of one square
foot of signage per linear foot of street frontage or:
         a.   One hundred and twenty square feet for minor arterials or
neighborhood streets;
         b.   One hundred and sixty-five square feet for major arterials;
         c.   One hundred and ninety-five feet for principal arterials; or
         d.   Six hundred square feet for freeways or toll roads.
      (2)   Street types are as defined in the most recently adopted/amended
master thoroughfare plan.
   (g)   Non-advertised message area. A minimum of 25% of the sign face,
excluding the base, shall contain non-advertised message area (see definition).
The non-advertised message area shall be of construction materials similar to
the building and shall be non-illuminated. The non-advertised message area
shall also be clearly distinct from the sign face and provide a vertical
framing element to the sign.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 23308-08-2018, § 1, passed 8-
7-2018; Ord. 23737-08-2019, § 1, passed 8-6-2019, eff. 9-8-2019)
§ 6.410 UNIFIED SIGN AGREEMENTS FOR ON-PREMISES SIGNS.
   The city council or development services director may authorize the
consideration of a single premises with multiple tenants or a single premises
of two or more adjacent lots or two or more lots that are separated only by
right-of-way for the purpose of erecting on-premise signs, if a unified sign
agreement is approved and executed in accordance with this section.
   (a)   Lots eligible for unified sign agreement.
      (1)   Two or more adjacent lots. In order to be considered to be
adjacent, lots must be immediately adjacent to each other and not at cross
corners or connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency
access easements. Lots separated by right-of-way must be directly across the
right-of-way and, except for the right-of-way, must be adjacent and not at
cross corners or connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as
emergency access easements.
      (2)   Single lot. A single platted lot commercial development which
contains multiple tenants.
   (b)   Criteria for approval. In deciding whether to approve a single lot
commercial development or multiple lots as a single premises for a unified sign
agreement, the following criteria shall be considered:
      (1)   All areas to be combined in the unified sign agreement must be part
of a clearly defined unified commercial or industrial development constructed
as a single destination point for customers and visitors. Attributes of a
unified commercial or industrial development include:
         a.   Common name identification to the public;
         b.   Shared parking provided throughout the development;
         c.   Sign structures utilized for shared signage, including
identification of the common name of the development;
         d.   Physical layout of the development results in a cohesive
development; and
         e.   The area should not be the combination of disparate premises
joined solely for the purpose of initiating a unified sign agreement.
      (2)   The signage proposed pursuant to a unified sign agreement must
demonstrate an overall reduction in sign clutter as evidenced by a reduction of
50% in the number of signs that would be allowed in the absence of a unified
sign agreement;
      (3)   No more than 50% of the advertised message area may be used by one
tenant;
      (4)   A unified sign agreement shall be authorized only in an “E” or more
intensive zoning district; and
      (5)   Property can be subject to only one unified sign agreement.
   (c)   Allowed signage.
      (1)   Upon approval of a unified sign agreement, all existing signs shall
be removed or brought into compliance with this subsection (c). All new signs
constructed pursuant to the agreement and all existing signs remaining on the
property shall comply with this subsection (c). Existing signs shall not be
considered to be nonconforming as a result of erection of signs in accordance
with the agreement.
      (2)   Within the area of the unified sign agreement, spacing between
detached signs shall be a minimum of 300 feet.
      (3)   The allowed size and height of signs shall be calculated as
provided for in §
6.407, except that the length and width of any right-of-way separating lots
within the area shall not be counted toward allowable sign square footage.
      (4)   For street frontages greater than 1,000 linear feet, the maximum
allowable sign area shall be calculated as one square foot of signage per
linear foot of street frontage.
      (5)   Entry features of construction materials similar to the building
and other detached signs shall be allowed for commercial or industrial
developments over five acres provided that:
         a.   The entry signs must be located on a major arterial or street of
higher classification;
         b.   The entry signs are attached to a wall or entry feature;
         c.   Maximum height of the feature is 25 feet;
         d.   Signage is limited to 80 square feet with a maximum height of ten
feet;
         e.   One feature is permitted per frontage; and
         f.   The feature must be located within 50 feet of an entry driveway.
   (d)   Sign plan required.
      (1)   A sign plan covering the entire area included in the unified sign
agreement shall be submitted to the development services director for approval.
The sign plan shall contain the following information:
         a.   The location, size and height of all existing and proposed signs;
         b.   Description of development within the area of the unified sign
agreement demonstrating the attributes of a unified commercial or industrial
development as described in subsection (b)(1) above; and
         c.   Demonstrated compliance with subsection (b)(2) above, showing an
overall reduction in sign clutter as evidenced by a reduction of 50% in the
number of detached signs.
      (2)   A copy of the sign plan shall be attached to the unified sign
agreement and may be amended only with the approval of the development services
director, upon compliance with the requirements set out in subsections (c) and
(d) above.
   (e)   Findings. The development services director may administratively
approve a unified sign agreement, if on the basis of the sign plan submitted
the director finds that all of the above requirements are met without the
necessity of any variances. If the director finds that variances from the above
requirements are necessary for height and size, consideration of the variance
(s) shall be by the board of adjustment with final approval of the unified sign
agreement by the city council.
   (f)   Notice of decision. Upon review of a unified sign agreement requesting
variance(s) for height, size or location of a unified sign agreement by the
development services director and after consideration by the board of
adjustment, notice shall be sent by regular United States mail to all property
owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the area included in the agreement,
as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll. Such notice
shall provide a description of the unified sign agreement and the location of
the area included in the agreement. The notice shall be mailed no later than 30
days prior to consideration of the unified sign agreement by the city council.
   (g)   Execution, amendment, termination and filing of unified sign
agreements.
      (1)   The unified sign agreement shall:
         a.   Contain the names and addresses of the owners and the legal
descriptions of all properties within the unified sign agreement;
         b.   State that all parties agree that the properties covered by the
agreement may be collectively treated as a single premises for the limited
purpose of determining the number, size and location of on-premises signs
permitted in accordance with this section;
         c.   State that the agreement constitutes a covenant running with the
land with respect to all properties subject to the agreement;
         d.   State that all parties agree to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Fort Worth from and against all claims or liabilities
arising out of or in connection with the agreement;
         e.   State that the agreement will be governed by the laws of the
State of Texas;
         f.   State that the agreement may be amended or terminated only in
accordance with subsection (g)(2)b. below;
         g.   Be approved by the city council or development services director
and approved as to form by the city attorney;
         h.   Be signed by all owners of the properties included in the
agreement; and
         i.   Be signed by all lien holders, other than taxing entities that
have either an interest in the lots covered by the agreement or an improvement
on those properties.
      (2)   A unified sign agreement may be amended or terminated as follows:
         a.   The amendment or termination agreement shall be executed by all
owners of the properties included in the unified sign agreement, and all lien
holders, other than a taxing entity, that have an interest in land covered by
the agreement or an improvement on such land;
         b.   A termination agreement shall be approved by the development
services director if all signs on the property governed by the agreement are in
compliance with city sign regulations, as if no unified sign agreement had been
executed. Any signs that are not in compliance shall be removed or brought into
compliance prior to approval of the agreement by the development services
director; and
         c.   In considering whether to approve an amendment to a unified sign
agreement, the development services director shall consider the criteria for
approval of unified sign agreements set out in subsection (b) above.
      (3)   A unified sign agreement or an agreement to amend or terminate such
an agreement is not effective until the agreement is approved by the
development services director and approved as to form by the city attorney, the
agreement is filed in the deed records in the county in which the property is
located, and two file-marked copies of the agreement are delivered to the
development services director.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18995-01-2010, § 1, passed 1-
12-2010; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 6.411 ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS.
   (a)   Electronic changeable copy signs may be permitted by special exception
of the board of adjustment in commercial, industrial, mixed-use and community
facility zoning districts, subject to the following conditions. Provided
however, electronic changeable copy signs shall not be allowed within the
Chisholm Trail Parkway (SH 121) freeway scenic corridor.
      (1)   A maximum of 25% of the sign face may be devoted to changeable
copy.
      (2)   The message rate shall not change at a rate faster than one message
every 20 seconds.
      (3)   Electronic changeable copy signs shall not contain animation,
rolling or running letters or message, flashing lights or displays as part of
the display.
      (4)   On detached signs, electronic changeable copy shall be limited to
monument signs, except where pylon and freeway signs are allowed under §
6.409.
      (5)   Electronic changeable copy signs shall have automatic dimming
technology installed limiting the sign to no more than 0.3 footcandles above
ambient light, measured at a distance equaling the square root of the product
of the sign's square footage multiplied by 100. The distance shall be rounded
to the closest whole number.
      (6)   All sound shall be prohibited.
   (b)   The board of adjustment shall not grant variances which are less
restrictive than the conditions of the special exception.
   (c)   In granting the special exception, the board of adjustment shall
consider the following:
      (1)   the presence of other electronic changeable copy signs in the
vicinity;
      (2)   the visibility from residential districts;
      (3)   the street classification of the adjacent roadways; and
      (4)   the proximity to scenic areas or corridors.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 5, passed 8-
4-2009; Ord. 21716- 04-2015, § 1, passed 47-2015, eff. 4-25-2015; Ord. 23737-
08-2019, § 1, passed 8-6-2019, eff. 9-8-2019)
§ 6.412 SALES OFFICE AND MODEL HOME SIGNS.
   Sales office and model home signs (signs identifying a developer’s sales
office/model home sites) are subject to the following.
   (a)   Signs shall not exceed a maximum size of 32 square feet.
   (b)   Signs shall be not exceed a maximum height of six feet.
   (c)   No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
   (d)   Only one sign advertising a model home may be permitted per builder in
the subdivision.
   (e)   Sign must be located on the site of the model home/sales office and
shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way.
   (f)   Model home sign shall be allowed only after a certificate of occupancy
has been issued for the model home.
   (g)   No sign may be erected for more than two years.
   (h)   Signs shall meet all requirements of the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code), including permitting requirements.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 6.413 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Permitted alteration of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign may
be altered only as follows, subject to complying with permitting requirements
set out in the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code):
      (1)   The sign may be upgraded in accordance with subsection (b) below;
      (2)   Advertising copy, including letters, symbols, or other matter on
the sign, may be changed, including the exchange of display faces that are
designed to be interchangeable to facilitate the display of advertising copy;
provided, however, display faces that are designed to be permanently attached
to the supporting sign structure may be replaced only with display faces
composed of like materials, e.g., a plywood display face may be replaced only
with a plywood display face. Display faces may be replaced only with display
faces that are the same size or smaller than the size initially registered as
of January 2, 1998, in accordance with §
5.01 of
Chapter 29 of the sign code, plus cut-out extensions that do not exceed 20% of
the registered sign area. The temporary use of a sign with a display face that
is smaller than the size that was initially registered shall not bar the
replacement of the display face with a larger display face, provided that it
shall not exceed the size reflected in the initial registration.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, vinyl, paint or pasted paper
may be affixed to a display face composed of any material;
      (3)   A sign which has been blown down or otherwise destroyed by wind,
fire or damages from any other source, may be repaired, provided that the cost
of repairing the sign is 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same
type at the same location, or less. If the cost of repairing the sign is more
than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same
location, the sign may not be altered, reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and
the owner shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance with the zoning
ordinance, the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) and all other applicable ordinances;
      (4)   a.   Maintenance operations may be performed on the sign. For
purposes of this section, MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS means the process of keeping a
sign in good repair.
         b.   Maintenance operations include:
            1.   Cleaning;
            2.   Painting;
            3.   Repair of parts with like materials in a manner that does not
alter the basic design or structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all
repairs performed during any consecutive 365-day period is not more than 60% of
the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location; and
            4.   Replacement of parts with like materials in a manner that does
not alter the basic design or structure of the sign, provided that the cost of
all replacement of parts performed during any consecutive 365-day period is not
more than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same
location.
         c.   The 365-day period limitation shall not apply to a sign that has
been blown down or otherwise destroyed as described in subsection (a)(3) above.
         d.   Examples of actions that are not maintenance operations and are
therefore prohibited include, without limitation:
            1.   Converting a sign from a multiple pole structure to a monopole
structure;
            2.   Replacing wooden components with metal components;
            3.   Increasing the area or height of a sign, except for increases
in area permitted under subsection (a)(2) above;
            4.   Adding illumination to a non-illuminated sign;
            5.   Adding additional display faces;
            6.   Converting a sign to utilize animated display or moveable copy
technology, including but not limited to signs featuring Tri-Vision technology;
and
            7.   Updating the technology in an already existing animated
display or moveable copy signs.
         e.   If a sign is dismantled for any purpose other than an alteration
or maintenance operation permitted hereunder, the sign may not be altered,
reconstructed, repaired or replaced, and the owner shall remove the sign or
bring it into compliance with this ordinance, the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) and all other applicable ordinances.
      (5)   All other alterations of any nature whatsoever in connection with
nonconforming signs are prohibited. If any such alteration is performed, the
owner shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance with the comprehensive
zoning ordinance, the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) and all other applicable ordinances. The cost of
any accessory use to a sign, including without limitation a communication
antenna and support facilities, shall not be included in calculating the cost
of erecting a new sign at the same location pursuant to subsections (a)(3) and
(a)(4) above.
   (b)   Upgrading existing off-premises signs. In order to encourage the
removal of off-premises signs from designated scenic areas and corridors, an
owner may upgrade an existing off-premises sign, with city council approval,
under the conditions set out below.
      (1)   Definition of “upgrading.” For purposes of this section, UPGRADING
means making any change to an existing off-premises sign, other than repairs
and maintenance operations permitted pursuant to subsection (a) above,
provided, however, signs erected on buildings and multiple signs located within
25 feet of each other on the same structure or separate structures shall not be
upgraded. Upgrading of off-premises signs shall be permitted only in areas that
have not been designated as a scenic area or corridor pursuant to §
6.402. Upgrading of off-premises signs in designated scenic areas is
prohibited.
      (2)   Calculation of credits for removal of off-premises signs.
         a.   Any person wishing to upgrade an off-premises sign must remove
four off-premises signs from designated scenic areas or corridors and must have
square footage credits, as defined below, equal to the size of the sign to be
upgraded. No credit will be given for signs that have not been registered in
accordance with §
5.01 of
Chapter 29 of the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code).
         b.   The planning and development department shall create an account
for each sign owner showing the date of removal and the location and dimensions
of the signs removed. The account shall reflect two types of sign credits, as
follows:
            1.   One-fourth credit for each off-premises sign that is removed
(“structure credit”); and
            2.   One-fourth credit for each square foot of display area that is
removed, excluding cut-out extensions (“square footage credit”). The number of
square footage credits awarded shall be equal to the display area of the sign,
and shall not be increased if copy is displayed on more than one side of the
sign.
         c.   Any sign credits not used within five years of their creation
shall expire.
         d.   A sign owner may transfer sign credits; provided, however, the
transfer does not extend the five-year term of such credits.
      (3)   Use of sign credits for upgrading off-premises sign.
         a.   A permit to upgrade an off-premises sign shall be issued only if
the applicant has at least one structure credit and sufficient square footage
credits. When the permit to upgrade the existing sign is issued, the
development department shall deduct from the sign owner’s account:
            1.   One structure credit for each sign to be upgraded; and
            2.   Square footage credits equal to the square footage of display
area of the sign to be upgraded.
         b.   Example: One 672 square foot sign (with advertising copy on one
side only or on both sides) can be upgraded by using one structure credit and
672 square footage credits. In order to earn one structure credit and 672
square footage credits, it would be necessary to remove four off-premises signs
with display areas totaling 2,688 square feet.
      (4)   Procedure for removal of off-premises signs. Any person wishing to
obtain sign credits for removal of an off-premises sign shall submit written
notice of intent to remove the sign to the development department, before
taking any action to remove the sign. The notice shall be submitted on a form
provided by the development department. No sign credits shall be awarded for
any off-premises sign that is removed before the notice of intent is submitted
to and accepted by the development department, except as set forth below.
Eligibility for credit shall be determined as follows.
         a.   Illegal signs. No sign credits will be awarded for removal of
illegal off-premises signs.
         b.   Nonconforming signs that have been illegally altered. No sign
credits will be awarded for illegally altered nonconforming signs that are
required to be removed in accordance with subsection (a) above.
         c.   Signs removed pursuant to eminent domain. No sign credits will be
awarded for removal of signs for which compensation is paid pursuant to eminent
domain proceedings.
         d.   Removal of damaged nonconforming signs. No sign credits will be
awarded for the removal of a nonconforming sign that is blown down or otherwise
destroyed by wind, fire or damages from any other source, where the cost of
repairing the sign is more than 60% of the cost of erecting a new sign of the
same type at the same location. If the damaged nonconforming sign can be
repaired at a cost of 60% or less of the cost of erecting a new sign, the owner
may elect to repair the sign. In the alternative, the owner may remove the sign
and receive sign credits for the removal. The owner shall submit a notice of
intent to the development department before removing the sign, unless the
immediate removal of the damaged sign is required because it presents a safety
hazard.
      (5)   No increase in area or height. An off-premises sign with a display
area exceeding 672 square feet that is upgraded in accordance with this section
shall be reduced to no larger than 672 square feet. The display area of a sign
that is 672 square feet or less in size may not be increased as a result of the
upgrade. No height increase is allowed for any upgraded sign.
      (6)   Zoning commission recommendation and city council approval
required. The zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the upgrade
request and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. No off-
premises sign may be upgraded without city council approval after a public
hearing. Notice of the zoning commission and city council hearings shall be
given in accordance with §
3.502.
      (7)   No violation of federal or state law. Nothing herein shall permit a
nonconforming sign to be upgraded in violation of any federal or state law.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 6.414 KIOSK SIGNS.
   Kiosk signs provide a uniform, coordinated method of providing homeowners,
developers and municipalities a means of utilizing directional signs, while
minimizing the negative impacts to the city and its residents. Kiosk signs
shall be used for homebuilder, developer and subdivision directional signage.
Kiosk signs are also intended to provide service to the public on directions to
municipal facilities and parks.
   (a)   The development services director may approve and permit kiosk signs
subject to the following requirements and limitations.
      (1)   All kiosk signs and individual sign panels must have approval by
the city. Fees for kiosk signs shall be as set forth in
Chapter 2, Article XII of the city code.
      (2)   Placement and installation of kiosk signs must be in accordance
with specifications. A site plan must be submitted to the planning and
development department for review and approval. The department of
transportation and public works must approve the location of all kiosk signs
prior to installation.
      (3)   Sign structures shall be located at least 100 feet apart from each
other, excluding signs located across a street from each other.
      (4)   Directional kiosk signs shall not obstruct the use of sidewalks and
walkways, and shall not obstruct visibility triangles designated by the city
for vehicles, pedestrians or traffic-control signs.
      (5)   In the event a kiosk sign is not constructed within 60 days after
the date of issuance of a kiosk sign permit, such permit shall expire.
      (6)   Kiosk sign structures shall be ladder type with individual sign
panels of uniform height and background color. Dimensions shall be as follows:
         a.   Six feet by four feet;
         b.   Eight feet by four feet;
         c.   Ten feet by four feet; and
         d.   Twelve feet by four feet.
      (7)   Kiosk signs may be located on private property, provided written
permission is obtained from the property owner. Such kiosk signs shall not
exceed the dimensions of four feet by 12 feet in height.
      (8)   Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated.
      (9)   Kiosk signs installations shall include break away design features
as required in right-of-way areas, as depicted in Texas department of
transportation’s Sign Mounting Details for Roadside Signs.
      (10)   No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or
other appurtenances shall be placed on the directional kiosk signs.
      (11)   In the event the contractor/developer is unable to provide a kiosk
sign for infill or smaller development tracts, the developer may work with the
development services director or designee to develop a signage plan for that
particular development.
   (b)   Services contract: The city council may, by a duly executed services
contract, grant to a qualified person or company the right to design, erect and
maintain directional kiosk signs within the city.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-
4-2020)
§ 6.415 NONCOMMERCIAL COPY.
   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign
authorized under this article to contain commercial copy may contain
noncommercial copy in lieu of commercial copy.
(Ord. 17872-11-2007, § 1, passed 11-6-2007)
ARTICLE 5: RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 6.500 ACCESS THROUGH RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   A driveway or walk on private property in a one- or two-family district
shall not provide access for uses in the “CR” district through the “K”
district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 6.501 LOT AREA WHERE NOT SERVED BY SANITARY SEWER.
   In areas not served by sanitary sewer the minimum lot area per family shall
be subject to the approval of the county department of health.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 6.502 TWO DETACHED DWELLING UNITS ON ONE LOT.
   (a)   Access. Ingress and egress shall be made available to both dwelling
units located upon the lot or site by paved driveways operating in such a
fashion that independent access shall be provided each unit through the
installation of separate driveways. If one unit is to the rear of the lot
behind a second unit, a back-up turn-around shall be provided. A parking space
shall be provided adjacent to each unit.
   (b)   Building separation. Minimum building separation of ten feet shall be
maintained.
   (c)   Landscaping. All yards shall be planted in ground cover except for
those areas occupied by building, driveways, sidewalks, flower beds, tree wells
and other landscaped areas.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 6.503 RESERVED.
Editor's note:
Ord. 21672-03-2015, § 3, adopted March 3, 2015, repealed § 6.503, which
pertained to zero lot line dwellings. See §§
4.708,
4.709. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.504 RESERVED.
Editor's note:
Ord. 21672-03-2015, § 3, adopted March 3, 2015, repealed § 6.504, which
pertained to cluster housing in the "R1" district. See §§
4.708,
4.709. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.505 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
Ord. 21672-03-2015, § 3, adopted March 3, 2015, repealed § 6.504, which
pertained to townhouse or cluster housing in the "R2" district. See §§
4.708,
4.709. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.506 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Section 4 of Ord. 23495-12-2018, adopted December 4, 2018, repealed § 6.506,
Unified Residential Development, derived from Ord. 13896, adopted October 12,
1999. See also Code Comparative Table.
§ 6.507 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   One-family dwellings must comply with the following standards.
   (a)   Elevation. The intent of this subsection is to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the City of Fort Worth and its citizens through
the adoption and enforcement of one-family dwelling unit design standards that
limit the effects of repetition and uniformity by requiring substantive
variation and diversity in front elevations within a certain lot pattern. The
elevations for one-family dwelling units within a six (6) lot pattern must be
sufficiently differentiated from each other and from any one-family dwelling
unit that is two (2) lots removed on either side of the subject property on the
same side of the street, as generally depicted below and otherwise set forth
herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8890.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8892.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8894.png]
      (1)   For a one-family dwelling unit to be deemed sufficiently
differentiated, i.e., different façade elevation, either Subsection a. or b.
below must be met:
         a.   One of the following elements is met:
            i.   Different number of full stories, except where there are two
or more dwellings of the same number of stories within the applicable lot
pattern in which case the three elements in subsection b. must be satisfied; or
            ii.   Side-loaded garage, except where there are two or more
dwellings with a side-loaded garage within the applicable lot pattern in which
case the three elements in subsection b. must be satisfied.
         b.   Three of the following elements are met:
            i.   Change in roofline that is at least 50% of the width of the
front elevation;
            ii.   Change in roof pitch of at least two (2) units of change as
measured by a roof's vertical rise over its horizontal span (e.g., 6/12 pitch
to 8/12 pitch);
            iii.   Inclusion or exclusion of a front porch or front entry
structure, or change in height of a front porch roof of at least four (4) feet.
A porch must be a minimum of four (4) feet in depth to create a functional
space;
            iv.   Difference in number of dormers;
            v.   Change in number of front facing garage bay doors;
            vi.   Garages recessed or projected by a minimum increment of four
(4) feet;
            vii.   Change in exterior materials covering 50% or more of the
wall coverage on the front façade (excluding openings);
            viii.   Addition of a bay window that projects a minimum of one
foot from the front wall, as measured from the ground up; or
            ix.   Difference in number of windows, provided there is at least
two (2) feet of separation between windows when two (2) or more windows are
present.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8896.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8898.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8900.png]
 
      (2)   The below items will not be considered when evaluating the above-
stated elements:
         a.   Change in paint or material color;
         b.   Change in roof pitch of less than two (2) units of change as
measured by a roof's vertical rise over its horizontal span (e.g., 6/12 pitch
to 7/12 pitch);
         c.   Change in roofline of less than 50% of the width of the front
elevation;
         d.   Minor changes in exterior architectural features;
         e.   Same proportions of exterior features, including flipped or
mirrored façade elevation; and
         f.   Changes in roof material, including, without limitation,
composition and metal roofs.
   (b)   Exterior walls. Exterior walls shall consist of a minimum of 50%
masonry. Exposures to a minor arterial or wider street shall required 100%
masonry construction except where such building face is obscured by a minimum
six-foot masonry wall. “Masonry” shall include brick, stone, cementitious fiber
concrete products or stucco. Similar products made from such materials and/or
durable recycled material shall be allowed as approved by the building
official.
   (c)   Attached garages. No attached garage facing a public or private street
may project greater than eight feet in front of the front wall of the house in
all single-family districts.
   (d)   Infill house. An infill house shall be required to have one minimum
three-inch caliper front yard tree of choice, and one minimum three-foot
caliper street parkway tree as approved by the city forester. In all instances,
a minimum of 40% canopy cover per lot must be achieved in accordance with §
6.302.
   (e)   Horizontal dimension. A minimum horizontal dimension of 15 feet shall
be required.
(Ord. 16925, § 1, passed 5-2-2006; Ord. 17513, § 1, passed 4-17-2007; Ord.
18615-05-2009, § 3, passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 18823-09-2009, § 2, passed 9-15-
2009; Ord. 23430-09-2018, § 1, 9-25-2018)
§ 6.508 ENTRY FEATURES.
   Entry features may be located at the entry to a subdivision subject to the
following.
   (a)   Entry feature must be located on a collector or wider street;
   (b)   Entry feature is limited to 25 feet with a minimum side and rear
setback of five feet. No front setback along the street right-of-way is
required;
   (c)   Entry signs must be freestanding or attached to a wall or entry
feature; and
   (d)   Signage is limited to 60 square feet and a maximum height of six feet
with a maximum illumination of 25 lumens.
(Ord. 16926, § 2, passed 5-2-2006)
CHAPTER 7: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
   
7.100   Continuation of nonconforming use
   
7.101   Additions, alterations, extensions, repairs
   
7.102   Discontinuation of nonconforming use
   
7.103   Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses
   
7.104   Restoration of partially destroyed building
   
7.105   Subsequent amendments to zoning ordinance
   
7.106   Nonconforming lot of record
   
7.107   Specific nonconforming uses
   
7.108   Exercise of eminent domain
§ 7.100 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the passage of an
ordinance making the use nonconforming may be continued, although such use does
not conform with the provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout
the building provided no structural alterations, except those required by law
or ordinance, are made therein. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or more restricted classification. If such nonconforming building is
removed, every future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 7.101 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, EXTENSIONS, REPAIRS.
   (a)   Nonconforming as to yards or height. Additions, alterations and
extensions to buildings and structures which are nonconforming as to yards or
height only shall be permitted without necessity of board of adjustment
approval, provided that the portions added, altered or extended shall fully
comply with all zoning regulations.
   (b)   No structural alterations. Repairs and alterations may be made to a
nonconforming building provided that no structural alterations shall be made
except those required by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 7.102 DISCONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (a)   General. The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of
an ordinance making the use nonconforming, although such does not conform to
the provisions hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is
discontinued, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance.
   (b)   Reversion not allowed. A nonconforming use if changed to conforming
use may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming
use if changed to a more restricted nonconforming use may not thereafter be
changed unless to an equal or to a more restricted use.
   (c)   Resumption of discontinued nonconforming use not allowed.
      (1)   A nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, shall not be
resumed. DISCONTINUANCE or ABANDONMENT shall be defined as follows:
         a.   When land used for a nonconforming use shall cease to be used in
a bona fide manner for one calendar month;
         b.   When a building designed or arranged for a nonconforming use
shall cease to be used in a bona fide manner as a nonconforming use for a
continuous period of 24 consecutive calendar months; and
         c.   When a building designed or arranged for a conforming use shall
cease to be used in a bona fide manner as a nonconforming use for a period of
12 consecutive calendar months.
      (2)   Upon evidence of hardship, the board of adjustment shall have the
power to extend the above time limits not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 7.103 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR NONCONFORMING USES.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all nonconforming uses.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 7.104 RESTORATION OF PARTIALLY DESTROYED BUILDING.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be taken to prevent the restoration of a
building destroyed to the extent of not more than 75% of its reasonable value,
by fire, explosion or other casualty, or act of God, or the public enemy, nor
the continued occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed
at the time of such partial destruction. Further, nothing in this chapter shall
be taken to require a bufferyard, screening fence or building setback as
identified in §
6.300, in order to restore a building that may have been partially destroyed by
fire, explosion, or other casualty, or act of God, or the public enemy when
such building is located on land adjacent to property or across the alley from
property that for any reason is or has been rezoned to a one- or two-family
district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 7.105 SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE.
   (a)   Uses, yards or buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall also
apply to uses, yards or buildings made nonconforming by subsequent amendments
to zoning regulations.
   (b)   One family dwelling. Any existing one family dwelling, made
nonconforming by the passage of a subsequent ordinance, may be altered or added
to, provided such additions or alterations meet the requirements of the one
family district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 23111-02-2018, § 1, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 7.106 NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD.
   (a)   (1)   Where a lot of record created by plat has less width or lot area
than this ordinance requires in the “A-2.5A” one-family through the “A-5” one-
family residential zoning districts, the district standard for lot width or lot
area shall not prohibit the erection of a detached one-family dwelling or an
accessory structure associated with a detached one-family dwelling as allowed
by the applicable one-family zoning district standards, provided that:
         a.   The lot size is at least 5,000 square feet and the lot width is
at least 50 feet; or
         b.   In an “A-5” one-family district, the lot size and lot width do
not vary more than 10% from the applicable standard.
      (2)   In accordance with the subdivision ordinance, property may not be
platted or replatted into lots that do not meet the minimum lot width or lot
size required by the applicable zoning district.
   (b)   Where a lot of record created by plat has less width or lot area than
this ordinance requires in the “A-2.5A” One-Family through the “A-5” One-Family
residential zoning districts, the district standards shall not prohibit the
reconstruction of a detached one-family dwelling to the original footprint of
the dwelling, provided such reconstruction is necessary due to fire, explosion
or other casualty, act of God, or the public enemy. The owner must apply for a
building permit within two years of the original destruction.
   (c)   A detached one-family dwelling may not be constructed or reconstructed
on a nonconforming lot of record unless:
      (1)   Permitted under subsections (a) or (b) above; or
      (2)   The combined lot area and lot width of the nonconforming lot with
an adjacent lot or lots under the same ownership comply with the zoning
standards of the district.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 17822, § 1, passed 10-2-2007)
§ 7.107 SPECIFIC NONCONFORMING USES.
   (a)   Nonconforming motor vehicle junk or storage yard. Any motor vehicle
junk yard or storage yard existing on September 15, 1987, which does not comply
with the provisions for motor vehicle junk yards or storage yards shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses were permitted to continue
to operate as a nonconforming use until September 15, 1990, at which time they
were deemed illegal.
   (b)   Existing nonconforming pawnshops. Any pawnshop legally in existence on
January 17, 1987, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and shall meet all
requirements for nonconforming uses; provided, however, that any such existing
pawnshop which is nonconforming only as to the distance restrictions contained
in §
5.125(a) that is destroyed by fire, explosion or other casualty, or act of God,
or the public enemy, may be restored or rebuilt and such nonconforming use may
be continued regardless of the extent of destruction to the building.
   (c)   Nonconforming sexually oriented businesses.
      (1)   Except for nonconforming adult entertainment cabarets subject to
subsection (d) below, a sexually oriented business otherwise lawfully operating
prior to December 21, 1993, that is in violation of the 1,000 foot distance
regulation of §
5.200B shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be voluntarily
changed by the operator to a conforming zoning use.
      (2)   If two or more sexually oriented businesses are located within
1,000 feet of one another and otherwise lawfully operating, the sexually
oriented business which was first established and continually operating is
deemed the conforming use and the later established business is deemed the
nonconforming use.
   (d)   Nonconforming adult entertainment cabarets.
      (1)   An adult entertainment cabaret serving or providing alcoholic
beverages in conjunction with the sexually oriented business activity and
otherwise lawfully operating prior to December 21, 1993, that is in violation
of the 1,000 foot distance regulation of §
5.200B shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be voluntarily
changed by the operator to a conforming use.
      (2)   In lieu of the amortization process authorized pursuant to state
law and the city’s prior versions of this article, a one-time exemption
(“grandfather status”) from the enforcement of the 1,000-foot distance
regulations only as established by §
5.200(b) (formerly § 18.B.) was provided to the operators as of December 21,
1993 of the following six existing adult entertainment cabaret locations that
also serve or provide alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sexually
oriented business activity:
         a.   “Honky Tonk,” 2412 East Belknap;
         b.   “Illusions,” 7405 Highway 80 West;
         c.   “New Orleans Nights,” 7101 Calmont Street;
         d.   “Second Time Around,” 1603 N. E. 28th Street;
         e.   “The Showgirl,” 4617 Highway 377 South; and
         f.   “Sinbad’s,” 8128 Highway 80 West.
      (3)   Hereafter the operators as of December 21, 1993, of each of those
locations listed in subsection (d)(2) above may continue to operate as an adult
entertainment cabaret at their present location so long as the current or
future operator remains in on-going compliance with this zoning ordinance and
other city ordinance applicable to sexually oriented businesses. Any subsequent
increase, enlargement, expansion, extension or alteration of any portion of the
business or property shall automatically terminate this one-time exemption.
      (4)   Each operator as of December 21, 1993 of the adult entertainment
cabarets listed in subsection (d)(2) above was issued one new specialized
certificate of occupancy from the planning and development department upon the
satisfactory completion of an up-to-date application form pursuant to former §
18C, comprehensive zoning ordinance, accompanied with the surrender of the
business’ current certificate of occupancy. No charge or fee was required by
the city for the first new certificate.
      (5)   City enforcement personnel shall also cooperate with the municipal
courts of Fort Worth in seeking dismissal or non-prosecution of any citation
written for violations of § 18A or 18B, comprehensive zoning ordinance, prior
to December 21, 1993, as to the six locations specified in subsection (d)(2)
above.
      (6)   a.   In lieu of the amortization process authorized pursuant to
state law and the city’s prior versions of this article, a one-time exemption
(“grandfather status”) from the enforcement of the limitation to industrial
districts as established by §
5.202 (formerly §
5.200B.) was provided to the operators as of September 27, 2004 of the
following existing adult entertainment cabaret locations that also serve,
provide or allow the consumption or the sale of alcoholic beverages in
conjunction with the sexually oriented business activity:
Baby Dolls Topless Bar  3601 Highway 157
Bright Lights Video 2   10355 North Freeway
Franks Wild Life Club   11050 George Court
Golden Goddess          9727 South Freeway
Honky Tonk Topless Bar  2412 E. Belknap Street
House of Babes          9317 South Freeway
Illusions Men’s Club  7405 Highway 80 W.
Main Stage Topless Bar  5000 Mark IV Parkway
New Orleans Nights      7101 Calmont Avenue
Showcase Cabaret        3929 Highway 157
Showcase II Topless Bar 1928 Josh Road
Showgirls Topless Bar   4617 Highway 377 S.
Sinbads Topless Bar     8128 Hwy 80 W.
Texas Cabaret           1300 Northeast Loop 820
X-Otic Club             719 N. Main Street
T&A                     8701 South Freeway
 
         b.   Hereafter, the operator as of September 27, 2004 of each of those
locations listed in subsection (d)(6)a. above may continue to operate as an
adult entertainment cabaret at their present location and zoning classification
so long as the operator remains in on-going compliance with this zoning
ordinance and the other city ordinances applicable to sexually oriented
businesses.
      (7)   a.   In lieu of the amortization process authorized pursuant to
state law and the city’s prior versions of this article, a one-time exemption
(“grandfather status”) from the enforcement of the 1,500 foot distance
requirement on I-30 and I-35 as established by §
5.202 (formerly §
5.200B.) was provided to the operators as of September 27, 2004 of the existing
adult entertainment cabaret locations listed in subsection (d)(6) above that
also serve, provide or allow the consumption or the sale of alcoholic beverages
in conjunction with the sexually oriented business activity.
         b.   Hereafter, the operator as of September 27, 2004 of each of those
locations listed in subsection (d)(6) above may continue to operate as an adult
entertainment cabaret at their present location and zoning classification so
long as the operator remains in on-going compliance with this zoning ordinance
and the other city ordinances applicable to sexually oriented businesses.
      (8)   The one-time exemption from the enforcement of the 1,000 or 1,500
foot distance or zoning category regulation, as applicable, shall not in any
way affect or prejudice the right of the City of Fort Worth to enforce any
other ordinance, existing or subsequently enacted, regulating sexually oriented
business activity.
   (e)   Nonconforming one-family or two-family carports. Notwithstanding any
provisions in the ordinance to the contrary, any carport which was added to the
front of a one-family or two-family residence before January 18, 2003 (as
verified by aerial photos from January 1, 2003) shall be deemed legal
nonconforming and may continue to exist subject to the following:
         a.   The owner of the property applied for a special exception from
the board of adjustment prior to September 1, 2004;
         b.   An application for a building permit for the front yard carport
on the property is filed with the city prior to March 1, 2008; and
         c.   The building permit for the front yard carport is finaled by the
city no later than one year after the application date of the initial filed
building permit unless an extension of time to receive the finaled building
permit is approved by the development services director or his or her designee.
   (f)   Nonconforming parking for multifamily uses. Parking for multifamily
units approved prior to the adoption of the unified residential development
standards effective March 1, 1971, shall be permitted to meet the prior parking
standard of one parking space per four dwelling units plus one parking space
per four bedrooms in excess of one bedroom per unit.
   (g)   Nonconforming hotel screening fence. Any screening fence erected along
the perimeter of any hotel property adjacent to a street, alley or right-of-way
prior to December 14, 1986, was required to be relocated or removed no later
than January 1, 1990.
   (h)   Nonconforming signs. See §
6.405.
   (i)   Docks, piers and boathouses. A property owner wanting to claim legal
nonconforming status under this chapter must register with the City of Fort
Worth, planning and development department by December 31, 2011. The
registration must include a digital photo of the existing dock.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 16000, § 1, passed 6-8-2004; Ord. 16118, §
4, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 16244, § 1, passed 12-21-2004; Ord. 17522, § 5,
passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 17698, § 1, passed 8-9-2007; Ord. 19515-01-2011, § 3,
passed 1-4-2011; Ord. 24030-02-2020, § 22, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 7.108 EXERCISE OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
   A lot, tract or parcel occupied by a lawful structure that complies with the
development regulations or a use of land that complies with the use regulations
shall not be rendered nonconforming due to the acquisition of right-of-way by
the exercise of eminent domain or threat of eminent domain by a governmental
entity. Such designation shall apply only to noncompliance that results from
the acquisition of right-of-way, but shall not apply to noncompliance that
results from future zoning ordinance amendments.
(Ord. 18104, § 1, passed 5-20-2008)
CHAPTER 8: ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
8.100   Enforcement agent
   
8.101   Violations and penalties
   
8.102   Additional remedies
§ 8.100 ENFORCEMENT AGENT.
   It shall be the duty of the city manager, through the proper department, to
enforce this ordinance.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 8.101 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Maximum fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined not more than $2,000 for
each offense. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   Minimum fine one previous conviction within three years. If it is
shown on trial of an alleged offense under this ordinance that within three
years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has been once previously
convicted of an offense under this ordinance:
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (b)(2) below, upon conviction the
defendant shall be fined not less than $250; and
      (2)   If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the
defendant was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time
of the alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less
than $1,000.
   (c)   Minimum fine; two or more previous convictions within three years. If
it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this ordinance that within
three years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has been previously
convicted of two or more offenses under this ordinance:
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (c)(2) below, upon conviction the
defendant shall be fined not less than $500; and
      (2)   If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the
defendant was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time
of the alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less
than $2,000.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 14403, § 1, passed 11-7-2000; Ord. 14663,
§ 1, passed 6-12-2001)
§ 8.102 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   If a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or if a building or other structure, or land
is used in violation of any provisions of this ordinance, the city, in addition
to any other remedies, may institute the appropriate action to:
   (a)   Prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
   (b)   Restrain, correct or abate the violation;
   (c)   Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land; or
   (d)   Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use on or about the
premises.
(Ord. 17244, § 1, passed 10-17-2006)
CHAPTER 9: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
9.100   Use of certain words
   
9.101   Defined terms
§ 9.100 USE OF CERTAIN WORDS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance certain terms and words are herewith
defined as follows.
   (a)   Words used in the present tense include the future.
   (b)   Words in the singular number include the plural and words in the
plural number include the singular.
   (c)   The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
   (d)   The word “shall” or “will” is mandatory, and not directory.
   (e)   The word “may” is permissive.
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 9.101 DEFINED TERMS.
   ACCESS EASEMENT, PRIVATE COMMON. An area created by plat or separate
instrument filed with the office of the county clerk other than a dedicated
street or place, or an alley, which is maintained free and clear of buildings,
structures and other obstructions for the purpose of providing free passage of
vehicles.
   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. As follows.
      (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING, HABITABLE. A subordinate building on the same
premises as a principal building for exclusive use for accessory uses as
defined in “Accessory Uses,” containing habitable space for living, sleeping or
eating.
      (2)   ACCESSORY BUILDING, NON-HABITABLE. A subordinate building on the
same premises with a principal building for exclusive use for accessory uses as
defined in “Accessory Uses,” including, but not limited to, private workshops
and storage sheds located on residential lots.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is clearly incidental to the use of the principal
building or the primary use of the property and which is located on the same
premises as the primary use.
   ACCIDENTAL POTENTIAL ZONE I (APZ-I ). The rectangular area beyond the clear
zone which still has a measurable potential for aircraft accidents relative to
the clear zone and is 3,000 feet in width by 5,000 feet in length.
   ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE II (APZ-II). The rectangular area beyond the APZ-
I which has a measurable potential for aircraft accidents relative to APZ-I or
the clear zone and is 3,000 feet in width by 7,000 feet in length.
   ACHROMATIC. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, ACHROMATIC is colorless or
lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays,
tans and earth tones. The term does not include black or any bold coloration
that attracts attention.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined
herein.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE AND ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that as
one of its principal business operations offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other
visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas;” or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia, which are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.” This does not include items
used for conception control or for protection from sexually transmitted
diseases.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, lounge or similar commercial
establishment that provides or features to customers live performances by
employees or entertainment personnel which is intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to customers and are distinguished or
characterized by any one or more of the following:
      (1)   An emphasis on the exposure of “specified anatomical areas;”
      (2)   An emphasis on “specified sexual activities;”
      (3)   An emphasis on “semi-nudity,” “nudity,” “state of semi-nudity”
“state of nudity” or “simulated nudity;” or
      (4)   A combination of any of the above.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that rents
or otherwise permits a room to be occupied by the public in exchange for any
form of consideration, that:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public, tenant or occupier of the room
for any television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a
sign visible from the public right-of-way or otherwise advertises the
availability of this type of adult accommodations to the public;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room(s) for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment which regularly
features non-live performances or entertainment such as films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting
or describing “specified sexual activities and/or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities.”
   AD VALOREM TAX LIMITATION. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, AD VALOREM TAX LIMITATION means a program established by law under
which the total amount of taxes that may be assessed by the City would be
capped or frozen based on actual taxes paid in a qualifying year. For purposes
of determining taxes to be paid in a qualifying year, other applicable property
tax exemptions, such as a homestead exemption, will be applied but the historic
site tax exemption would not.
   ADVERSE EFFECT. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, ADVERSE
EFFECT means a direct or indirect effect on the significance or integrity of a
historic property that is or would be caused by an action. An indirect effect
may be caused by an action but may occur later in time or farther removed in
distance but is still reasonably foreseeable.
   AICUZ. The air installation compatible use zone report of the Department of
Defense.
   AIRPORT. The Fort Worth Alliance Airport, Dallas-Fort Worth International
Airport, Fort Worth Meacham International Airport, Naval Air Station Fort Worth
Joint Reserve Base and Fort Worth Spinks Airport located in Tarrant, Dallas,
Denton, Johnson and Tarrant Counties.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The elevation as established in the most current approved
airport layout plan set.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, installation, electronic and/or visual
interference, or use of land or water which obstructs the airspace required for
the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water under the imaginary surfaces
as established in 14 C.F.R. Part 77, “Objects Affecting Navigable Space –
Imaginary Surfaces” upon which an airport hazard might be established if not
prevented as provided in §
4.405.
   AIRPORT HEIGHT CONTROL AREA. The space between the earth’s surface and the
imaginary surfaces as established in 14 C.F.R. Part 77, “Objects Affecting
Navigable Space – Imaginary Surfaces.”
   AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN. A graphic representation of the current and future
airport facilities as determined from the review of the aviation forecasts,
facility requirements and alternatives analysis.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of access to
adjacent property.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves,
excluding satellite dish antennas and antennas accessory to residential uses.
ANTENNAS ANCILLARY TO RESIDENTIAL USES shall mean television antennas and
amateur radio equipment not used for commercial purposes, including ham radio
and CB equipment.
   APARTMENT. A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged,
intended or designed for a place of residence of one family or group of
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
   APPLICANT. 
      (1)   For the purpose of Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, APPLICANT is:
         a.   A person in whose name a specialized certificate of occupancy to
operate a sexually oriented business will be issued;
         b.   Each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented
business as required by this section;
         c.   Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business
for which a specialized certificate of occupancy application is made,
regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the
application;
         d.   Each individual who has a 20% or greater ownership interest in a
sexually oriented business for which a specialized certificate of occupancy
application is made, regardless of whether the individual’s name appears on the
application; and
         e.   Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a
sexually oriented business for which a specialized certificate of occupancy
application is made, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature
appears on the application.
      (2)   For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, an APPLICANT
is a property owner, or a designated and duly authorized representative or
agent of the property owner, that submits an application pursuant to the
Historic Preservation Ordinance; provided, however, that when the city submits
an application, it is not necessary for it to be the property owner.
   AQUAPONICS. The combination of aquaculture (farming of aquatic species) and
hydroponics (plants) to grow food crops or ornamental crops and aquatic species
together in a recirculation system without discharge or exchange of water.
   ARCHEOLOGY. The science or study of the material remains of past life or
activities and physical site, location or context in which they are found, as
delineated in the Department of the Interior’s Archaeological Resources
Protection Act of 1979.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility providing responsible adult supervision
of or assistance with routine living functions of an individual in instances
where the individual’s condition necessitates that supervision or assistance.
   AUTOMOBILE. All passenger cars, as well as light-duty trucks, vans and sport
utility vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA. An open area or lot used for the display or sale of
automobiles, where no repair work is done except minor reconditioning of the
cars to be displayed and sold on the premises, and no dismantling of cars or
sale or keeping of used car parts or junk on the premises is allowed.
   AWNING/CANOPY. A wall mounted, cantilevered structure providing shade and
cover from the sun.
   BALCONY. A cantilevered platform projecting from the wall of an upper-story
of a building with a railing along its outer edge, often with access from a
door or window.
   BASEMENT. A story below the first story as hereinafter defined. See also
STORY.
   BASE-YEAR TAXABLE VALUE. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, the BASE-YEAR TAXABLE VALUE means the taxable value of a structure,
and the land necessary for access to and use of the structure, on the city's
certified appraisal roll as of December 31 of the year prior to the date upon
which the HPO determines that an application for a historic site tax exemption
is complete. For avoidance of doubt and consistent with state law, "taxable
value" as used herein means a property's appraised value less all applicable
property tax exemptions.
   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME. A property with an existing structure as of December
1, 1993, that is designed for and occupied as a one-family residence providing
overnight accommodations to transient guests. The structure serves as the
primary residence or homestead of its owner-operator with the bed and breakfast
home considered to be an accessory use and not the primary use of the property.
The person who owns the property must also be the operator of the
establishment.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A property providing overnight accommodations to
guests operated by an owner and/or operator, with premises being a commercial
enterprise. This term excludes any bed and breakfast home.
   BELT COURSE. A horizontal course of brick or stone flush with or projecting
beyond the face of a building.
   BICYCLE PARKING SPACE. Parking accommodation for one bicycle to a city
approved bicycle rack.
   BICYCLE RACK. The city approved fixture that parks at least two bicycles and
includes at least a four feet wide by six feet long dimension.
   BIORETENTION AREA. Structural stormwater areas, including dry and wet
swales, which capture and treat runoff using soils and vegetation in shallow
basins or landscaped areas.
   BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by highways or streets,
other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected,
the director of public works shall determine the outline of the BLOCK.
   BOARDING HOME FACILITY. An establishment that:
      (1)   Furnishes, in one or more buildings, lodging to three or more
elderly and/or disabled persons who are unrelated to the owner of the
establishment by blood or marriage; and
      (2)   Provides community meals, light housework, meal preparation,
transportation, grocery shopping, money management, laundry services, or
assistance with self-administration of medication to persons/residents who are
capable of feeding, dressing, moving, selfevacuating, bathing and attending to
other personal needs or maintenance without assistance; and
      (3)   Does not provide personal care services to persons/residents.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   BUILDING FACADE. The face of a building that delineates the edge of
conditioned floor space.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. See §
6.100.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Authorization given by the City of Fort Worth to erect,
construct, renovate, maintain or conduct any other specified activity on any
building or structure, or on any installations or facilities therein. The term
BUILDING PERMIT shall include, but not be limited to, building permits,
electrical permits, mechanical permits and plumbing permits.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree, measured at a point six inches above the
ground line if the resulting measurement is no more than four inches. If the
resulting measurement is more than four inches, the measurement is made at a
point 12 inches above the ground line.
   CAMPUS DEVELOPMENT. A campus development is defined as a unified group of
buildings and/or facilities located on a contiguous parcel(s) and operated as a
place of worship, school or hospital.
   CARE FACILITY. An institutional use of a building or property whereby a
publicly or privately funded program enables persons to receive medical,
psychological, emotional or other rehabilitative care as an out-patient or
live-in patient. This definition does not include those institutional uses
provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, nor does it include foster care
programs or community homes.
   CARPORT/PORTE COCHERE, PRIVATE. An open-sided extension of the roof of the
principal building, or an accessory open-sided detached building/structure on
the same lot, used for the shelter or storage of occupant owned motor vehicles
as an accessory use only.
   CARPORT, PRIVATE. An accessory open-sided detached building/structure on the
same lot, used for the shelter or storage of occupant owned motor vehicles as
an accessory use only.
   CAR WASH. A facility for the washing or steam cleaning of vehicles as
follows:
      (1)   SELF-SERVICE. Facilities where a vehicle may be manually washed,
sprayed, dried or vacuumed by its owner or operator with equipment provided by
the facility. Typically, no employees will be on-site at the facility.
      (2)   AUTOMATED-SERVICE. Facilities where a vehicle is driven by the
owner or operator through an automated tunnel for washing and drying but the
owner or operator vacuums the vehicle with equipment provided by the facility.
Minimal staff will be on-site at the facility.
      (3)   FULL-SERVICE. Facilities where operating functions are performed
entirely by the facility with the use of washing, waxing, drying, and vacuuming
equipment supplemented with manual detailing. Employees will be on site at the
facility.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. For the purposes of the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, a Certificate of Appropriateness is a signed and dated
document evidencing the approval of the historic and cultural landmarks
commission or the historic preservation officer, as appropriate, for work
proposed by an owner or applicant of a historic property.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAM. A local, state, and federal government
partnership to empower local communities to better protect historic properties
by identifying local priorities, meeting recognized historic preservation
standards and providing access to financial and technical services to further
the identification, evaluation, designation and protection of buildings, sites,
districts, structures, and objects.
   CHIEF OF POLICE or CHIEF. The chief of the Fort Worth police department or a
designee or any employee(s) of the police department assigned by him or her to
perform the duties prescribed in this article.
   CITY ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL. An authorized representative of any of the
following departments or divisions:
      (1)   Department of planning and development;
      (2)   Code compliance;
      (3)   Health department;
      (4)   Fire department;
      (5)   Police department; and
      (6)   Marshal’s office.
   CIVIC CLUB. See LODGE.
   CLEAR ZONE (CZ). The trapezoidal area lying immediately beyond the end of
the runway and outward along the extended runway center line for a distance of
3,000 feet. Dimensions are 1,500 feet in width at the runway threshold and
2,284 feet in width at its outer edge. The CLEAR ZONE represents the highest
potential for aircraft accidents.
   CLINIC. Offices for one or more health practitioners engaged in treating the
sick or injured on an outpatient basis.
   CLUSTER SUBDIVISION. A grouping of individual building lots or sites in
close proximity, each of which or the majority of which has less land area than
required for isolated individual lots, with the additional area in the cluster
subdivision being devoted to open space, recreation space, car spaces and
access facilities in addition to required yards.
   CO-LOCATION. Placement of an antenna on an existing telecommunication tower,
stealth telecommunication tower, transmission tower, building, light or utility
pole or water tower or other structure, where the antenna are located on the
existing structure.
   COMMERCIAL COPY. A message displayed on a sign which relates solely to the
economic interests of the advertiser and its audience; a message pertaining to
price and product advertising, goods and services.
   COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL USE.
      (1)   For the purpose of the landscape provisions of §
6.301, the following uses are considered to be commercial/institutional:
         a.   Any use allowed by right in the commercial districts, including
public and private schools and places of worship;
         b.   Private recreation facilities in manufactured housing
subdivisions in the “MH” district;
         c.   Principal and special exception uses in the “CF” district; and
         d.   The following uses, which are permitted only in “PD” districts:
halfway houses, gambling facilities or other operations featuring games of
chance (including bingo parlors), and horse, dog and automotive racing.
   COMMERCIAL MULTI-UNIT CENTER. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, COMMERCIAL MULTI-UNIT
CENTER is a building or structure (including a shopping mall or strip shopping
center) containing three or more separate premises, each of which is offered by
lease or otherwise for separate occupancy or control and each of which occupies
an enclosed area having its own door or entranceway opening onto public
property, a public way or a common area.
   COMMERCIAL PRINT CENTER. A commercial establishment open to the general
public that is primarily involved in the electronic duplication of graphic and
printed materials for personal or business use, and which also provides other
products and services including, but not limited to, photocopying,
electrostatic printing, laser printing, word processing services, computer
generated graphics, computer aided design services, video imaging and
reproduction services, on-site computer rental and on-site teleconferencing.
Offset printing, or similar printing processes, shall not be permitted.
   COMMERCIALLY MANUFACTURED VEHICLE. A mobile vending unit originally
manufactured as a mobile food vehicle to be used for the preparation of food
which was manufactured by a person regularly in the business of manufacturing
mobile food vehicles for sale. Commercially manufactured shall not include any
vehicle that is converted or retrofitted to be a mobile food vehicle.
   COMMUNITY CENTER. A building dedicated to social or recreational activities,
serving the city or a neighborhood and owned and operated by the City of Fort
Worth, or by a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the health,
safety, morals or general welfare of the city.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A shared garden space managed by a public or nonprofit
organization, a neighborhood association, person or group of individuals in the
community, to grow plants and harvest food or ornamental crops for use by those
cultivating the land and their households.
   COMMUNITY HOME. A community-based residential home as defined by the
Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Tex. Human Resources Code,
Chapter 123. Not more than six persons with disabilities and two supervisors
may reside in the community home at the same time. The limitation on the number
of persons with disabilities applies regardless of the legal relationship of
those persons to one another.
   COMPLETE APPLICATION. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, a
COMPLETE APPLICATION is an application that contains all information required
by the Historic Preservation Ordinance and all that is necessary to fully
support the sufficiency of a request, including, without limitation, a full
description and illustration of the nature and scope of a request, and which
must include the signature of the applicant verifying the information provided.
   CONVICTION. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, CONVICTION is a conviction
in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political
subdivision of a state of foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated or
pardoned. CONVICTION includes disposition of charges against a person by
probation.
   COOKING EQUIPMENT. A stove, range or other such appliances, which requires a
220V or gas connection that is used, designed or intended to be used for the
cooking and preparing of food.
   CORNICE. A projecting shelf along the top of a wall, along the exterior trim
at the meeting of a roof and wall, or at the uppermost division of an
entablature.
   COTTAGE INDUSTRY. Small scale assembly and light manufacturing of
commodities (including electronics) fully enclosed within the building without
producing any noise, noxious odors, gas, or other pollutants. This category
shall include workshops and studios for cottage industries such as pottery,
glass-blowing, metal working, screen printing, weaving.
   COURTYARD. An open unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with
a building and which is bounded on three or more sides by the building.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. Area around the trunk of the tree that is equal to a
radius of one foot per inch diameter measured at breast height (DBH) - four and
one-half feet.
   CULTURAL MOTIF. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
CULTURAL MOTIF is a recurrent architectural element or dominant style found in
the design of a building.
   CUSTOMER. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, a CUSTOMER is any person
who:
      (1)   Enters the premises and patronizes a sexually oriented business,
whether or not in exchange for the payment of an admission fee or any other
form of consideration, gratuity or as a guest of a member; or
      (2)   Purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any sexually oriented
merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services while on the premises.
   DATA CENTER. Real and personal property consisting of buildings or
structures specifically designed or modified to house networked computers and
data and transaction processing equipment and related infrastructure support
equipment, including, without limitation, power and cooling equipment, used
primarily to provide, as a service to persons other than the company operating
the data center, data and transaction processing services, outsource
information technology services and computer equipment colocation services, or,
used primarily to provide, to a single user, including the user's affiliates,
customers, lessees, vendors and other persons authorized by the user, data and
transaction processing services.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility that provides non-medical care and supervision
for more than six children, elderly persons or persons with physical and/or
mental disabilities. This definition does not include those uses defined as a
community home.
   DECKING. The surface material that forms the floor of the structure.
   DEMOLITION. For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, an act
or process which destroys a site or structure in its entirety, or which
destroys a part of a site or structure and permanently impairs its structural,
historic or architectural integrity.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.  For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT is the consistent failure to maintain a structure that
causes, or is a substantial contributing factor of, the deterioration of
building materials to such an extent that the structure is no longer safe or
its rehabilitation is no longer feasible, ultimately leading to its demolition.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. For the purposes of
Chapter 4, §
4.202, Manufactured Home (“MH”) District, a graphic representation, drawn to
scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outline of land included in the
plan and all proposed use locations, with accurate dimensions indicating the
relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT OF AN EXISTING TREE (DBH). That measurement of the
size/diameter of a tree as determined by measuring at four and one-half feet
above the soil level. For a multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total
diameter of the largest trunk plus one-half the diameter of each additional
trunk.
   DIAMETER OF AN EXISTING TREE. That measurement of the size/diameter of a
tree as determined by measuring at four and one-half feet above ground. For a
multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total diameter of the largest trunk
plus half the diameter of each additional trunk.
   DISMANTLED VEHICLE. A vehicle that has, intentionally or unintentionally,
one or more significant parts removed. A SIGNIFICANT PART is any part that is
need to safely operate the vehicle, including, but not limited to, a wheel or
tire, windshield, door, side quarter panel, trunk, hood, roof, steering wheel
or transmission. A vehicle can be considered dismantled under this definition
whether or not it is in an operative condition.
   DISPLAY AREA/FACE. That area made available by a sign structure for the
purpose of displaying an advertising message, such area to exclude
nonstructural trim.
   DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITY. Any permanent change to existing surface conditions
including clearing, grading, trenching, boring and similar activities.
DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITY will not include normal mowing or removal of trees less
than six inches in diameter.
   DOCK, PIER OR BOATHOUSE (OR ANY COMBINATION). A structure that permits the
landing and mooring of vessels, including the anchoring system, cables, floats,
electrical, plumbing and any other related components or materials installed in
conjunction with the construction, maintenance or use of the dock for the
landing and mooring of vessels, but excluding the walkway.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR BUSINESS. A restaurant or business that provides car
service and/or a drive-through window, either exclusively or in conjunction
with walk-in service.
   DRIVEWAY. Any hard surface parking area that provides access to private
property from the right-of-way to the required off-site parking behind the
building line. A RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY may consist of compacted gravel base
confined by a border.
   DRY SWALE. A system that consists of an open conveyance channel with a
filter bed of permeable soils that overlay an under drain system. Flow passes
into and is detained in the main portion of the channel where it is filtered
through the soil bed. Runoff is collected by a perforated pipe and gravel under
drain system to the outlet.
   DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY. One or more buildings containing or aggregating three
or more one-family dwelling units.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by not more than one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for residential
occupancy by two families.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building, or any portion thereof, containing a complete set
of independent living facilities for occupancy and use by one family, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, sanitation and cooking
within a kitchen for the exclusive use of the occupants whose intent is to
habitat the dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY. Non-rented or leased living facilities within a
detached building located on the same lot, parcel or tract of the primary
dwelling unit for use or occupancy by temporary guests or a member of the
family of the main dwelling unit, which does not contain cooking equipment.
   EMERGENCY ACCESS EASEMENT. An area created by plat or separate instrument
filed with the office of the county clerk other than a dedicated street or
place, or an alley, which is maintained free and clear of buildings, structures
and other obstructions for the purpose of providing free passage of service and
emergency vehicles.
   EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, EMPLOYEE is any person who
renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business
or who works on the premises of a sexually oriented business that receives any
form of compensation, including tips or gratuities, from the operator, manager,
customers, other employees or entertainment personnel and in exchange
therefore:
         a.   Renders any work, service, performance or exhibition whatsoever,
directly or indirectly, to or for a customer; or
         b.   Renders any other support service whatsoever, directly or
indirectly, for or on behalf of the furtherance of the business operations.
      (2)   EMPLOYEE includes, but is not necessarily limited to, bartenders,
cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, escorts, hosts, hostesses, models, masseurs,
outcall persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses or other persons
working on or about the premises.
   EMPLOYMENT CENTER. For the purposes of §
4.305, an EMPLOYMENT CENTER is a distinct cluster of economic activities that
employ at least 30,000 people, have interrelated or complementary land uses and
can be identified by distinct geographic boundaries. EMPLOYMENT CENTERS may
include one large employer or a conglomeration of employers.
   ENDANGERED. For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
threatened by deterioration, damage or irretrievable, irreplaceable loss due to
neglect, disuse, disrepair, instability, lack of financial resources and/or
impending demolition.
   ENTERTAINMENT. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, any variety of live or non-
live performances, services, exhibitions or displays by entertainment personnel
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting,
depicting or engaging in “specified sexual activities” or while exposing
“specified anatomical areas,” or which provide sexual gratification or sexual
stimulation to customers.
   ENTERTAINMENT PERSONNEL. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, any person, including
persons traditionally regarded as “independent contractors,” who receives any
form of compensation, including tips or gratuities, from the operator,
customers, employees or other entertainment personnel and in exchange
therefore:
      (1)   Renders any live entertainment, service, performance, exhibition or
display whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to or for a customer or the
furtherance of the business operation; and
      (2)   Shall include but is not necessarily limited to bartenders,
cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, escorts, hosts, hostesses, models, masseurs,
out call-persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses or other persons
working on or about the premises.
   ESCORT. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, ESCORT is a person who, for
consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for
another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, ESCORT AGENCY is a
commercial venture that furnishes, or offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish escorts for a fee, commission, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, ESTABLISHMENT is:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   EVENT CENTER OR RENTAL HALL An establishment that is leased on a temporary
basis before the event by individuals or groups who reserve the facility to
accommodate private functions, including but not limited to banquets, weddings,
anniversaries, receptions, business organizational meetings, and other similar
functions, to which the general public is not admitted and for which no
admission charge is imposed. Such establishments may include kitchen facilities
for the preparation of food and areas for dancing, dining and other
entertainment activities that customarily occur in association with banquets,
weddings or receptions. An event center does not include a game room, bar, pool
hall, dance hall, night club or concert hall.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The architectural style, design, general
arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of a building or
structure, as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by such outer
surfaces. Such exterior architectural feature shall include, by way of example
but not by limitation, the kind, color, texture of the building material and
the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures
appurtenant to such building or structure.
   EXTERIOR PORTION. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, EXTERIOR PORTION is any
part of the physical structure of an enterprise, including, but not limited to,
a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering or window, which is visible
from any public way or public property.
   FACADE. The faces or elevations of a building visible from a public way or
space; usually limited to the front face of a building in an urban environment.
   FAMILY. Any individual or two or more persons related by blood, adoption,
marriage or guardianship, or not more than five unrelated persons operating as
a single housekeeping unit and expressly excluding lodging, boarding,
fraternity, and sorority houses.
   FARMERS’ MARKET. An outdoor marketplace for the distribution and sale of
food products directly to consumers that are grown, made and offered for sale
by the producing farmers and including unique products and goods created and
sold by local artisans, not to include mass produced products.
   FBC ADMINISTRATOR. The  Development Services Director  or designee
responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Stockyards Form Based Code
and Design Guidelines.
   FEEDING PEN, ACCESSORY. An area used for feeding of livestock as an
accessory use only to farming and ranching activities.
   FEEDING PEN, COMMERCIAL. An area where livestock are confined and are fed in
any quantity or in any manner other than grazing on growing herbage, for any
purpose other than as a normal accessory use to farming and ranching
activities. Pasturing of livestock on growing herbage, including rental of
grazing land for pasturing, shall not be considered as a COMMERCIAL FEEDING PEN
use.
   FENESTRATION. The design, proportioning and disposition of windows and other
exterior openings of a building.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation,
by water or mud, of lands not normally inundated and that are used or usable by
man.
   FLOOD, 50-YEAR. A flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in
50 years although such flood may occur in any year. A 50-YEAR FLOOD is
determined by statistical analysis of stream flow records, and rainfall and
run-off characteristics in the watershed.
   FLOOD, INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL. A flood having an average frequency of
occurrence of once in 100 years although such flood may occur in any year. An
INTERMEDIATE REGIONAL FLOOD is determined by statistical analysis of stream
flow records, and rainfall and run-off characteristics in the watershed.
   FLOODPLAIN. Land which has a history of flood or is subject to recurrent
flooding as determined by the City of Fort Worth public works department.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum total of the area of all buildings, excluding utility
rooms and mechanical rooms, measured between the outer perimeter walls of the
buildings, provided that space in a building or structure used for parking of
motor vehicles shall not be computed in the floor area. Courtyards or balconies
open to the sky and roofs which are utilized for recreation, etc., shall not be
counted in the FLOOR AREA but shall be a part of the recreational space.
   FOOD, NON-POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS. Food products that are not potentially
hazardous, such as popcorn, pretzels and nuts, and as further defined in
Chapter 16, Health and Sanitation of the city code of the City of Fort Worth.
   FOOD, POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS. Natural or synthetic food products that require
temperature control as further defined in
Chapter 16, Health and Sanitation of the city code of the City of Fort Worth.
   FOOTCANDLE. Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be
horizontal unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance
meter, a.k.a., light meter.
   FORECOURT. An open area at grade, or within 30 inches of grade, that serves
as an open space, plaza or dining area.
   FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A building containing the general facilities
and sleeping rooms for members of a fraternity or sorority.
   FRESH WATER FRACTURE PONDS. A pit used for the collection and storage of
fresh water for the purpose of fracture stimulation of gas wells.
   FRIEZE. The horizontal part of a classical entablature, often decorated with
sculpture in low relief.
   FRONTAGE. All the property adjacent to one side of a street between two
intersecting streets, measured along the street line.
   FULL CUTOFF. Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is emitted
at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no
more than 10% of the lamp’s intensity is emitted at or above an angle ten
degrees below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture.
   FULLY SHIELDED. Attribute of a lighting fixture provided with internal and/
or external shields and louvers to prevent brightness from lamps, reflectors,
refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal viewing angles.
   GALLERY. A covered passage extending along the outside wall of a building
supported by arches or columns that is open on three sides.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. Space in a principal building, or an accessory building on
the same lot, used for the shelter or storage of occupant owned motor vehicles
as an accessory use only.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private or storage garage used for
the care or repair of self-propelled vehicles or where such vehicles are kept
for remuneration, hire or sale.
   GARAGE, STORAGE. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
used exclusively for parking or storage of self-propelled vehicles, but with no
other services provided except facilities for washing.
   GARAGE, TERRACE. A private garage placed in front of the building line due
to the steep topography of the lot.
   GLARE. Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently
greater than the brightness to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance
or loss in visual performance and visibility, so as to jeopardize health,
safety or welfare.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. For any building shall be measured by taking the outside
dimensions of the building at each floor level, except that portion of the
basement used only for utilities or storage, and any areas within the building
used for off-street parking.
   GROUP HOME I. A family based facility which contains not more than 15
residents and three supervisory personnel and which provides 24-hour care in a
protected living arrangement for the mentally and/or physically impaired,
developmentally disabled or victims of abuse or neglect. This classification
includes congregate living facilities for the elderly, maternity homes,
emergency shelters during crisis intervention for victims of crime, abuse or
neglect, and residential services licensed by the Texas commission on alcohol
and drug abuse, but not primarily for criminal rehabilitation.
   GROUP HOME II. Same definition as group home I except that there is no limit
on number of residents.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility providing for the housing and rehabilitation or
training of adults on probation, parole, early or pre-release or any other form
of executive, judicial or administrative release from a penal institution,
including without limitation community residential facilities established in
accordance with Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Ann. Art. 42.18, as amended
from time to time. HALFWAY HOUSE includes facilities which provide in-patient
treatment for chemical dependency to persons on probation, parole, early or
pre-release or any other form of executive, judicial or administrative release
from a penal institution if such persons are ordered to obtain such treatment
for chemical dependency as a condition of release. For purposes of this
definition, an adult is a person age 18 or over.
   HARD-SURFACE (PARKING). Any porous or non porous surface suitable for the
function of driving and parking of vehicles; nonporous surfaces are typically
asphalt and concrete.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in the airport/
airfield overlay districts and shown on the airport height control map, the
datum shall be measured in mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HIGHWAY I-30 AND/OR I-35. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Business, HIGHWAY I-35 AND/OR I-30
shall mean any property located within 300 feet of the right-of-way line of the
prospective interstate highway. Measurement of the distance shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the right-of-way line of the highway to the nearest property
line of the property sought to be used, or used, as a sexually oriented
business.
   HISTORIC CONTEXT. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
HISTORIC CONTEXT means information about historic trends and properties grouped
by an important theme in the prehistory or history of Fort Worth, the State of
Texas, or the United States during a particular period of time.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. For purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, a
HISTORIC PROPERTY is a building, site, structure, or object designated or
pending designation as highly significant endangered, historic and cultural
landmark (either individually or within a historic and cultural landmarks
district), or demolition delay.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY, CONTRIBUTING. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, a CONTRIBUTING HISTORIC PROPERTY is a building, site, structure, or
object that adds to the historic significance of a designated historic
property.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY, NON-CONTRIBUTING. For purposes of the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, a NON-CONTRIBUTING HISTORIC PROPERTY is a building,
site, structure, or object that does not add to the historic significance of a
designated historic property and which is designated as a non-contributing
resource in the design standards and guidelines for such district if such
design standards and guidelines exist. Such designation is meant to provide
greater latitude for utilization of the historic property; however, all
modifications must conform to the applicable design standards and guidelines.
   HOBBY. An accessory use carried on by the occupant of the premises in a
shop, studio or other workroom, purely for personal enjoyment, amusement or
recreation; provided that the articles produced or constructed in said shop,
studio or workroom are not sold either on or off the premises, and provided
such use will not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise,
odor, dust, smoke or fumes.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment
that is conducted by a member of the family residing in the dwelling which is
clearly customary, incidental and a subordinate secondary use of the dwelling
unit as a residence and does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood.
   HOME SCHOOL. A private school as defined in the Tex. Education Code §
21.033, which is taught by a parent or parents, legal guardian or other
designated adult member of the household in which the student resides.
   HOSPICE. Temporary residence for patients and their families receiving
medical or psychological care from licensed institution. May include family
counseling, group therapy, psychiatric treatment and training of family members
by authorized practitioners in the provision of a caring environment for
supplying the physical and emotional needs of the ill and their families.
   HOSPITAL, GENERAL. An institution providing in-patient medical or surgical
care for the acutely sick or injured, who are generally confined for relatively
short periods of time. Included as an integral part of the institutions are
such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, educational
facilities, food services and staff offices.
   HOSPITAL, LONG-TERM. An institution providing in-patient medical treatment
of an intensive and specialized nature for the chronically ill, who are
generally confined for periods of time exceeding 30 days. LONG-TERM HOSPITALS
include homes for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients, and institutions
for patients with a contagious disease, such as tuberculosis sanitariums.
   HOTEL. One or more buildings containing individual living or sleeping units
specially designed as temporary quarters for transient guests, including
provisions for meals and personal services. This definition shall include
hotels, extended stay hotels, motels and inns.
   ILLUMINANCE. Quantity of light, measured in footcandles.
   INDOOR AMUSEMENT. A privately established and operated facility that
provides indoor amusement opportunities for a fee, including, but not limited
to, an arcade or pool hall, but not a bar or similar facility that serves
alcohol, or a dance hall, night club, concert hall, or event center or rental
hall or sexually oriented business that is otherwise categorized.
   INDOOR RECREATION. A privately established and operated facility that
provides indoor recreational opportunities for a fee, including, but not
limited to, roller, ice skating and hockey rinks; batting cages, gymnasium or
indoor arena, basketball, handball and tennis courts, but not for any use
involving animals.
   INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING. Residential structure that is designed for the
occupancy of one or more families; constructed in one or more modular
components built at a location other than the permanent site or using two or
more International Standards Organization (ISO) shipping containers; and
designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or
modular component is transported to the permanent site and erected or installed
on a permanent foundation system; and meets the building, plumbing, electrical
and mechanical requirements and standards as set out in state law.
   INDUSTRIAL USE. For the purpose of the landscape provisions of §
6.301, INDUSTRIAL USE includes:
      (1)   Any use allowed by right in the industrial districts, with the
exception of commercial/institutional uses, as defined in this chapter; and
      (2)   All uses permitted only in a “PD” planned development district with
the exception of halfway houses, gambling facilities or other operations
featuring games of chance (including bingo parlors) and horse, dog and
automotive racing.
   INFILL HOUSING. Any detached single-family dwelling developed, reconstructed
or enlarged by more than 50% of the original structure five years or more
following final plat of the property.
   INTERESTED PARTY. For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, an
INTERESTED PARTY is a person who has an interest in a matter that is the
subject of a public hearing or administrative decision. A person has an
interest if the person:
      (1)   Is the applicant or the record owner of property that is the
subject of a public hearing or administrative decision;
      (2)   Is a designee of a registered neighborhood association that has an
interest within the historic district;
      (3)   An adjacent property owner located in the same historic district;
or
      (4)   Is an organization committed to preserving the City of Fort Worth’s
historic identity with demonstrated experience in historic preservation.
   KENNEL.
      (1)   Any building, lot or premises where four or more dogs or cats (at
least eight weeks of age) are kept. This shall not include residentially zoned
premises or premises which are used for residential purposes, at which the
occupant is keeping his or her own dogs or cats; or
      (2)   Any building, lot or premises where dogs or cats are kept or
housed, for which remuneration is received.
   KINDERGARTEN. A facility providing educational care for pre-school age
children. See DAY CARE CENTER.
   KITCHEN. Any room or portion of a room containing cooking equipment and
facilities for the refrigeration, preparation, cooking of food, and washing of
cooking and eating utensils and used or intend or designed for cooking and
preparing food. The installation of a 220V or gas connection in any room or
portion of a room that is used or intended to be used as cooking equipment for
the preparation of food shall be considered a kitchen.
   LAKEFRONT PROPERTY LINE. The property line that borders the waters of Lake
Worth as shown on the final plat of record or survey for the property.
   LANDMARK. For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, a
structure or property which is of value in preserving the historical, cultural,
architectural or archeological heritage, or an outstanding example of design or
a site closely related to an important personage, act or event in history. Such
structures or property should be preserved and restored to their historical
character and should be protected from modifications which detract from their
historical significance.
   LANDSCAPE AREA. Area of required landscaping provided in conformance with
Chapter 6, Article 3.
   LANDSCAPE PLAN. A plan illustrating bufferyard features and landscaping
required per
Chapter 6, Article 3 of the zoning ordinance, and to illustrate trees along
arterial streets required per §
31-103(b) of the subdivision ordinance. Buffer yards are required along common
property lines of one- or two-family districts adjacent to nonresidential
districts for which certain trees may be credited. In addition, LANDSCAPE PLANS
are required for commercial, industrial and manufactured home uses to include
shrubs and sod (all references to trees have been removed from the landscaping
requirements per Ord. 17367). Trees are required along arterial streets for
residential subdivisions of three lots or more.
   LARGE ANIMALS. For purposes of §
5.307, LARGE ANIMALS shall be any equine animal including, but not limited to,
a horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jennet, any
species of the bovine family; including, but not limited to, any cow, calf,
steer or bull, any llama, sheep, ram, ewe, lamb; any goat, billy, nanny or kid;
or an emu, ostrich or rhea.
   LIFT COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order to lift gas from the well.
   LINE COMPRESSOR. A device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid
(gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a pipeline.
   LIVE/WORK SPACE. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit in which a significant
portion of the space includes a nonresidential use that is operated by the
tenant.
   LODGE. An association of persons meeting regularly for their mutual benefit
or for the promotion of some common purpose, supported jointly through payment
of membership dues, all members having the right to vote on club policies and
business.
   LODGING HOUSE. A dwelling with at least one common exterior entrance where
separate sleeping rooms are available for rent for a period of 30 consecutive
days or longer to persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements,
and excluding hotels or motels. The owner, agent or rental manager may or may
not reside within the dwelling.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under this ordinance,
and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place.
   LOT, ARTIFICIAL. For the purposes of §
6.301(b), portion of a one acre or larger tract that contains the area to be
developed as an individual project and that encompasses all improvements,
including parking, related to the project.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of two or more streets.
   LOT COVERAGE. The total lot area covered by the foundation of the main
structure, attached and detached garages, carports, porte cocheres, accessory
detached habitable areas, porches, patios and entry areas compared to the total
site area. Any portion of the foundation not covered by roof is not considered
in lot area calculations. Sheds, arbors, cantilevered (unsupported) upper story
areas, eave overhangs and uncovered patios are not considered in lot coverage
calculations.
   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance from the front street line to the
rear line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot, the side line of which does not abut on any street.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
   LOT, MANUFACTURED HOME. A plot of land within a manufactured home park or
recreational vehicle park as indicated on the development plan, which is
designed to accommodate one manufactured home or recreational vehicle
respectively.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the county clerk.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two or more
streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7385.jpg]
   Through Lot
   LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at right
angles to the depth.
   LUMEN. The light-output rating of a lamp (light bulb).
   MANUFACTURED HOME or MANUFACTURED HOUSING. Includes the terms HUD-Code
manufactured home and mobile home, and collectively means and refers to both
and shall include one or more International Standards Organization (ISO)
shipping containers.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, HUD-CODE. A structure, constructed on or after June 15,
1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. The
term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24
C.F.R. § 3282.8(g).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A unified development of lots arranged on a tract of
land under common ownership, which has been planned and improved for the
placement of two or more manufactured homes for non-transient occupancy. For
purposes of this definition only, a LOT means a plot of ground within a
manufactured home park which is designed to accommodate one manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A unified development of lots for the
placement of one manufactured home per platted lot for non-transient occupancy,
established for the purpose of having individually owned lots.
   MANUFACTURED HOME USE. For the purpose of the landscape provisions set out
in
Chapter 6, Article 3, MANUFACTURED HOME USE shall include manufactured home
parks and recreational vehicle parks allowed by right in the “MH” manufactured
home district.
   MASSAGE. Any method by which a person utilizes his or her hands, feet or an
instrument for treating the superficial parts of a customer’s body for medical,
hygienic, exercise, entertainment, relaxation or stimulation purposes by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating.
   MASSAGE PARLOR/BATH. Any commercial business, unrelated to a sexually
oriented business operation, which provides massage treatment of a non-sexual
nature by a licensed masseuse as a primary service.
   MASSAGE THERAPY/SPA. Any medical or therapeutic practice unrelated to a
sexually oriented business operation operated by or employing licensed
psychologist, physicians, physical therapists, registered nurses,
chiropractors, licensed practitioners or athletic trainers engaged in the
practice of healing arts and the treatment of disease, ailments and disorders
of the body.
   MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARD CODE. That article of the city code so designated.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings containing individual
compartmentalized storage units for the inside storage of a customer’s goods or
wares, where no unit exceeds 1,000 square feet in floor area.
   MIXED USE. Structure or project containing residential and nonresidential
uses.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems.
   MOBILE VENDING UNIT. A vehicle establishment that is designed to be readily
moveable and from which merchandise is sold or food is sold or served. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a commercially manufactured vehicle.
   MOBILE VENDOR, FRESH MARKET. A licensed mobile vending unit that sells
nonhazardous, fresh fruits and vegetables. Any product that is cut and
processed shall follow Division 4 of the Health Code. No less than 75% of the
products for sale shall be produce and any additional product shall be
nonhazardous, packaged food.
   MOBILE VENDOR FOOD COURT. A primary land use located on one or more platted
lots where two or more mobile vending units congregate to offer food or
beverages for sale to the public, functioning as a single business and may
provide restrooms, tables, play areas, a permanent structure for alcohol sales
and other outdoor entertainment open to the customers of all vendors.
   MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK YARD or STORAGE YARD. Any business and any place of
storage or deposit which displays, or in or upon which there are displayed, to
view from a public right-of-way, two or more registered or unregistered motor
vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways, or
used parts of motor vehicles, or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or
other waste, or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part or
intended to be a part of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material
shall be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles, but excluding vehicles in
operable condition specially adapted or constructed for racing or operation on
privately owned drag strips or raceways, vehicles retained by the owner for
antique collection purposes rather than for salvage or for transportation, and
vehicles stored as the property of a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States who is on active duty assignment outside the continental and territorial
limits of the United States.
   MULLION. A vertical strip that divides windows and doors.
   MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT. The term multifamily district shall refer collectively
to the “CR, “C,” “D,” “DHR1” and “DHR2” districts. The term also includes any
“PD” districts that include multifamily uses.
   NAS FW JRB. The Naval Air Station Fort Worth Joint Reserve Base.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The official federal list of
buildings, districts, and sites (including structures and objects) significant
in American history and culture, architecture, archeology, and engineering
maintained by the National Park Service and administered on a state-wide basis
of the Texas Historical Commission. Restrictions on these properties exist only
when there is an undertaking that uses federal funds or that requires a federal
permit or license.
   NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATION CENTER. A privately established and operated
facility located in a residential subdivision that provides recreational
opportunities for residents of the subdivision and their guests.
   NET LAND AREA. All of the privately owned property embraced within the outer
perimeter property lines, not including dedicated public streets. Dedicated
rights-of-way for open space, drainage or access, approved private streets or
dedicated easements which can be used by the land occupants for private
purposes shall be included in net land area. Where land is dedicated for future
opening or widening of a public street such land shall not be computed as net
land area.
   NET SITE AREA. For the purposes of
Chapter 6, Article 3, Landscaping and Buffers, the area used to calculate
landscape requirements. This area is calculated as follows:
      (1)   For undeveloped sites. All areas of a site except:
         a.   The footprint of proposed buildings and other proposed
structures; and
         b.   Any bufferyard areas required by
Chapter 6, Article 3.
      (2)   For developed sites. All areas of a site except:
         a.   The footprint of existing buildings and structures;
         b.   The footprint of proposed buildings and structures;
         c.   Existing parking lots not in excess of 10% over the number of
required parking spaces and paved access areas; and
         d.   Any bufferyard areas required by
Chapter 6, Article 3.
   NONCOMMERCIAL COPY. A message displayed on a sign that pertains to
political, social or ideological issues.
   NONCONFORMING USE, BUILDING OR YARD. A use, building or yard that does not
(by reason of design, use or dimensions) conform to the regulations that apply
in the district where the use, building or yard is situated. These uses,
buildings or yards were legally in existence at the time the ordinance was
passed to make them nonconforming. A use, building or yard established after
the passage of an ordinance that does not conform to the ordinance regulations
of the district in which it is situated shall be considered to be illegal.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The term NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT shall refer
collectively to the districts listed in §§
4.100(c) and (d), as well as the “EP,” “OM” and “IP” districts.
   NOXIOUS. An element creating an impact that may interfere with the enjoyment
and use of property, including smoke, odors, noise, vibration, glare or heat.
   NUDE MODELING BUSINESS. Any establishment where an employee or entertainment
personnel performs a massage or “specified sexual activities” while appearing
in a “state of nudity,” “simulated nudity” or while displaying “specified
anatomical areas,” and is also provided or allowed to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted to customers.
   NUDE MODELING STUDIO. Any establishment where an employee or entertainment
personnel appears in a “state of nudity,” “simulated nudity” or displays
“specified anatomical areas,” and is also provided or allowed to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted to
customers.
   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   Appearing while any of the following portions of the human body are
less than completely and opaquely covered:
         a.   The appearance of a bare buttock, vulva, anus, anal cleft, pubic
region, pubic hair, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or
         b.   A state of dress which fails to completely and opaquely cover a
buttock, vulva, anus, anal cleft, pubic region, pubic hair, male genitals,
female genitals or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated
below a point immediately above the top of the areola of the female breast.
      (2)   For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos,
liquid latex, whether wet or dried and other similar substances shall not be
considered an opaque covering.
   NUDITY, SIMULATED. A state of dress in which any artificial device of
covering is worn on a person and exposed to view so as to simulate an actual
“state of nudity.”
   NURSING AND CARE HOME. An institution providing meals and resident care and
services for persons who are generally admitted for periods of time exceeding
30 days. Such service includes custodial or attendant care, and may or may not
provide for routine and regular medical and nursing services. NURSING AND CARE
HOMES include homes for the aged, and convalescent and rest homes.
   OBJECT.  For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, an OBJECT is a
construction that is primarily artistic in nature or relatively small in scale
and simply constructed that is affixed to property or immovable.
   OFF-STREET. Off the right-of-way of a street or place.
   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DISTRICTS. Collectively, the “A-2.5A,” “A-43,” “A-21,”
“A-10,” “A-7.5,” “A-5,” “AR,” “B,” “R1” and “R2” districts.
   OPEN SPACE. For the purposes of calculating open space, the net land area
minus all building footprints, parking areas, access drives and fenced patios.
OPEN SPACE must be open to the sky and cannot be paved, except for necessary
sidewalks, active recreation areas and patios that are adjacent to dwelling
units and not enclosed by a fence.
   OPERATED or CAUSED TO BE OPERATED. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, OPERATED or CAUSED TO BE
OPERATED is to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may
be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business
whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or operator of the business.
   OPERATOR. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, OPERATOR is:
      (1)   The person(s) in whose name a valid specialized certificate of
occupancy has been issued for a sexually oriented business pursuant to the
city’s comprehensive zoning ordinance, Appendix A of this code;
      (2)   Each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
sexually oriented business specialized certificate of occupancy;
      (3)   Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business
for which a specialized certificate of occupancy has been issued, regardless of
whether the individual’s name or signature appears on the application;
      (4)   Each individual who has a 20% or greater ownership interest in a
sexually oriented business for which a specialized certificate of occupancy has
been issued, regardless of whether the individual’s name appears on the
application;
      (5)   Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a
sexually oriented business for which a specialized certificate of occupancy has
been issued, regardless of whether the individual’s name or signature appears
on the application;
      (6)   The person(s) in whose a name a specialized certificate would be
required in order to lawfully operate a sexually oriented business pursuant to
the city’s comprehensive zoning ordinance, Appendix A of this code;
      (7)   Any individual who is in control of the operations of a sexually
oriented business, either on an hourly basis, daily basis, weekly basis or
shift basis or any combination thereof; or
      (8)   The person(s) who operates or causes to be operated any form of
sexually oriented business, which is subject to regulation pursuant to the
city’s comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   OUTCALL BUSINESS. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, OUTCALL BUSINESS is a
commercial venture that provides employees or entertainment personnel who, in
exchange for a fee, commission, tip or other consideration, goes to the
location requested by the customer and while there:
      (1)   Privately models lingerie or other intimate wearing apparel;
      (2)   Privately performs a strip tease;
      (3)   Privately performs a semi-nude or nude modeling session; or
      (4)   Bathes or massages the customer; and
      (5)   But shall not include persons otherwise engaged in legitimate, non-
sexually oriented activities or services such as licensed private nurses,
licensed physical therapists, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar persons whose business or service relationship with
their patron is not characterized by sexually oriented activities.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. Outdoor storage of any inert material or goods that would
not be a nuisance or offensive due to odor, fire, health or other restriction
of city code, and excluding trash, junk, garbage, salvaged waste or materials.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area other than a street, alley or place used
for the temporary parking of more than four self-propelled vehicles and
available for public use whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation
for clients or customers.
   PARKING SPACE. A space set aside for the sole purpose of parking a vehicle
on a temporary basis.
   PARKING, TANDEM. Parking spaces arranged one behind another, for example, in
a driveway.
   PARKWAY. The area of public right-of-way located between the curb or edge of
pavement and the property line.
   PASTURE LAND. For purposes of calculating the required square footage of
land for each animal in §
5.307, Large Animals, of
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, PASTURE LAND shall be the designated
open space, excluding any residential structures and accessory structures
unrelated to the keeping of large animals.
   PAWN SHOP. A shop that lends money in exchange for valuable personal
property as security. This definition includes the sale of such securities
after repossession and the sale of new merchandise generally found in retail
stores.
   PERSON. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, any individual,
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
   PILASTER. A shallow rectangular feature projecting from a wall, having a
capital and a base and architecturally treated as a column.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building in which persons regularly assemble for
religious worship.
   PLANT, ADAPTED. A plant originally found in other parts of the nation or
world that thrives in the North Central Texas area.
   PLANT, GROUPING. A collection of native and or adapted plants united in a
group.
   PLANT, NATIVE. A plant that lives or grows naturally in a particular region
without direct or indirect human intervention.
   POLE SIGN. A detached sign which is supported by one or more poles in or
upon the ground.
   PORCH. A raised structure attached to a building, forming a covered entrance
to a doorway.
   POROUS SURFACE (PARKING). A parking surface constructed of materials that
permit water to enter the ground by virtue of their nature or by large spaces
in the material, such as pre-cast and mold in-place concrete blocks, concrete
grids, interlocking bricks and plastic mats with hollow rings, hexagonal cells
or porous concrete.
   PORTE COCHERE, PRIVATE. A roofed structure located on the same lot, which
extends from the roof of the principal building and over an adjacent driveway
that is designed to let vehicles pass from the street to an interior courtyard
and used for the shelter of those getting in and out of vehicles.
   PREMISES.
      (1)   A single tract or platted lot.
      (2)   In addition, multiple adjacent tracts or platted lots under common
ownership will be deemed to be a SINGLE PREMISES if they meet the following
requirements:
         a.   Lots or tracts are not separated by intervening streets, alleys,
utility or railroad rights-of-way or other interruption;
         b.   Property contains a single primary use; and
         c.   Property is not used for one- or two-family residential purposes.
      (3)   Tracts or platted lots that are at cross corners or that are
connected by narrow strips of land too small to serve as emergency access
easements shall not be considered to be adjacent.
   PRESERVATION. For purposes of the Historic Site Tax Exemption, PRESERVATION
means the act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing
form, integrity, and materials of the exterior of a historic property. Work,
including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, generally
focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials and
features rather than extensive replacement and new construction.
   PRESERVED TREE. Any healthy tree retained for the purpose of meeting the
requirements under §
6.302.
   PRIMARY STREET. The principal frontage for a building site, as defined
during site plan review by the  development services director  or designee.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING/PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A structure in which the primary use
of the property is conducted.
   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OPERATION. For the purposes of determining whether a
business is subject to regulation pursuant to
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, PRINCIPAL BUSINESS
OPERATION shall mean and include any non-live, sexually oriented retail sale or
rental business activity as defined herein which amounts to 35% or more of the
total business operation at a particular location. The 35% criteria may be
determined by percentages of floor space utilized, inventory of items for sale
or rental, display areas, presentation time of entertainment or performances,
or gross revenue of the business as measured over any continuous 90-day period.
However, the 35% criteria shall not apply to any sexually oriented business
featuring or offering any form of live performances, entertainment, modeling or
other live activity, as all such live activity is subject to regulation as a
“sexually oriented business.”
   PRIVATE SCHOOL. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 1, Home Occupations, PRIVATE SCHOOL shall mean a non-public
school facility located in a dwelling unit that provides students their primary
education in math, reading, spelling, grammar, good citizenship and other
academic instruction by someone other than the student’s parent, legal guardian
or an adult member of the household in which the student resides.
   PRODUCTION AREA. Raised beds and rows; not to include buildings or
structures, including structures that involve the growing of crops.
   PRODUCTION UNIT. For purposes of a site plan, a production unit shall
include all property, contiguous or noncontiguous, that is used for toward the
production of agricultural crops. Uses may include direct production of the
land, accessory structures such as greenhouses, storage buildings, and tanks,
and storage of other equipment as appropriate and allowed in the zoning
district. A land use CO will be required for each noncontiguous lot.
   PROJECTED FRONT YARD. See §
6.101(f).
   PROTECTED TREE. Any tree listed in subsection n, Table B, §
6.302.
   PROTECTIVE MEASURES. Protective fencing surrounding the critical root zone
and bark protection to ensure that all prohibited activities in the critical
root zone are prevented, including for trees on adjacent properties. In
addition, appropriate construction methods as outlined in §
6.302 of the zoning ordinance, “Landscaping and Buffers” shall be followed.
   PUBLIC PARK. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, a PUBLIC PARK is any land
area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like
recreational purposes, but shall not include:
      (1)   Privately-owned amusement parks; or
      (2)   Privately-owned or privately-managed golf courses.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE EASEMENT (P.O.S.E.). See §
5.305.
   PUBLIC PROJECT. Capital improvement project that includes a disruptive
activity that will prevent the surface from being restored to its original
condition. PUBLIC PROJECTS shall specifically exclude utilities regulated by
the public utility commission or the railroad commission.
   QUOIN. A differentiated exterior angle or corner of a masonry wall, or one
of the stones or bricks forming such an angle, usually differentiated from
adjoining surfaces by material, texture, color, size or projection.
   RECLAMATION. The process of restoring an area affected by surface mining
operations to its original or other substantially beneficial condition
considering past and possible future uses of the area and the surrounding
topography.
   RECONSTRUCTION. For purposes of the Historic Site Tax Exemption,
RECONSTRUCTION means the act or process of depicting, by means of new
construction, the form, features, and detailing of the exterior of a non-
surviving site, landscape, building, structure, or object for the purpose of
replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic
location.
   RECREATIONAL SPACE. Outdoor space which is made available and maintained in
a suitable condition to afford occupants space for passive and active
recreational pursuits to the exclusion of all other uses and/or recreation
rooms or buildings available to all occupants of the development.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle which is
         a.   Built on a single chassis;
         b.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
         c.   Self-propelled or permanently towable by motor vehicle or light
duty truck;
         d.   Designed primarily not for use as permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use;
and
         e.   Required by Texas law to have a valid vehicle registration when
traveling upon public streets.
      (2)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall not include a manufactured home.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A unified development on a tract of land under
common ownership designed primarily for transient service, on which
recreational vehicles of the general public are parked or situated.
   REGULARLY. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, offering, featuring,
promoting or advertising a happening, occurrence or activity on a recurring
basis or at fixed intervals, or as a customary and regular aspect of the
business.
   REGULATED STRUCTURE. For purposes of §
5.307, Large Animals, of
Chapter 5, Supplemental Use Standards, a REGULATED STRUCTURE shall be any of
the following:
      (1)   A residence, structure or building used for human habitation, other
than the person’s habitation;
      (2)   A restaurant, café or eating establishment; or
      (3)   A church, school, hospital, convalescent home or nursing home.
   REHABILITATION. For purposes of the Historic Site Tax Exemption,
REHABILITATION is the act or process of making possible a compatible use for a
property through exterior repair or alterations while preserving those portions
or features that convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, a building in which persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of
religious belief.
   RELOCATION, ALTERNATIVES. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, ALTERNATIVES when referring to relocation refers to options other
than the proposed relocation that may be a practical means of saving a historic
property from demolition.
   RELOCATION, INTERIM AND LONG-TERM PROTECTION. For purposes of the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, INTERIM AND LONG-TERM PROTECTION when referring to
relocation means effective planning and protective measures initiated before
relocation that address the methods, scope, scale, and timeline of a relocation
and rehabilitation of a historic property.
   RELOCATION, RARITY. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
RARITY when referring to relocation means a historic property that is one of
the older structures in a historic district or has a design that has a
distinctive character that is rare in Fort Worth.
   RELOCATION, SETTING OF THE EXISTING AND RECIPIENT SITE. For purposes of the
Historic Preservation Ordinance, SETTING OF THE EXISTING AND RECIPIENT SITE
when referring to relocation means the physical environment of a historic
property (and its recipient site) that illustrates the character of the place.
Integrity of setting remains when the surroundings of a place to navigation
have not been subjected to radical change.
   RELOCATION, STREETSCAPE INTEGRITY. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, STREETSCAPE INTEGRITY when referring to relocation, streetscape
integrity refers to the effect of reinforcing the intactness of a streetscape
through the relocation of similar historic properties.
   RELOCATION, STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY. For purposes of the Historic Preservation
Ordinance, STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY when referring to relocation refers to the
effect on the structural soundness of a historic property or other nearby
historic properties due to relocation.
   RENT or SUBRENT. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, the act of permitting a
room or other portion of the premises to be occupied in exchange for any form
of consideration.
   REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE, ORDINARY. For the purposes of the Historic
Preservation Ordinance, any work, the purpose and effect of which is to correct
any deterioration or decay of or damage to a structure or property, or any part
thereof, and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to its
condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage, using the same
materials or those materials available which are as close as possible to the
original and all of which must comply with applicable codes and ordinances.
ORDINARY REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE does not include a  change in design, material
or outward appearance, but does include in-kind replacement or repair.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Collectively, the districts listed in §
4.100(b), as well as the “DHR1,” “DHR2,” “MH,” “MU-1” and “MU-2” districts and
“PD” planned development districts that allow residential uses.
   RESTAURANT. A place which is regularly open in a bona fide manner; which is
used and kept open for the service of food to customers for compensation; which
has suitable seating for guests; which has suitable facilities for preparation
and service of an assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the
day or night and the serving of food is the primary business of such place, and
which may, as an accessory use, provide patrons with space for dancing or
permit patrons to dance. Includes restaurants legally authorized (by duly
issued permits from the city and state) to sell alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises; provided however that gross receipts for alcoholic
beverages shall not exceed 50% of the total gross receipts.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. Any restaurant providing car service.
   RESTORATION. For the purposes of the Historic Site Tax Exemption,
RESTORATION means the act or process of accurately depicting the form,
features, and character of the exterior of a historic property as it appeared
at a particular period of time by means of the removal of features from other
periods in its history and reconstruction of missing features from the
restoration period.
   RETAIL SALES, GENERAL. A facility for the retail sale of merchandise,
including without limitation bicycle sales or repairs; bird store; Christmas
tree sales; cigar or tobacco store; confectionery store; craft or novelty
store; department store; dry goods or notions store; electronic media sales or
servicing; florist shop; fur storage or sales; gasoline sales; gift shop;
hardware, paint or wallpaper store; jewelry store; musical instruments, sales
and supplies; optical goods sales; pet shop; piano store; and variety store.
   RETAIL SMOKE SHOP. A store that derives 90% or more of its gross annual
sales from the sale of tobacco, cigarettes, smoking and electronic smoking
devices, or related products and accessories and does not sell alcoholic
beverages for onsite consumption.
   ROOMER or LODGER. A person occupying any room or group of rooms used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes and paying compensation for said rooms or group of rooms by
prearrangement for a week or more at a time to an owner or operator who is not
related by blood, adoption or marriage to such person. Any person occupying
such room or group of rooms and paying such compensation without prearrangement
or for less than a week at a time shall be classed for purposes of this
ordinance not as a ROOMER or LODGER, but as a guest of a commercial lodging
establishment (bed and breakfast home or inn, hotel or motel).
   ROWHOUSE. See TOWNHOUSE.
   RPZ. The runway protection zone at the ends of the runways for the municipal
airports.
   RUNWAY. The paved surface of an airport designated for the landing and
taking off of aircraft.
   RUSTICATION. Rough masonry materials often located at the base of a
classical building; the rough stones being expressive of strength and
therefore, logically, required at the base.
   SCHOOL. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, SCHOOL includes any of the
following:
      (1)   Public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities
providing education up through and including the twelfth grade level; and
      (2)   Licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State
of Texas or by the City of Fort Worth that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of
age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
   SCREENING FENCE. A solid fence or wall constructed so that no person can see
the area surrounded by the fence. (See §
5.304.)
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR THE TREATMENT OF HISTORIC
PROPERTIES. The standards established by the Secretary of the Interior and set
out in 36 C.F.R. Part 68, as amended or may be amended in the future.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS STANDARDS. The
standards established by the Secretary of the Interior and set out in 36 C.F.R.
Part 61, Appendix A, as amended or may be amended in the future, for advising
federal, state, and local agencies on professional qualifications standards for
the identification, evaluation, documentation, registration, treatment, and
interpretation of historic and archeological resources.
   SERVICE BUILDING. For the purposes of
Chapter 4, §
4.202, manufactured home (“MH”) district, a structure housing toilet, lavatory
and such other facilities as may be required.
   SETTING. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, setting of a
heritage structure, site, or area is defined as the immediate and extended
environment that is part of, or contributes to, its significance and
distinctive character. Beyond the physical and visual aspects, the setting
includes interaction with the natural environment and past or present social or
spiritual practices, customs, traditional knowledge, use or activities and
other forms of intangible cultural heritage aspects that created and formed the
space as well as the current and dynamic cultural, social, and economic
context.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
      (1)   Any commercial venture whose operations:
         a.   Include the providing, featuring or offering of employees or
entertainment personnel who appear on the premises while in a state of nudity
or simulated nudity and provide live performances or entertainment for
customers; or
         b.   As a “principal business operation” (35% or more) as defined
herein, provide, feature or offer non-live, sexually-explicit entertainment,
materials, or items for sale or rental to customers; or provide or offer a
service or exhibition of materials or items which are intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, said materials or
items being distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on subject matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or
“specified anatomical areas;” and
         c.   Include, but are not limited to, any form of sexually oriented
business, adult arcade, adult bath, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult entertainment cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, nude modeling business, massage parlor, nude modeling
studio, adult out-call establishment, escort agencies, sexually oriented
encounter center or other business establishment conducting sexually oriented
activity as defined or regulated herein.
      (2)   The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall not be construed to
regulate:
         a.   An otherwise lawfully operating retail business which does not
offer or feature sexually explicit merchandise, material or items for sale or
rental to customers as a “principal business operation” (35% or more) and does
not offer or feature any form of live sexually oriented entertainment;
         b.   Any clothing business that offers wearing apparel for sale to
customers but does not exhibit merchandise on live models;
         c.   A bar, nightclub or lounge or other non-sexually oriented
business that occasionally promotes a swimsuit or similar contest in which the
contestants do not appear “nude” or in “a state of nudity;”
         d.   Any medical practice operated by or employing licensed
psychologists, physicians, physical therapists, registered nurses,
chiropractors or athletic trainers engaged in practicing the healing arts; or
         e.   Any educational courses conducted at a proprietary school
licensed by the State of Texas, or conducted by a private college or university
which operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
junior college, college or university licensed by the State of Texas; and where
in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class and where no more than one nude model appears before the
class at any one time.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENCOUNTER CENTER. A commercial enterprise that, for any
form of consideration or prize, offers physical activities, contact, wrestling
or tumbling between male and female persons, or between persons of the same
sex, when one or more of the persons is in a “state of nudity” or “simulated
nudity” and the activity is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to its customers.
   SHELTER. A facility providing temporary housing primarily to indigent,
needy, homeless or transient persons and which may also provide ancillary
services such as counseling and/or vocational training, bathing, dining and
food preparation.
   SHOOTING GALLERY. An area used for target practice by use of a firearm other
than one used for or with live ammunition and for the sole purpose of
amusement, games of chance or other arcade type activity.
   SHOOTING RANGE. An area used for the discharge of firearms using live
ammunition, including target, silhouette, skeet, trap, black powder, self-
defense or similar recreational and/or professional shooting.
   SHORT TERM HOME RENTAL. The rental for compensation of dwellings or
accessory dwelling units for the purpose of overnight lodging for a period of
not less than one night and not more than 30 consecutive days other than
ongoing month-to-month tenancy granted to the same renter for the same unit as
their primary residence. This is not applicable to hotels, motels, and bed and
breakfasts homes or bed and breakfast inns.
   SIDE STREET. The frontage that is not a primary street, as defined during
site plan review by the  development services director  or designee.
   SIGN.
      (1)   Any surface, fabric, display or visual medium, including the
component parts, which bears letters or sculptured matter, including logos,
used or intended to be used to convey information or to attract attention to
the subject matter of such sign. Graphics which carry no advertising shall not
be construed to be a sign, except where such graphics pictorially display
products or business that convey an advertising intent. The term SIGN includes
the sign structure.
      (2)   For the purpose of
Chapter 5 Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, SIGN means any on-premises
display design, pictorial or other representation that is constructed, placed,
attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever
so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and used
to seed the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise
available at the sexually oriented business. The term SIGN also includes any
representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a
sexually oriented business establishment or to any part of the tract upon which
the establishment is situated.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign employing visible moving parts or the changing of
colors.
   SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign attached to, applied on or supported by, any part of
a building (such as a wall, window, canopy, awning, arcade or marquee).
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. An on-premises sign that is characterized by
changeable copy, letters, symbols or numerals that are not permanently affixed
to the structure, framing or background allowing the letters, characters or
graphics to be modified from time to time manually or by electronic or
mechanical devices, such as but not limited to, a bulletin board, electronic
message board or projected image sign. However, an athletic scoreboard or sign
located on the athletic field sign of a fence shall not be an electronic
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS may not be used to display
commercial messages relating to products or services that are not offered on
the premises.
   SIGN, DETACHED. A sign which is supported by structures, supports or
foundations in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign or part of a sign that contains units which cause
such sign or part thereof to appear to flash or blink. FLASHING SIGNS shall not
include running light signs, twinkle signs or those signs having only one on-
off cycle in any period exceeding six seconds.
   SIGN, ILLEGAL. Any sign erected, constructed, enlarged or altered which does
not conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) or other applicable ordinances in effect at the
time of erection, construction, enlargement or alteration.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light
source.
   SIGN, INFLATABLE OR BALLOON. Air or gas filled balloons or similar devices
used to advertise or define a fixed location.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign that was lawfully installed in compliance with
all city ordinances applicable at the time of installation, but that does not
comply with the current provisions of this zoning ordinance, the sign code (
Chapter 29 of the city code) or other applicable ordinances.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign which is a primary use and advertises businesses,
commodities, activities, services or persons which are not usually available or
present upon the premises upon which such sign is located, or which directs
persons to any location not on the premises. Any sign with more than 10% of the
sign devoted to such use shall be deemed to be an OFF-PREMISES SIGN.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which advertises the business name, owner and/or
commodities, activities or services offered on the premises where such sign is
located and where at least 90% of the sign is devoted to the advertisement of
such business name, owner, commodities, activities or services.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign designed, constructed or used to facilitate the
placing or moving of same from one location to another.
   SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST. A sign conveying a message of interest to the public
in general, including:
      (1)   Time and temperature signs;
      (2)   Signs and notices containing identification of nonprofit service
clubs, religious organizations or charitable associations and containing
information relating to meetings, locations, fund-raising or other nonprofit
activities; and
      (3)   Signs relaying news messages and financial and stock market
messages.
   SIGN, PROJECTED IMAGE. A sign which involves a fixed and non-moving image
projected on the face of a wall or structure from a distant electronic device,
such that the image does not originate from the plane of the wall or structure.
   SIGN, REVOLVING. A sign which revolves on, around or about a structural
support. A structural support can be a pole, building or other type of support.
Revolving parts within or upon a display surface shall not be construed as a
REVOLVING SIGN.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on the roof of a
building.
   SIGN, RUNNING LIGHT OR TWINKLE. A sign with low wattage outline lighting
which appears to flash. Any sign employing more than four complete on-off
cycles per second shall be considered a RUNNING LIGHT OR TWINKLE SIGN.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports or is intended to support any
sign.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, other than a window sign, intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time only, including by way of example but
not of limitation, any sign, banner, pennant, valance, inflatable or balloon or
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, wallboard or
other light materials, with or without frames or wheels.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any commercial copy located on the internal and/or external
surface of a window or a glass door, or is located less than ten feet from the
window or a glass door of any establishment for the purpose of being visible to
and read from the outside of the building.
   SIGNIFICANT TREE. A protected tree that is 24 inches in diameter (75.36
inches in circumference) or 18 inches in diameter (56.55 inches in
circumference) for Post Oaks and Blackjack Oaks.
   SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. Individuals occupying a dwelling unit that have
established ties and familiarity with each other; share a lease agreement, have
consent of the owner to reside on the property, or own the property; jointly
use common areas and interact with each other; and share the household
expenses, such as rent or ownership costs, utilities, and other household and
maintenance costs, or share responsibility for household activities. If the
unit is rented, all residents over the age of 18 have chosen to jointly occupy
the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease with
joint use and responsibility for the premises.
   SITE. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, a SITE is the
location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or
activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished,
where the location itself possess historic, cultural, or archeological value
regardless of the value of any existing structure.
   SITE, DEVELOPED. For the purpose of the landscape provisions in
Chapter 6, Article 3, a premises that contains existing structures or buildings
for which a building permit was required.
   SITE PLAN. A plan showing the location all the protected trees by size and
species that are six inches or greater on the site, the location of all
easements, the location of all proposed buildings, a grading plan, if
applicable; the protected trees desired to be removed, the protected trees that
shall remain on the site, and an accompanying document indicating the reason
for the proposed removal of any protected tree, and if applicable, a
description on how the existing healthy protected trees proposed to be retained
will be protected from damage from construction.
   SITE, UNDEVELOPED. For the purposes of the landscape provisions in
Chapter 6, Article 3, a premises that does not contain a structure or building
for which a building permit was required.
   SMALL BOX DISCOUNT STORE. A retail store with a floor area less than 10,000
square feet that offers for sale an assortment of physical goods, products or
merchandise directly to the consumer, including food or beverages for off-
premise consumption, household products, personal grooming and health products
and other consumer good. Small box discount stores do not include retail stores
that: contain a prescription pharmacy; sell gasoline or diesel fuel; primarily
sell specialty food items (e.g. meat, seafood, cheese, or oils and vinegars);
dedicate at least 15% of floor area or shelf space to fresh foods and
vegetables.
   SPATIALLY DISCRETE. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
SPATIALLY DISCRETE means two or more historic properties separated by non-
significant areas where the space between the historic properties is not
related to the significance of a historic district and visual continuity is not
a factor in the significance.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The following portions of the human body:
      (1)   Genitals, whether or not in a state of sexual arousal;
      (2)   Pubic region or pubic hair;
      (3)   Buttock(s);
      (4)   The portions of the female breast(s) beginning from a point
immediately above the top of the areola and continuing downward to the lowest
portion of the breast(s); or
      (5)   Any combination of the above.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes one or more of the following:
      (1)   The fondling, massaging or other erotic touching or stimulation of
“specified anatomical areas” or of an erogenous zone;
      (2)   Normal or perverted sexual activity, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the
activities above.
   STABILIZATION. For the purpose of the Historic Preservation Ordinance, the
act or process of applying measures designed to re-establish a weather
resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated
structure or property while maintaining the essential form as it presently
exists.
   STABLE, COMMERCIAL. A structure in which livestock used for pleasure riding
or driving are housed or kept for hire, including a riding track.
   STABLE, PRIVATE. Space in a principal building or an accessory building on
the same lot used for stabling of livestock owned by the occupants, exclusively
as an accessory use.
   STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE (SHPO). The state office responsible for
administering federal historic preservation programs as defined in the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended and or may be amended in the
future. The Executive Director of the Texas Historical Commission serves as the
SHPO for the State of Texas.
   STEALTH TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER. A facility that is designed in such a way
that the facility is not readily recognizable as telecommunication tower or
telecommunication equipment. STEALTH FACILITIES may include, but are not
limited to, totally enclosed antennas; wireless facilities that replicate,
duplicate or simulate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles,
monopoles with totally enclosed antennas or light poles and that serve as a
function of the use(s) of the site; and camouflaged wireless facilities that
are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment.
   STOOP. A small raised platform that serves as an entrance to a building.
   STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE. A retail facility offering a variety of
merchandise, including, but not limited to, the following: food, beverages,
clothing, automotive supplies, personal hygiene items, toys, sports equipment,
books, electronic equipment and household items. Does not include retail
facilities specifically listed in the retail sales and service section of the
nonresidential use table in §
4.803.
   STORE, HOME IMPROVEMENT. A retail facility the primary focus of which is to
offer a variety of merchandise for home improvement, including, but not limited
to, building materials and supplies, appliances, plants, gardening supplies and
home furnishings. Does not include retail facilities specifically listed in the
retail sales and service section of the nonresidential use table in §
4.803.
   STORE, LARGE RETAIL. A store for the retail sale of merchandise with a
footprint exceeding 50,000 square feet, including without limitation a general
merchandise store, home improvement store, antique shop, appliance sales or
supply store, new or used clothing store, new or used furniture store,
greenhouse or plant nursery, grocery store, pawn shop or facility for general
retail sales. A LARGE RETAIL STORE that sells to members only or that also
offers merchandise at wholesale is not excluded from this definition.
   STORY. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and
the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part
of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A TOP
STORY ATTIC is a half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the
middle of the interior height of said story. The FIRST STORY is the highest
story having its interior floor surface not more than four feet above the curb
level, or the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the
building were it set back from the street.
   STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords principal means of
access to adjacent property.
   STREET, LIMITED LOCAL. As defined in the City of Fort Worth plan commission
rules and regulations, § 403(b), Street Design: Limited Local Streets, a street
not more than 600 feet in length ending in a cul-de-sac and serving no more
than 25 dwelling units; a loop-type street not more than 1,600 feet in length
having at least one 90-degree bend and serving no more than 80 dwelling units;
or a street not more than 800 feet in length serving no more than 45 dwelling
units.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a foundation for habitable
or nonhabitable purposes, which requires location on the ground, or attached to
something having a location on the ground. For signage, this includes but is
not limited to advertising signs, billboards and poster panels, but exclusive
of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls, sidewalks and curbs.
   STRUCTURE FOR THE PURPOSES OF § 4.405 STRUCTURES. An object permanently or
temporarily constructed or installed by humans, including, but without
limitation, buildings as measured at its highest peak, towers, spires,
architectural features, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in
the roof or in exterior walls.
   STRUCTURAL SOIL. An artificially engineered medium that meets or exceeds
road bearing-load requirements for structurally sound pavement design and
installation while supporting tree growth, remaining root penetrable and
encouraging deep root growth away from the pavement surface. Examples include
C.U. Structural Soil, Permatill and Utelite E-Soil.
   SUBSTANTIAL TREATMENT. For purposes of the Historic Preservation Ordinance,
SUBSTANTIAL TREATMENT means treatment at a cost that equals or exceeds the
greater of (i) $3,000.00 or (ii) 20% of the appraised value of a structure as
of the year prior the year in which a historic site tax exemption application
is deemed complete as determined by the HPO.
   TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER. A facility, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers, but not including stealth
telecommunication towers, designed to support one or more antennas and to
contain ancillary facilities designed and used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving and relaying voice, data and other similar signals to or from various
wireless communication devices. For purposes of this definition, amateur radio
transmission facilities not used for commercial purposes and facilities used
exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals are not
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   TEMPORARY GUEST. A nonpaying guest of the occupants of the primary residence
who does not utilize an accessory dwelling unit or primary residence as an
address for any purposes and whose stay does not exceed more than 14 days in a
consecutive 30-day period. A roomer or lodger shall not be considered a
TEMPORARY GUEST.
   TEMPORARY IRRIGATION. An irrigation system that is used to establish native
and adaptive plant species and is removed after one year of establishment
period.
   TERMINAL, MOTOR FREIGHT. The use of property or buildings for the temporary
parking of motor freight vehicles or trucks of common carriers, during loading
and unloading and between trips, including necessary warehouse space for
storage of transitory freight.
   TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE. A one-family dwelling constructed as part of a series
of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or
dwellings by party walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no
visible separation between walls or roof, and each dwelling being located on a
separately platted lot. A townhome in the urban residential, low intensity
mixed-use, low intensity mixed-use greenfield, high intensity mixed-use and
high intensity mixed-use greenfield districts shall be defined as a development
containing three or more attached dwelling units consolidated into a single
structure.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. For the purpose of
Chapter 5, Article 2, Sexually Oriented Businesses, TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR
CONTROL of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possession the
ownership or control.
   TRANSIENT OR SHORT TERM RESIDENT. Individuals occupying a dwelling unit,
including rental of a home or room, for a period of less than 30 days. The
definition also includes the usage of property for a daily or weekly rental as
a commercial business.
   TRANSMISSION TOWER. A tower and ancillary support equipment providing
transmissions via radio, TV infrared or other similar means of signal
transmission between towers and receivers.
   TREATMENT. For purposes of the Historic Site Tax Exemption, TREATMENT means
rehabilitation, preservation, reconstruction, restoration or any combination of
those activities as they are defined in this zoning ordinance. Treatment also
includes "treated".
   TREE. A woody plant having at least one well-defined stem or trunk, a
defined crown and a mature height of at least ten feet.
   TREE REMOVAL. The cutting, destroying, removing, moving, poisoning, banding,
marking or effectively destroying through damaging, any tree six inches or
greater in diameter, regardless of species, situated on property regulated by
the zoning ordinance without first obtaining an urban forestry plan/permit from
the city forester.
   TREE REMOVAL PERMIT. A permit required for the removal of a single tree as
required under §
6.302.
   TUTOR/PRIVATE EDUCATION CLASSES. For the purposes of
Chapter 5, Article 1, Home Occupations, TUTOR/PRIVATE EDUCATION CLASSES shall
mean a person or persons employed to provide, in a dwelling unit, additional,
specialized or remedial instruction to another, which supplements the person’s
core education.
   URBAN AGRICULTURE/URBAN GARDEN/URBAN FARM. A public or private, for profit
or nonprofit agricultural operation consisting of the planting and harvesting
of crops, the raising of fowl, and beekeeping. This does not include the
raising of large animals for production except as allowed in the Land Use
Charts, per §
5.146 Supplemental Standards.
   URBAN FORESTRY ADMINISTRATOR. For the purpose of tree preservation, that
person or persons designated by the director of the development services
department to provide administrative review and approval of urban forestry
plans/permits (urban forestry compliance section).
   URBAN FORESTRY PERMIT. A permit required under §
6.302 for the removal of more than one tree or the construction of new
structures on properties greater than one acre for where a building permit is
required.
   URBAN FORESTRY PLAN. AA plan showing the location of existing canopy
coverage and any trees that are classified as large or significant as per §
6.302 on the site, the location of all easements, the location of all proposed
buildings, a grading plan, if applicable; the trees desired to be removed, the
trees that shall remain on the site, and an accompanying document indicating
the reason for the proposed removal of any tree, and if applicable, a
description on how the existing healthy trees proposed to be retained will be
protected from damage from construction.
   URBAN MANOR HOUSE. A building with two to five attached dwelling units
consolidated in a single structure. A manor house is located on a single lot
and must contain common walls. Dwelling units within a building may be situated
either wholly or partially over or under other dwelling units.
   VENDOR, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. For the purposes of §
5.406, a VENDOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY shall include a determination of the
location of the vendor for verification of the proper zoning, verification that
the safety code requirements are met and submission of a letter from the
property owner, all applicable code compliance department permits and sales tax
registration.
   VENDOR, DOOR-TO-DOOR. A person who travels by foot or vehicle from door-to-
door, house-to-house, building-to-building or place-to-place, within the city,
for the purpose of offering for sale, or soliciting orders for future delivery,
of food, goods, services or merchandise.
   VENDOR, FOOD. A food vendor that sells food products, either potentially
hazardous or non-potentially hazardous, from an informal fixed location out of
a vehicle that is pulled or is portable under its own power.
   VENDOR, MERCHANDISE. A merchandise vendor that sells merchandise products
from an informal fixed location.
   VENDOR, TRANSIENT FOOD. A food vendor that sells food products, from a
pushcart or out of a mobile vending unit that is pulled or is portable under
its own power, for sale to the general public from an informal location, other
than a public street or thoroughfare, for a period of not more than 60
consecutive minutes at any one location.
   WALKWAY (OR BRIDGE). A passage that provides access from the land to a boat
dock, marina or other floating facility.
   WAREHOUSE. A facility greater than 500 square feet in floor area for the
inside storage of commodities.
   WATER TABLE (ARCHITECTURAL). A projecting course of molded brick between the
upper and ground floor. The wall above the water table steps back several
inches.
   WATER USE AND ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement granted by the City of Fort Worth
enclosed on one side by the lakefront property line, on a second side by the
waters of Lake Worth, and on the third and fourth side by two lines, each
beginning at opposite ends of the lakefront property line and each being a
projection of the side lot lines of each lot as shown on the plat of record or
survey for the property.
   WET SWALE. A system that consists of an open conveyance channel which has
been excavated to the water table or to poorly drained soils.
   YARD. An open space other than a courtyard, on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth
of the front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance
between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the street
to the largest required setback of either the required, established, platted
building line or projected front yard. Setbacks shall be measured from the
front property line. Each street frontage shall be considered a front yard
except that in one- and two-family districts, the yards with street frontage
may be considered a side or rear yard if there are no other front yards
projecting along that same block face. Determination of what type of yard it
should be will be dependent upon the setback that is necessary to maintain
uniformity along the block face.
   YARD, PROJECTED FRONT. See §
6.101(f).
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the main building, except
that area included in the side yard as defined below.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear yard.
(Ord. 14331, § 1, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 14337, § 8, passed 9-12-2000; Ord.
14556, § 1, passed 3-20-2001; Ord. 14713, § 4, passed 7-17-2001; Ord. 14780, §
1, passed 9-18-2001; Ord. 14872, § 1, passed 11-27-2001; Ord. 15112, § 4,
passed 5-21-2002; Ord. 15166, § 3, passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 15249, § 1, passed 9-
17-2002; Ord. 15283, § 1, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 15331, § 5, passed 11-12-2002;
Ord. 15405, § 1, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 15406, § 1, passed 1-14-2003; Ord.
15830, § 1, passed 1-13-2004; Ord. 15839, § 5,passed 1-20-2004; Ord. 15848, §
2, passed 1-27-2004; Ord. 16118, § 2, passed 9-14-2004; Ord. 16119, § 3, passed
9-14-2004; Ord. 16183, § 2, passed 10-19-2004; Ord. 16330, § 13, passed 3-8-
2005; Ord. 16270, § 2, passed 1-18-2005; Ord. 17093, § 7, passed 8-8-2006; Ord.
17228, § 2, passed 10-3-2006; Ord. 17276, § 1, passed 11-7-2006; Ord. 17513, §
1, passed 4-17-2007; Ord. 17514, § 2, passed 4-17-2007; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed
4-24-2007; Ord. 18009, § 4, passed 3-4-2008; Ord. 18208-07-2008A, § 3, passed
7-29-2008; Ord. 18434-1-2008, § 2, passed 1-6-2009, eff. 1-14-2009; Ord. 18504-
03-2009, § 9, passed 3-3-2009, eff. 3-11-2009; Ord. 18615-05-2009, §§ 3, 4,
passed 5-12-2009; Ord. 18745-08-2009, § 6, passed 8-4-2009; Ord. 18746-08-2009,
§ 3, passed 8-4-2009; Ord. 18823-09-2009, §§ 3, 4, passed 9-15-2009; Ord.
18902-11-2009, § 3, passed 11-3-2009; Ord. 19013-01-2010, § 4, passed 1-26-
2010; Ord. 19026-02-2010, § 8, passed 2-2-2010; Ord. 19227-07-2010, § 5, passed
7-13-2010; Ord. 19428-11-2010, § 2, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 19515-01-2011, § 2,
passed 1-4-2011; Ord. 19587-03-2011, § 5, passed 3-8-2011; Ord. 20158-04-2012,
§ 3, passed 4-3-2012; Ord. 20454-10-2012, § 8, passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 20510-12-
2012, § 4, passed 12-4-2012, eff. 12-11-2012; Ord. 20666-03-2013, § 4, passed
3-19-2013, eff. 4-9-2013; Ord. 20898-09-2013, § 2, passed 9-10-2013, eff. 9-25-
2013; Ord. 20901-09-2013, § 2, passed 9-10-2013; eff. 9-25-2013; Ord. 21032-11-
2013, § 2, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 21499-10-2014, § 2, passed 10-14-2014, eff.
10-23-2014; Ord. 21715-04-2015; § 1, passed 4-7-2015, eff. 4-25-2015; Ord.
21945-10-2015, § 1, passed 10-13-2015, eff. 10-17-2015; Ord. 22154-04-2016, §
6, passed 4-5-2016, eff. 4-21-2016; Ord. 22335-08-2016, § 7, passed 8-2-2016;
Ord. 22337-08-2016, § 3, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 22703-05-2017, § 6 passed 5-2-
2017; Ord. 22810-08-2017, § 5, passed 8-1-2017, eff. 9-7-2017; Ord. 23110-02-
2018, § 1, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 23166-04-2018, §§ 2, 4, passed 4-3-2018; Ord.
23971-12-2019, § 2, passed 12-3-2019, eff. 12-11-2019; Ord. 24030-02-2020, §
22, passed 2-4-2020; Ord. 25514-05-2022, § 1, passed 5-10-2022, eff. 5-18-2022;
Ord. 25955-01-2023, § 1, passed 1-10-2023, eff. 1-20-2023; Ord. 26358-08-2023,
§ 1, passed 8-8-2023; Ord. 27381-12-2024, § 2, passed 12-10-2024, eff. 12-20-
2024; Ord. 27545-03-2025, § 1, passed 3-11-2025, eff. 5-30-2025; Ord. 27615-04-
2025, § 2, passed 4-22-2025, eff. 5-9-2025)
APPENDIX A: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
HISTORICAL NOTE
   The first comprehensive zoning ordinance for the City of Fort Worth was
adopted by the city council on September 6, 1940, effective October 1, 1940,
and was numbered Ord. 2082. This ordinance was published in pamphlet form and
included maps showing the various zoning districts.
   On September 1, 1947, the city council adopted a digest and codification of
Ord. 2082, including all text amendments between the adoption date and October
1, 1940. This ordinance was published in pamphlet form, with new district maps,
and was effective September 1, 1947.
   On November 26, 1952, the city council adopted a new comprehensive zoning
ordinance numbered 3011, effective March 1, 1953, which was published in
pamphlet form with all amendments up to date and new district maps.
   Since March 1, 1953, there have been several amendments to the text of Ord.
3011 and a large number of changes in the zoning districts. This pamphlet,
which includes the text amendments adopted since March 1, 1953, does not
include district maps; however, the maps are on file in the zoning office at
the city hall, and are kept up to date by the zoning staff. Current information
on the zoning classification of all land within the corporate limits is thereby
available to the public.
   Following is a list of ordinances which are text amendments, with their
effective dates and a brief clue to the subject matter:
Ordinance Effective date Subject
Ordinance Effective Subject
          date
2082      October   Original comprehensive zoning ordinance
          1, 1940
2110      May 14,   Amended front yard requirements
          1941
2147      October   Permitted conversion of accessory buildings to separate dwellings
          7, 1942
2429      July 16,  Zoned area annexed December 17, 1946
          1947
2434      August 2, Extensive text amendments
          1947
2437      July 30,  Repealed ordinance permitting conversion of accessory buildings to separate dwellings
          1947
2082      September Digest and codification of Ord. 2082
          1, 1947
2514      February  Amended accessory building regulations
          25, 1948
2570      August    All previously unzoned property zoned “A”
          11, 1948
2745      February  Amended height and area regulations
          15, 1950
2754      March 22, Board authority to grant public garage in “E;” Auxiliary parking in “A” to “D;” amended light industrial uses
          1950
2777      June 21,  Amended height regulations
          1950
2803      September Added cleaning and dyeing works
          13, 1950
3011      March 1,  Digest and codification as new ordinance
          1953
3063      April 22, Amended regulations as to churches and nonconforming uses
          1953
3230      August    Amended definitions, “E-R” uses, “E” uses; created “F-R” district; amended “F,” “I,” “J” uses; amended height
          25, 1954  and area regulations
3340      May 18,   Amended “H” height regulations
          1955
3409      December  Permitted advertising signs in required yards in “E” district
          14, 1955
3534      September Permitted drive-in business in “E” district with sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption
          19, 1956
3709      September Motor freight terminals in “I” district
          13, 1957
3747      January   Fees adopted for zoning petitions and board of adjustment applications
          1, 1958
3770      February  Open air swimming pools in “E” district
          21, 1958
3795      April 11, Excluded sale of alcoholic beverages in “F-R” district
          1958
3939      September Permitted bowling alleys in “F-R” district subject to restrictions
          12, 1958
4086      May 1,    Permitted auto laundry and steam cleaning in “F” district subject to restrictions
          1959
4087      May 1,    Amended horsepower limitations in “I” and “J” districts
          1959
4160      July 17,  Permitted small animal hospitals in “E” district subject to restrictions
          1959
4187      October   Provided for appointment of alternative members on board of adjustment
          9, 1959
4368      September Permitted casting of aluminum products and manufacture of die-casting molds, dies and cores in “J” districts
          16, 1960
4635      May 21,   Eliminated “cans” and “drums” under paragraph 18 in “K” districts
          1962
4751      October   Reduced to 4 the minimum number of members of zoning board of adjustment required to hold a public hearing
          29, 1962
4792      January   Revised § 19, off-street parking and loading requirements
          7, 1963
4793      January   Amended § 1, “definitions”
          7, 1963
4794      January   Reduced required rear yards in “E,” “F-R” and “F” districts
          7, 1963
4795      January   Added “E-P” planned commercial district to district listing
          7, 1963
4796      January   Added “E-P” planned commercial district, use, height and area regulations
          7, 1963
5062      November  Added casting of magnesium products in “J” light industrial districts
          27, 1963
5127      March 9,  Permitted self-service car wash in “E” district
          1964
5358      April 19, Amended § 25, “changes and amendments”
          1965
5572      May 16,   Added “AG” agricultural district
          1966
5756      March 9,  Amended §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 9A, 10, 16, 18, 19, 20 and 25; added § 2B “CF” community facilities
          1967      district
5996      September Reworded regulation requiring a building to be located on a defined lot
          9, 1968
6066      March 17, Established floor-area ratio option as a method of adjusting height limitation in multifamily, commercial and
          1969      industrial districts
6081      April 14, Established new off-street parking for residential uses based upon both the number of dwelling units and
          1969      number of bedrooms
6184      October   Amended § 1, § 2, § 3, § 4, § 5, § 17 and § 18
          27, 1969
6197      November  Amended “C” and “D” rear yards; repealed item A.5.c. of § 18
          17, 1969
6229      January   Repealed items 6,b) and 6,c) of subsection A, § 18
          12, 1970
6311      June 8,   Added § 2C, “MH” mobile home park district
          1970
6381      October   Amended auto parking area requirements in “E-R” and § 9
          28, 1970
6404      December  Provided for recreational vehicle parks
          14, 1970
6439      March 1,  Provided for land use intensity ratio development
          1971
6527      August 9, Clarified alcoholic beverage sale in “E” district
          1971
6564      October   Permitted dancing in “E” district
          11, 1971
6566      October   Added “IP” industrial park district
          11, 1971
6567      October   Added floodplain zoning districts
          18, 1971
6609      January   Amended regulations as to churches in “A” districts
          10, 1972
6643      March 13, Established fence provisions; off-street parking for elderly housing
          1972
7022      June 17,  Added electric power substation to § 2-C
          1974
7258      January   Amended rezoning fee schedule
          5, 1976
7286      January   Added motor vehicle junk yard to §§ 2-A, 13, 14 and 15
          20, 1976
7327      April 21, Established “HC” historic and cultural subdistrict
          1976
7343      May 10,   Amended § 16A and § 19, off-street parking and loading regulations
          1976
7364      June 14,  Amended § 2 to regulate spacing and size of commercial advertising signs along interstate and primary
          1976      highways
7437      November  Amended § 2, establishment of districts
          18, 1976
7469      January   Amended § 2B, § 5 and § 6 to add additional uses
          10, 1977
7519      March 21, Define “garage sales”
          1977
7622      September Amended application fees
          13, 1977
7703      February  Added ambulance dispatch station to § 20
          14, 1978
7786      August    Amended § 19 to revise minimum distance from street for location of loading docks
          24, 1978
7805      September Amended § 16 to provide for screening walls or fences on double-frontage lots along arterial streets
          24, 1978
8290      March 21, Amended § 19 to revise head-in parking and loading dock provisions
          1981
8379      August 1, Amended § 2-G to fully revise the “HC” historic and cultural subdistrict
          1981
8410      September Corrected Ord. 8379
          18, 1981
8663      November  Comprehensive revisions of all the residential districts (including additions of “R-1,” “D-HR1" and “D-HR2")
          1, 1982   and § 16A, unified residential development provisions
8703      December  Amended § 9A “F-R” to add mini-warehouses
          24, 1982
8743      February  Amended “D-HR1" and “D-HR2" districts regarding yard setbacks; the “ER” district to allow nonresidential “D-
          26, 1983  HR2" uses; and § 16A regarding height and yard regulations
8744      February  Amended the “MH” mobile home district to add provisions for mobile home subdivisions
          26,1983
8785      April 22, Corrected Ord. 8663
          1983
8915      September Provided for $1,000 fine for violations of zoning ordinance
          23, 1983
8934      September Provided for 9 members on the historic and cultural advisory board
          27, 1983
8976      November  Added “A-R” residential district; revisions to other residential districts and unified residential
          23, 1983  regulations
9117      June 21,  Created new § 17A, “off premises signs;” revised regulations regarding on-premises and off-premises signs
          1984
9121      June 21,  Permitted automated recycling machines in “I” and as a special exception in other zones
          1984
9122      June 21,  Regulated disk satellite antennas in “A”
          1984
9123      June 21,  Revised height and area regulations for “D-HR1" and “D-HR2"
          1984
9124      June 21,  Revised § 25, changes and amendments
          1984
9215      September Permitted softball parks in “F-R” district
          16, 1984
9234      October   Regulated temporary batch plants
          17, 1984
9295      January   Created “R-2" residential district
          26, 1985
9457      August    Permitted newspaper distribution centers not exceeding 12,000 square feet in “F-R” district
          20, 1985
9500      December  Required erection of sign for special exception uses
          1, 1985
9501      October   Allowed community homes in “A” and “CF;” care facilities in “CF” and “E-R;” redefined “family”
          22, 1985
9508      November  Grandfathered existing off-premises signs with downward shielded lights
          5, 1985
9537      January   Permitted newspaper distribution centers not exceeding 20,000 square feet in “F-R”
          4, 1986
9538      January   Zoned all unzoned land “AG” Prohibited building permits on unzoned or unplatted land
          4, 1986
9558      January   Exempted fire code signage from “UR” sign regulations
          21, 1986
9602      March 29, Created “PD” planned development district
          1986
9705      August    Amended historic and cultural subdistrict to become a certified local government
          23, 1986
9716      September Created “O-M” office midrise district
          17, 1986
9717      September Created “CD” conservation district
          19, 1986
9759      November  Amendments to § 17A “off-premises signs”
          11, 1986
9760      November  Created § 17B “on-premises signs”
          11, 1986
9780      December  1,000 foot spacing between sexually oriented businesses and churches, schools, parks and residential lots
          14, 1986
9781      December  500 foot spacing between hotels and residential lots; “PD” zoning for hotels
          14, 1986
9798      January   Regulation of pawn shops
          17, 1987
9823      February  Regulation of temporary signs
          17, 1987
9957      September Amendments to § 18A “sexually oriented businesses”
          15, 1987
9958      September Location and regulation of motor vehicle storage yards, junk yards and repair garages
          15, 1987
10095     April 12, Amendments to § 8, “E-R” restricted commercial district, § 9 “E” commercial district, § 9A “F-R” restricted
          1988      commercial district, § 10 “F” commercial district, § 13 “I” light industrial district
10096     April 12, Additional setback requirements and screening of commercial properties
          1988
10097     April 12, Amends § 18 “modification to district regulations
          1988
10169     September Provides for horse racing tracks to be permitted only in “PD” planned development and specifies additional
          13, 1988  development controls for horse racing tracks and allows for commercial stables under certain circumstances
10204     November  Amends § 21, certificate of occupancy, to clarify requirements for same
          15, 1988
10222     December  Adds to § 2-G, “HC” historic and cultural subdistrict, paragraph d. to subsection B.4. pertaining to
          13, 1988  demolition of structures identified as primary resources
          March 14, Adds model homes and portable trailers to be used as temporary construction and/or sales offices or storage
10273     1989      trailers as temporary permitted uses in “A” one- family district and amends § 19, off-street parking and
                    loading in connection with model homes and portable trailers and changing sign restrictions
10334     June 27,  Amends § 2-B, “CF” community facilities district providing development regulations
          1989
          June 27,  Add group homes I to § 5, “C-R” multifamily; add group homes II to § 6, “C” multifamily; add halfway houses
10335     1989      to § 9A, “F-R” restricted commercial; define group homes I, group homes II and halfway houses; amend § 20,
                    board of adjustment, by adding group homes I, group homes II and halfway houses
10340     July 11,  Amend § 18, modifications to district regulations regarding bufferyards and restrictions thereon; screening,
          1989      irrigation, landscaping, point system, permit requirements
10362     August    Amend § 2G, historical and cultural subdistrict
          15, 1989
10444     November  Changing name of historic and cultural subdistrict to the historic and cultural landmark subdistrict and name
          14, 1989  of historic and cultural advisory board to historic and cultural landmark commission
10445     November  Adding paragraph D to § 16, accessory uses, prohibiting accessory structures in front yards
          14, 1989
10446     November  Permitting parole offices only in “FR” restricted commercial district or less restricted zoning districts
          14, 1989
10447     November  Adding community home II for not more than 8 disabled persons in all residential zones and registration of
          14, 1989  community homes, group homes and halfway houses
10567     April 10, Increasing fine from $1,000 to $2,000
          1990
10658     August    Restricting location of new bars in the “F” and “G” commercial districts
          14, 1990
10727     September Adding location restrictions for existing bars in the “F” and “G” commercial districts
          13, 1990
10750     December  Adding paragraph K to § 17, legal nonconforming uses, approving carports added to the front of single-family
          12, 1990  residences
10761     January   Correction to Ord. 10750
          3, 1990
10788     February  Providing definition of “adult entertainment cabarets” and regulating location of adult entertainment
          21, 1991  cabarets
10842     May 17,   Providing for required site plan review by the zoning commission
          1991
10876     July 17,  Providing for appointment of four alternate members to board of adjustment and for election of officers at
          1991      November meeting each year
10937     October   Providing for definition of “reclamation” and amending § 20.C.2 regulating quarries, mines, dredging
          15, 1991  operations, sand and gravel pits and excavation operations
10954     November  Amending § 18.D providing temporary relief from requirements for vacant nonresidential property
          12, 1991
10973     December  Amending §§ 17 and 18 providing exception to bufferyard requirements for buildings destroyed by fire, etc.
          10, 1991
11015     February  Amending “waiver” authority of board of adjustment for sand and gravel mining special exceptions as adopted
          11, 1992  under Ord. 10937
11016     February  Providing definition for “projected front yard” and adding projected front yard to requirements of §§ 16.C.1
          11, 1992  and 3.d.4h)
11072     April 14, Adding “hospice” as a permitted use in “CF,” “C” and “E-R;” amending § 19, subsection B.2 to include hospices
          1992
11073     April 14, Amending § 2-B by removing items A, B and C from 2. special exception uses and placing them in 1. principal
          1992      uses
11130     July 14,  Amending § 20 C.13. to permit day care facilities in “A-R,” “R-1,” “R-2" and “D” districts as a special
          1992      exception
          October   Providing that height and area regulations apply to both buildings and structures in: 2C, “H;” 2D, “IP;” 3,
11187     13, 1992  “A;” 3A, “A-R;” 4, “B;” 4A, “R-1;” 4B, “R-2;” 5, “C-R;” 6, “C;” 7, “D;” 7A, “D-HR1;” 7B, “D-HR2;” 8, “E-R;”
                    8B, “O-M;” 9, “E;” 9A, “F-R;” 10, “F;” 11, “G;” 12, “H;” 13, “I;” 14, “J;” 15, “K”
11188     October   Amending § 9, “E” commercial, by adding recording studios as a permitted use with certain restrictions
          13, 1992
11256     February  Amending § 17-B, on-premises signs, to regulate the location of portable signs
          2, 1993
11281     March 23, Correction to Ord. 11187
          1993
11293     April 13, Amending § 2-G providing definitions, appointing a preservation officer and designation of an “HC” historic
          1993      and cultural overlay district
11425     October   Amending § 9, “E” commercial district; § 9A, “FR” commercial district; § 10, “F” commercial district; § 11,
          12, 1993  “G” commercial district and § 12, “H” business district, to permit outside storage and display of merchandise
11474     December  Amending § 18A, “sexually oriented business” providing a statement of purpose and intent, prohibited
          21, 1993  locations of sexually oriented business, for existing nonconforming uses
          December  Amending § 18B “adult entertainment cabarets” providing a statement of purpose and intent, prohibited
11475     21, 1993  locations of adult entertainment cabarets, that the regulations of § 18A and 18C are also applicable to adult
                    entertainment cabarets
11476     December  Creating a new § 18C “specialized certificates of occupancy” for all sexually oriented business, providing
          21, 1993  for the requirements of specialized certificates of occupancy for all sexually oriented businesses
                    Amending § 1 “definitions” to include definitions of “bed and breakfast home,” and “bed and breakfast inn,”
          December  amending § 19 “off-street parking and loading regulations,” amending § 20, “board of adjustment” to allow
11478     21, 1993  “bed and breakfast home” and “bed and breakfast inn” as a special exception in: 4, “B;” 5, “CR;” 6, “C;” 7,
                    “D;” 7A, “D-HR1;” 7B, “D-HR2;” 8, “E-R;” 9, “E;” 9A, “F-R;” 10, “F;” 11;, “G;” 1; 2, “H;” 13, “I;” 14, “J;”
                    15, “K”
          October   Amending subsection A.18 to § 18, “modifications to district regulations,” to establish criteria for minimum
11707     11, 1994  front, side or rear yard setbacks in districts zoned “F-R” through “K” when they abut and are across the
                    street from a residentially zoned district
11734     November  Repealing subsection 20.c.39 of § 20, “board of adjustment,” concerning, special exceptions for group home I
          15, 1994  and II
          December  Amending § 1 to add a definition of “commercial print center;” amending § 9 to permit commercial print
11769     13, 1994  centers in “E” commercial districts; and amending § 9A to delete the maximum floor area for small job
                    printing shops
11843     February  Amending § 1 to change the definitions of “corner lot,” “through lot” and “front yard” and to add definitions
          14, 1995  of “one- and two-family zoning” and “residential zoning.”
          February  Amending § 15, “K” “heavy industrial district,” by repealing § 15.A and adding a new § 15.A; Amending § 2-H,
11844     14, 1995  “P-D” planned development district only; amending § 20, “board of adjustment,” by deleting certain special
                    exception uses
          May 23,   Amending § 2-G, “HC” historic and cultural landmark overlay district; to provide procedures and criteria for
11970     1995      the designation of historic structures, restrictions on alteration and demolition of designated structures,
                    requirements for certificates of appropriateness and tax incentives
12036     July 11,  By amending § 3,”A” one-family district,” by amending § 3.C.
          1995
                    By amending § 2-H, “P-D” planned development district, by repealing subsection 2-H.I(7) and adding a new sub§
          August    2-H.I(7) to add requirement for landfill, recycling and other materials recovery and processing facilities;
12087     15, 1995  amending § 9, “E” commercial district, to allow outside storage of certain containers for recycling; amending
                    § 20, “board of adjustment,” by allowing a special exception for small collection facilities for recycling
                    cans, glass and other material
                    To amend § 17A, “off-premises signs,” by amending § 17A(H)(1)-(5) concerning the creation and duties of the
12088     August    scenic preservation commission; adding a new § 17A(H)(6) concerning the designation of areas of the city as
          15, 1995  scenic, cultural, architectural or historic areas wherein the location, erection and maintenance of off-
                    premises signs are prohibited
          September By amending § 25, “changes and amendments,” subsection B(3)(A) to require that written notice of all public
12169     12, 1995  hearings before the zoning commission be sent to owners of real property within 300 feet of the property
                    proposed to be rezoned
12125     September By repealing § 18.E, “location regulations applicable to bars in “F” and “G” commercial districts;” and §
          5, 1995   20.C.41 concerning special exceptions for bars made nonconforming by such location requirements
                    By amending § 18 to allow public utility towers, distribution lines and supporting structures in all zoning
                    districts; to allow communication antennas to be mounted on public utility towers; and to provide that
          November  distance and height requirements do not apply to public utility towers, distribution lines and communication
12261     14, 1995  antennas constructed on public utility towers; amending § 20, “board of adjustment,” to allow the
                    construction of communication towers on public utility towers; amending 2-B, “CF” community facilities
                    district, and § 13, “I” light industrial district, to permit radio, television, microwave broadcast, relay
                    and receiving towers, and transmission and retransmission facilities
12347     January   Amending § 1, “definitions” to add definitions of “shooting gallery” and “shooting range.”
          20, 1996
12348     January   Amending § 2-H. “PD” planned development, subsection D(3) to require that written notice of public hearings
          20, 1996  before the zoning commission on-site plan approval be sent to owners of real property within 300 feet
          February  Amending § 1, “definitions,” 2-C, § “MH” mobile home district, § 9, “E” commercial district, § 20, “board of
12405     23, 1996  adjustment” and § 2-F, “O-2" floodplain district, concerning regulation of mobile home parks, mobile home
                    subdivisions and recreational vehicle parks
          May 24,   Amending § 1, “definitions,” § 2-B, “CF” community facilities district, § 8, “E-R” restricted commercial
12525     1996      district and § 20, “board of adjustment” to amend the definition of “day care center” and to establish hours
                    of operation for day care centers operated in residential districts with a special exception
                    Amending § 4A, “R-1" residential district, and § 4B, “R-2" residential district to revise setback and
12526     May 24,   platting requirements for zero lot line and cluster home developments, and to require submission of
          1996      development plans for small lot and zero lot line developments and for townhouse and cluster home
                    developments
          June 4,   Amending § 1, “definitions,” and § 13, “I” light industrial to amend the definition of “kennel” to exclude
12541     1996      residential premises at which the occupant keeps his or her own animals and to establish distance
                    requirements for dog kennels from habitations on another person’s property
          August 6, Amending § 2-H, “PD” planned development district, § 1, “definitions,” § 9A, “FR” restricted commercial
12610     1996      district, and § 20, “board of adjustment” to amend the definition of “halfway house” and to allow halfway
                    houses only in planned development districts
                    Amending §§ 1, 2-H, 8, 8A, 8B, 16, 16A, 17, 18 and 19 concerning zoning and design of multifamily dwellings;
12628     August    prohibiting multifamily dwellings in commercial districts; providing design regulations for multifamily
          17, 1996  dwellings, including number of units permitted per acre, building height and separation setback, parking and
                    open space, and providing for expiration of unified residential development site plans
12665     September Amending Ord. 12628 concerning multifamily dwellings by providing for “PD” planned development zoning for
          14, 1996  mixed residential and nonresidential uses and for multifamily uses in or adjacent to defined employment areas
          November  Amending § 2-G, “historically, culturally, architecturally and archaeologically significant properties,” §
12768     12, 1996  2.C.3 to provide that a structure designated “highly significant endangered” is entitled to the maximum 15
                    year term for tax incentive if rehabilitation of structure is completed within two years after designation
                    Amending § 1, “definitions,” and § 17B, “on-premises signs” to amend the definition of “accessory use,” add a
12812     December  definition of “premises” and provide for execution of a unified sign agreement whereby lots that are
          25, 1996  adjoining or separated only by right-of-way will be considered as a single premises for application of on-
                    premises sign regulations
13038     June 17,  Amended § 19, “off-street parking and loading regulations,” to update reference to building code
          1997
          July 22,  Amended § 1, “definitions,” relating to signage, repealed §§ 17A and 17B concerning off-premises signs and
13092     1997      on-premises signs, respectively, and enacted new § 17A concerning regulation of on-premises and off-premises
                    signs
13286     February  Amended several sections of 3011 to make them consistent with Ord. 13092
          2, 1998
13419     April 14, Amended § 19 to provide references for accessible parking spaces
          1998
13404     October   Enacted § 18E, “landscape requirements”
          1, 1998
13657     December  Amended § 17A, “signs,” concerning permitted alteration of nonconforming signs
          5, 1998
 
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999)
Editor’s note:
   For further amending zoning ordinances, see the Code Comparative Table.
APPENDIX B: MAPS
Exhibit Title See Section
Exhibit Title                                                     See Section
B.1     Reserved
B.2     Reserved
B.3     Downtown tourism area                                     5.200
B.4     Will Rogers Memorial Complex tourism area                 5.200
B.5     Fort Worth Stockyards National Register historic district 6.402
B.6     Central business district scenic preservation district    6.402
B.7     Cultural district scenic preservation district            6.402
B.8     Medical district scenic preservation overlay district     6.402
B.9     Fairmount/Southside historic district                     6.402
B.10    Elizabeth Boulevard National Register historic district   6.402
B.11    Circle Park conservation district                         6.402
B.12    Grand Avenue National Register historic district          6.402
B.13    Masonic Widows Orphans Home historic district             6.402
B.14    Kenwood Court historic district                           6.402
B.15    Central Business District                                 4.905
B.16    Urban Design District-Downtown                            4.402
B.17    Panther Island District                                   4.1304
B.18    Reserved
B.19    Near Southside                                            4.1305
B.20    Near Southside Core Zones                                 4.1305
B.21    Trinity Uptown Peripheral Zone                            4.403
B.22    I-35W Design Overlay District                             4.404
B.23    Camp Bowie (“CB”) District                            4.1306
B.24    Camp Bowie (“CB”) District Sub Areas                  4.1306
B.25    Trinity Lake (“TL”) District                          4.1307
B.26    Trinity Lake (“TL”) District Character Zones          4.1307
B.27    Naval Air Station/JRB Airport Overlay                     4.405(c)
B.28    Spinks Municipal Airport Overlay                          4.405(d)
B.29    Meacham Municipal Airport Overlay                         4.405(e)
B.30    Proposed Overlay Zone Dallas/Fort Worth International     4.405(f)
        Airport
B.31    Fort Worth Alliance Airport Overlay                       4.405(g)
B.32    TCU Residential Overlay District                          4.406
B.33    SY Stockyards Form Based Code                             4.1309
B.34    Berry/University Form Based Code Subdistricts             4.1308
B.35    Berry/University Form Based Code Storm Water Bonus Area   4.1308
B.36    Stop Six (“SS”) Overlay District                      4.408
B.37    One Mile Buffer of Historic Southside Neighborhood and    5.154
        Shelters on E. Lancaster
         
 
Key to Sections
Section         Title
Key to Sections
Section         Title
6.402           Sexually oriented businesses
6.402           Scenic preservation areas and corridors
4.905           Central Business District
4.402           Urban Design District-Downtown
4.1304          Panther Island District
4.1305          Near Southside (“NS”) District
4.403           Trinity Uptown Peripheral Zone (“TUP”) Overlay District
4.404           I-35W Corridor (“I-35W”) Design Overlay District
4.1306          Camp Bowie Overlay (“CB”) District
4.1307          Trinity Lakes (“TL”) District
4.405(c)        Naval Air Station/JRB Airport Overlay
4.405(d)        Spinks Municipal Airport Overlay
4.405(e)        Meacham Municipal Airport Overlay
4.405(f)        Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Overlay
4.405(g)        Fort Worth Alliance Airport Overlay
4.406           TCU Residential (“TCU”) Overlay District
4.1308          Berry/University (“BU”) District
4.1309          SY Stockyards Form Based Code
4.408           Stop Six (“SS”) Overlay District
                 
 
Exhibit B.1: Reserved
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that Exhibit B.1 Employment Center Multifamily Area 1 was
deleted by Ord. 14436, § 5, adopted December 12, 2000.
Exhibit B.2: Reserved
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that Exhibit B.2 Employment Center Multifamily Area 2 was
deleted by Ord. 14436, § 5, adopted December 12, 2000.
Exhibit B.3: Downtown Tourism Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7387.jpg]
Exhibit B.4: Will Rogers Memorial Complex Tourism Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7389.jpg]
Exhibit B.5: Fort Worth Stockyards National Register Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7391.jpg]
Exhibit B.6: Central Business District Scenic Preservation District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7393.jpg]
Exhibit B.7: Cultural District Scenic Preservation District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7395.jpg]
Exhibit B.8: Medical District Scenic Preservation District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7397.jpg]
Exhibit B.9:Fairmount/Southside Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7399.jpg]
Exhibit B.10: Elizabeth Boulevard National Register Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7401.jpg]
Exhibit B.11: Circle Park Conservation District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7403.jpg]
Exhibit B.12: Grand Avenue National Register Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7405.jpg]
Exhibit B.13: Masonic Widows Orphans Home Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7407.jpg]
Exhibit B.14: Kenwood Court Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7409.jpg]
Exhibit B.15: Central Business District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7411.jpg]
Exhibit B.16: Urban Design District-Downtown
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8005.png]
Exhibit B.17: Panther Island District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10497.png]
Exhibit B.18: Reserved
Exhibit B.19: Near Southside
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10499.png]
Exhibit B.20: Near Southside Core Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10501.png]
Exhibit B.21: Trinity Uptown Peripheral Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7421.jpg]
Exhibit B.22: I-35W Design Overlay District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7423.jpg]
Exhibit B.23: Camp Bowie (“CB”) District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9335.jpg]
Exhibit B.24: Camp Bowie (“CB”) District Sub Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9337.jpg]
Exhibit B.25: Trinity Lakes (“TL”) District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10503.png]
Exhibit B.26: Trinity Lakes (“TL”) District Character Zones
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10505.png]
Exhibit B.27: Naval Air Station/JRB Airport Overlay
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7433.jpg]
Exhibit B.28: Spinks Municipal Airport Overlay
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7435.jpg]
Exhibit B.29: Meacham Municipal Airport Overlay
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7437.jpg]
Exhibit B.30: Proposed Overlay Zone Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7439.jpg]
Exhibit B.31: Fort Worth Alliance Airport Overlay Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7441.jpg]
Exhibit B.32: TCU Residential Overlay District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7639.jpg]
Exhibit B.33: SY Stockyards Form Based Code
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10270.png]
 
Exhibit B.34: Berry/University Form Based Code Subdistricts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8019.jpg]
 
Exhibit B.35: Berry/University Form Based Code Storm Water Bonus Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8021.jpg]
 
Exhibit B.36: Stop Six (“SS”) Overlay District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9099.png]
 
Exhibit B.37: One Mile Buffer of Historic Southside Neighborhood and Shelters
on E. Lancaster
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cd21c832a9e48c963a6e53ee18ac4de953972d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10390.gif]
APPENDIX C: USE INDEX
   Uses listed in bold font are found in the residential district use table (§
4.603) or the nonresidential district use table (§
4.803).
   Uses in normal font refer to a bold font use—See the appropriate reference.
   References in italic font indicate where bold font use is found in the
residential district use table (§
4.603) or the nonresidential district use table (§
4.803).
Use Reference
Use                                                                               Reference
Accessory use or building                                                         Listed in both: Residential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses and
                                                                                  nonresidential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
                                                                                  Included in: Gas (natural or artificial) manufacture, processing or storage;
Acetylene gas storage                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Acid manufacture                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult arcade                                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult bath                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult bookstore                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Adult cabaret                                                                     Included in: Sexually oriented business; Listed in: Nonresidential district use
                                                                                  table/commercial uses/entertainment and eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Day care center (child or adult);
Adult day care                                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult entertainment cabaret                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult motel                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult motion picture theater                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult out-call establishment                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult theater                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Adult video store                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Farm, ranch, livestock grazing or pasturing, truck garden, orchard and
                                                                                  plant nursery, agrarian activities, farm accessory buildings (barns, stables,
Agricultural uses                                                                pens, equipment buildings and silos), irrigation intake or pump, wildlife
                                                                                  sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum, game farm, fish hatchery;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
Aircraft landing area                                                             Included in: Airport, aviation field, helistop or landing area;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Airport, aviation field, helistop or landing area                                Includes: Aircraft landing area, Aviation field, helistop, heliport;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern or cocktail lounge; club, private; restaurant, drive-in
Alcoholic beverage sales                                                          restaurant or business or liquor or package store;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Metal casting;
Aluminum products casting                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Depends on level of medical services provided, could be Assisted living facility
Alzheimer’s care facility                                                       or nursing home;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Ambulance dispatch station                                                       Listed in: Residential use table/other and Nonresidential district use table/
                                                                                  public and civic uses/health care facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, outdoor;
Amusement park                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Indoor amusement enterprises, video arcade, shooting gallery,
                                                                                  billiards or pool hall, skating rink (roller or ice), dance hall, disco (does
Amusement, indoor                                                                not include bowling alley or circus);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Outdoor commercial amusement enterprises, amusement park, baseball
                                                                                  stadium, softball park, stadium, concession stands, miniature golf, archery
Amusement, outdoor                                                               range, zoo (private);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Revival (temporary), Rodeo (temporary), circus (temporary), carnival,
Amusement, outdoor (temporary)                                                   temporary tent and outdoor assembly, temporary open sales booths and ancillary
                                                                                  facilities;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
                                                                                  Includes: Fat rendering, fertilizer manufacture, distillation of bones; tallow,
                                                                                  grease or lard manufacture; tannery, curing or storage of raw hides or skins;
Animal by-products processing                                                    wool pulling or scouring; yeast plant;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Animal shelter                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t 
Appliance sales, supply or repair                                                Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Aquarium (commercial)                                                             Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Aquarium (public)                                                                 controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Antenna                                                                           Listed as: Telecommunication antenna;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Antique shop                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Apartment hotel                                                                   Obsolete use deleted 
                                                                                  Listed as: Multifamily dwellings (apartments);
Apartments or multifamily dwellings                                               Listed in: Residential district use table/household living; nonresidential
                                                                                  district use table/household living 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Arboretum                                                                         controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Non-residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
                                                                                  Included in:: Amusement, indoor;
Arcade                                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor or Amusement, outdoor;
Archery range                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Arsenal                                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Art museum                                                                        controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Artist studio                                                                     Listed as: Studio, art or photography;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Batch plant, concrete or asphalt (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/temporary uses/temporary uses or
Asphalt and cement batch and mixing plants, refining or manufacturing plants      Listed as Batch plant, concrete or asphalt (permanent); and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Assaying                                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Assembly of pre-manufactured parts, except for vehicles, trailers, airplanes or   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
mobile homes                                                                     services 
                                                                                  Could include: retirement center, Alzheimer’s care facility (compare with care
Assisted living facility                                                         facility and nursing home);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Listed as: Theater, movie theater or auditorium;
Auditorium, theater, moving picture house                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Vehicle junkyard or storage yard;
Automobile junk or storage yard                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary;
Automobile parking area (primary use)                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
Automated collection vending machine or small collection facility for recycling   Listed as: Recycling collection facility;
aluminum cans, glass, grocery bags, plastic bottles, magazines, newspapers and    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
comparable materials
                                                                                  Included in: Vehicle sales or rental; including automobiles, motorcycles, boats
Automobile sales or rental area                                                   or trailers;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Automobile, truck and heavy equipment laundry and steam cleaning                  Listed as: Vehicle steam cleaning;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Automotive repair; paint and body shop                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
Auto parts supply, retail                                                        Includes: Retail auto parts supply;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Auxiliary parking                                                                 Listed as: Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Aviation field, airport or aircraft landing area                                  Included in: Airport, aviation field, helistop or landing area;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Bag cleaning                                                                      Obsolete use deleted
Bakery                                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Bakery (wholesale)                                                                Included in: Wholesale, produce market, bakery or wholesale house;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/wholesale 
Bank, financial institution                                                      Includes: Bank, savings bank, savings and loan, financial institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Includes: Beer garden, pub, brew pub, private club, teen club, commercial or
Bar, tavern or cocktail lounge; club, private or teen                            business club;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Barber or beauty shop                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, outdoor;
Baseball stadium                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Baseball/softball facility (commercial)                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Batch plant, concrete or asphalt (permanent)                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing  
Batch plant, concrete or asphalt (temporary)                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
                                                                                  Included in: Massage therapy;
Baths, Turkish and massage health treatments                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/entertainment
                                                                                  and eating 
Bed and breakfast home                                                           Separate listing from Bed and breakfast inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Bed and breakfast inn                                                            Separate listing from Bed and breakfast home;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Beauty shop                                                                       Included in: Barber or beauty shop;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern or cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Beer garden                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Bicycle repair shop                                                               Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service  
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Bicycle sales                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Billiard hall or parlor                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Gambling facility (including bingo);
Bingo                                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Bird store                                                                        Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service  
                                                                                  Includes: Horse-shoeing; cooperage works;
Blacksmith or wagon shop                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Brick, clay, glass, shale, tile or terra cotta products
Blast furnace, boiler works and brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture            manufacture;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Bleaching powder manufacture                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Blood bank                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Blueprinting or photostating                                                      Included in: Copy store or commercial print center without off-set printing;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Boarding or lodging house                                                        Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and
                                                                                  Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Boat sales or rental                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Body and fender work                                                              Included in: Automotive repair; paint and body shop;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Furnace, blast; forge plant, boiler works manufacture;
Boiler works manufacture                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing  
Book, stationery store or newsstand                                              Includes: Card shop;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Bottling works, soft drinks or milk                                              Includes: Milk bottling or central distribution station, soft drink bottling,
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial 
Bowling alley                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Branch library                                                                    controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Brew pub                                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Brewery, distillery or winery                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Brick, clay, glass, shale, tile or terra cotta products manufacture              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Telecommunication tower;
Broadcast, relay or receiving tower                                               Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Yards, contractor’s, lumber or storage;
Building material storage yards                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Burglar alarm sales or service                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Bus station                                                                       Included in: Passenger station or terminal; truck, freight, rail or water;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Business college or commercial school                                            Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Business office                                                                   Included in: Office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Included in: Furniture or cabinet repair or construction;
Cabinet repair and construction                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Restaurant, café or cafeteria;
Café                                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Restaurant, café or cafeteria;
Cafeteria                                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Food processing (no slaughtering);
Candy, canning or preserving factory                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Food processing (no slaughtering);
Canning factory                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Car wash, full or self service                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Card shop                                                                         Included in: Book, stationery store or newsstand;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Care facility                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Carnival                                                                          Included in: Amusement, outdoor (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Carpet and rug cleaning                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Gambling facility (including bingo);
Casino                                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Metal casting;
Casting of aluminum products                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Metal casting;
Casting of magnesium products                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Cement products plant;
Cast stone works                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Caterer or wedding service                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Includes: Concrete block plant, cast stone works, concrete pipe plant;
Cement products plant                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing  
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Cemetery                                                                          Not listed in use tables since no new cemetery is allowed in the city, only an
                                                                                  existing cemetery may be expanded
                                                                                  Includes: Community center, recreation center and welfare center; philanthropic
Center, community, recreation or welfare, government operated or controlled      or eleemosynary institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic/recreation 
Central station light or power plants                                             Listed as: Power plant or central station light;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Food processing (no slaughtering);
Cereal mill                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services
                                                                                  Included in: Place of worship;
Chapel                                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious
Chicken battery or brooder                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Day care center;
Child day care                                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Chlorine manufacture                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Christmas tree sales                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Place of worship;
Church                                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Cigar or tobacco store                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service
Circus                                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating
                                                                                  Included in: Brick, clay, glass, shale, tile or terra cotta products
Clay, shale or glass products                                                     manufacture;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Cleaning, dyeing, pressing works, laundry and washeteria                          Listed as: Laundry, dry cleaning or washeteria;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Cleaning, pressing and laundry collection offices                                 Listed as: Laundry or dry cleaning collection office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service  
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility; including doctors office or medical
Clinic, medical                                                                   clinic;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Clothing/wearing apparel sales, used                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Club, commercial or business                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Club, private                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Club, teen                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Cluster housing                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Coal, coke or wood yard                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern or cocktail lounge;
Cocktail lounge                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Food processing (no slaughtering);
Coffee roasting                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Coke ovens                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Frozen food lockers (excluding processing);
Cold storage plant or ice plant                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
College or university                                                            Includes: Dormitory; higher education institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Commercial or business club                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary;
Commercial parking area                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
Commercial print center                                                           Listed as: Copy store or commercial printing center without off-set printing;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Print center, commercial, with off-set printing;
Commercial print centers including offset printing                                Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Swimming pool, commercial;
Commercial swimming pool                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Telecommunication antenna (on a structure);
Communications antenna                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Listed as: Telecommunication tower;
Communications tower                                                              Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Includes: former family home I and former family home II;
Community home                                                                   Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
                                                                                  Listed as: Center, community recreation or welfare, government operated or
Community recreation or welfare center                                            controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included in: Cement products plant;
Concrete block plant                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Condominiums                                                                      Included in: Multifamily dwellings (apartments);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living
Confectionery store                                                               Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service
                                                                                  Included in: Yards, contractor’s, lumber or storage;
Contractor’s or storage yard                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Convenience store                                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Blacksmith or wagon shop;
Cooperage works                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Copy store or commercial print center without offset printing                    Includes: Blueprinting, photostating;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Correctional facility                                                            Includes: Jail, penitentiary,
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Cotton gin, cotton oil mill, baling or compress                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial 
                                                                                  Includes: Country club (non-profit);
Country club (private)                                                           Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Country club (public)                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation
                                                                                  Listed as: Country club (private);
Country club (non-profit)                                                         Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Craft or novelty store                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Creosote treatment or manufacture                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Cultural facility                                                                 controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t 
Custom dressmaking or millinery shops                                             Listed as: Dressmaking, custom; millinery shop;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Dance hall                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating  
                                                                                  Included in: Business college or commercial school;
Dance school/studio                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Includes: Child day care or adult day care;
Day care center                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Restaurant, café or cafeteria;
Delicatessen shop                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility; including doctor’s office or medical
Dental laboratory or dentist office                                               clinic;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Department store                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Disco                                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Satellite antenna;
Dish satellite antenna                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses and
                                                                                  nonresidential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
                                                                                  Included in: Brewery, distillery or winery;
Distillery                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Distillation of bones, coal or wood                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Doctor’s clinic or doctor’s office and offices for other practitioners of the Included in: Health services facility; including doctor’s office or medical
healing arts licensed or similarly recognized under the laws of the State of      clinic;
Texas                                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Dog and cat hospital or small animal hospital with no outside kennels             Included in: Veterinary clinic with indoor kennels;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Dog or cat hospital or kennel                                                     Listed as: Veterinary clinic with outdoor kennels;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Dog kennel                                                                        Listed as: Kennel;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Dog pound                                                                         Listed as: Animal shelter;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
                                                                                  Included in: Racing, horse, dog or automotive;
Dog racing                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Dormitory                                                                         Included in College or university;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Racing; horse, dog or automotive;
Drag strip                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Dressmaking, custom or millinery shop                                            Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Drive-in business                                                                 Included in: Drive-in restaurant or business;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/entertainment and eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Drive-in business ;
Drive-in restaurant or business                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Theater, drive-in;
Drive-in theater                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Golf driving range;
Driving range                                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Drug store                                                                        Listed as: Pharmacy (drug store);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Dry goods or notions store                                                        Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Duplex/two-family attached dwellings                                             Listed in Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
                                                                                  Included in: Print center, commercial, with off-set printing;
Duplicating service and offset printing (less than 2,001 sq. ft.)                 Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Dwelling units, two attached (zero lot line with common wall)                     Listed as: One-family zero lot line attached dwelling (twin home);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling units, two detached (standard spacing)                                   Listed as: Duplex/two one-family detached dwellings;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling units, two detached (zero lot line)                                      Listed as: One-family zero lot line detached;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling units, two-family (duplex)                                               Listed as: Duplex/two one-family attached dwellings;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling units, zero lot line attached                                            Listed as: One-family attached dwelling (townhouse, row house);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling units, zero lot line detached                                            Listed as: One-family zero lot line detached
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwelling, multifamily                                                             Listed as: Multifamily dwellings (apartments);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Dwellings, one-family                                                             Listed as: One-family detached dwelling;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Egg cracking or processing                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Electric power substation                                                        Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Electrical and gas appliances and supply sales, repair and neighborhood           Listed as: Appliance, sales, supply or repair;
installation services                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Electroplating                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Elementary and junior high schools, public, parochial and private                 Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Elementary and secondary school                                                   Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Center, community, recreation or welfare;
Eleemosynary institution                                                          Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included in: Water supply, treatment or storage facility;
Elevated storage tank (water)                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Enameling                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Escort agency or service                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals;
Explosives, manufacture or storage                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Express business                                                                  Included in: Express office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Express office                                                                   Includes: Express business;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Extended stay hotel                                                               Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Fabrication of manufactured housing, temporary or office buildings               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Community home to match state terminology;
Family home                                                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
                                                                                  Included in: Community home to match state terminology;
Family home II                                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Farm accessory building (barn, stable, pen, equipment building and silo)          Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
Farm, ranch, orchard, truck garden, nursery for growing plants and similar        Included in: Agricultural uses;
agrarian activities                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Fat rendering                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Listed as: Mill, feed or flour;
Feed or flour mill                                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Feed store, no processing or milling                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Feeding pen, commercial                                                           Listed as: Stockyards or feeding pens (commercial);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Fertilizer manufacture                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Listed as: Gasoline sales;
Filling station                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service  
Financial institution                                                            Included in: Bank, financial institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Fine art center                                                                   controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Firewood sales                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Fish hatchery                                                                     Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Non-residential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
Fish smoking or curing                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Outdoor sales and storage;
Flea market                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Florist or gift shop                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Includes: Candy, canning or preserving factory; cereal mill; coffee roasting;
                                                                                  food products, syrups, fruit juices, extracts, drugs or medicine, meat
Food processing (no slaughtering)                                                processing (no slaughtering);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Furnace, blast; forge plant, boiler works manufacture;
Forge plant                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Foster child care home                                                            Not listed as a separate use, considered by law as a residential dwelling unit
                                                                                  Included in: One-family attached (townhouse, row house) or in: Multifamily
Fourplex                                                                          dwellings (apartments);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living and
                                                                                  Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Fraternity or sorority house                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living 
                                                                                  Included in: Cold storage plant or ice plant;
Frozen food lockers (excluding processing)                                        Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Funeral home                                                                      Listed as: Mortuary or funeral home;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Fur storage or sales                                                              Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Furnace, blast; forge plant, boiler works manufacture                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Cabinet repair or construction;
Furniture or cabinet repair or construction                                      Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Furniture sales, new (office and residential) in a building                      Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Furniture sales, used (in a building)                                            Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Furniture upholstery, refinishing or resale                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Galvanizing, sheet or structural shapes                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Galvanizing, small utensils                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Includes: Bingo, casino;
Gambling facility (including bingo)                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Game farm                                                                         Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses 
Garage or other occasional sales                                                 Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Garage sales                                                                      Listed as: Garage or other occasional sales;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
                                                                                  Not listed as a separate use, included as an accessory use Garages, public for
Garage, carport                                                                   repairs of autos and auto paint and body shops
                                                                                  Included in: Automotive repair; garage, public; body and fender shop;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Garages, storage only                                                             Included in: Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Garbage dump                                                                      facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Garden apartments                                                                 Included in: Multifamily dwellings (apartments);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Gas (natural or artificial) manufacture or processing                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Gasoline sales                                                                    Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Hospital;
General hospital                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Gift shop                                                                         Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service
Glue manufacture                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Listed as: Golf course;
Golf course (except commercial miniature golf or commercial driving range)        Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Does not include commercial miniature golf or commercial driving range;
Golf course                                                                      Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
Golf driving range                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Government office facility                                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/government
Grain elevator                                                                   and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/government 
Greenhouse or plant nursery                                                      Listed in: Residential district use table/other uses/other uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Food store, supermarket, produce market retail, meat market;
Grocery store or meat market                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Water supply, treatment or storage facility;
Ground storage tank (water)                                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Group home I                                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and in
                                                                                  the Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Group home II                                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and in
                                                                                  the Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Gunsmithing, repair or sales                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Halfway house                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Hardware, paint or wallpaper store                                                Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Hazardous waste disposal, household                                               facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Health or recreation club                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Doctor’s office, medical clinic, dentist office, office of other
                                                                                  practitioners of the healing arts licensed or similarly recognized under the
                                                                                  laws of the State of Texas; psychological testing and counseling office;
Health services facility; including doctor’s office or medical clinic          physical, audio, speech or therapy; sale or rental of medical supplies or
                                                                                  equipment, podiatry office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Heating supplies or appliances                                                    Listed as: Appliance, sales; supply or repair;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Helistop or heliport                                                              Included in: Airport, aviation field, helistop or landing field;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
                                                                                  Included in: Multifamily dwellings (apartments);
High-rise apartment                                                               Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Higher education institution                                                      Included in: College or university;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Home occupation                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses
                                                                                  Listed as: Racing; horse, dog or automotive;
Horse, dog or automotive racing                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Stable, commercial, riding/boarding or rodeo arena;
Horse training track                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Hospice                                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Hospital, general; related facilities and support retail or personal
Hospital                                                                         service;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Hospital;
Hospital, general                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Nursing home (with full medical services);
Hospital, long term                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Hospital;
Hospital and related facilities and support retail and personal service           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Tourist hotel, extended stay hotel, limited service hotel, tourist
Hotel, motel or inn                                                              court, motor hotel;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Hotel, tourist                                                                    Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
                                                                                  Included in: Furniture, sales, new (office or residential) in a building
Household furniture store                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service; or
                                                                                  included in Furniture sales, with outside storage or display (new or used);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/light industrial services 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Household hazardous waste disposal                                                facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
HUD-Code manufactured housing                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Ice plant or storage house                                                        Included in: Cold storage plant or ice plant;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Indoor amusement enterprise, including arcade, bar, beer garden, cocktail lounge, Listed as: Amusement, indoor;
drive-in, lounge, night club                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Amusement, indoor;
Indoor amusement enterprise, including shooting gallery, skating rink             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Amusement, indoor;
Indoor amusement enterprise, including tavern, billiard or pool hall, dance hall  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Inn                                                                               Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Interior decorating                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Metal foundry or fabrication plant;
Iron, steel, brass, copper or aluminum foundries or fabrication plant             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Jail                                                                              Included in: Correctional facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t.
Japanning                                                                         Obsolete use deleted
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Jewelry store, optical goods sales                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Junior high school                                                                Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Junkyard or storage yard for vehicles                                             Included in: Vehicle junkyard or storage yard;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Kennel                                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Kindergarten                                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Health service facility including doctor’s office or medical
Laboratory, medical, dental or optical                                            clinic;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Municipal landfill; solid waste landfill operations; handling,
                                                                                  processing and loading of municipal solid waste and recyclable materials for
                                                                                  transportation at transfer stations; storage, processing, bailing or reclamation
                                                                                  of paper, wood, metals, plastics, rags, junk, concrete, asphalt and other
Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire facility     materials at materials recovery facilities and recycling centers; disposal,
                                                                                  dumping or reducing of offal or dead animals; composting for yard and wood
                                                                                  wastes, municipal solid waste and/or sludge at composing facilities; collection
                                                                                  and storage of household hazardous wastes; and processing and storage of scrap
                                                                                  tires at waste tire facilities, garbage dump, tire disposal facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Laundry or dry cleaning collection office                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Laundry, dry cleaning or washeteria                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Leather goods shop                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Theater, movie theater or auditorium;
Legitimate theater                                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Library                                                                           controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Limited service hotel                                                             Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Liquor or package store                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Agricultural uses; Locksmith
Livestock grazing or pasturing                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
Lodge or civic club                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating
Lodging house                                                                     Included in: Boarding or lodging house;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living 
Long term hospital, nursing and care home and philanthropic or eleemosynary       Included in: Hospital;
institution                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Yard, contractor’s, lumber or storage;
Lumber yard                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Machine shop                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Metal casting;
Magnesium casting, machining or fabricating                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Manager’s office                                                                No separate listing, included in: Accessory uses in multifamily districts
Manufacture of products from aluminum, brass or other metals or from bone,        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
leather, paper, shell, wire or wood                                               services
Manufacture of acetylene and/or oxygen gas alcohol, adding machines, airplanes,   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
automobiles, trucks and tractors, bearings, steel tanks, etc.                    and manufacturing 
Manufacture of artificial flowers, ornaments, awnings, tents, bags, blacking,
cleaning or polishing preparations, small boats under 28 feet in length, brooms   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
or brushes, buttons and novelties, canvas products, clothing, suits coats or      services 
dresses for wholesale trade 
Manufacture of basket materials, bicycles, boots, boxes, caskets, liquid soap,    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
shoes, storage batteries and textile fabrics                                     and manufacturing 
Manufacture of die-casting molds, dies and cores                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Acid manufacture, ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture;
Manufacture, processing or production of hazardous chemicals                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Manufacture of heavy rubber products                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Listed as: HUD code manufactured housing or as manufactured home park or as
Manufactured home                                                                 manufactured home subdivision;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Manufactured home or RV repair                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Manufactured home park                                                           Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Manufactured home subdivision                                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
                                                                                  Included in: Massage therapy;
Massage health treatments                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Turkish baths, massage parlor or massage health treatments;
Massage therapy                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating  
Meat market                                                                       Included in: Grocery store or meat market;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Meat processing (no slaughtering)                                                 Included in: Food processing, no slaughtering;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility, doctor’s office or clinic;
Medical, dental or optical laboratory                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility, doctor’s office or clinic;
Medical supplies or equipment, sales or rental                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Aluminum casting, casting of magnesium products;
Metal casting                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Metal foundry plant or fabrication plant                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Smelting or reclamation of tin, copper, lead, zinc or iron ores;
Metal smelting, reclamation or ore reduction                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Metal stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Telecommunications tower;
Microwave relay/receiving tower                                                   Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Middle school                                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Bottling works, soft drinks or milk;
Milk bottling or central distribution station                                     Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, outdoor;
Miniature golf course                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Mini-warehouses                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Mining quarry, dredging or excavation of dirt, rock, soil, gravel, sand, stone   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Mobile home                                                                      Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Mobile home or manufactured housing sales                                        Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Model home                                                                       Includes use as show home or sales office in a new subdivision;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Monument or marble works, finishing or carving only                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial 
Monument works, stone                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Mortuary or funeral home                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Place of worship;
Mosque                                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
                                                                                  Included in: Theater, movie theater or auditorium
Motion picture theater                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Motel                                                                             Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Motor hotel                                                                       Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
Motor vehicle junk yard or storage yard or used auto junk area                    Listed as: Vehicle junkyard or storage yard;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Motor vehicle parking as a principal use                                          Listed as: Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Vehicle sales or rental; including automobiles, motorcycles, boats
Motorcycle sales or rental area                                                   or trailers;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Theater, movie theater or auditorium
Movie theater                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Multifamily dwellings (apartments)                                               Includes: Garden apartments, condominiums, high-rise apartments, fourplexes;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household 
Municipal solid waste landfill operations, handling, processing and loading of
municipal solid waste and recyclable materials for transportation at transfer
stations; storage, processing, bailing or reclamation of paper, wood, metals,     Listed as: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
plastics, rags, junk, concrete, asphalt and other materials at materials recovery facility;
facilities and recycling centers; disposal, dumping or reducing of offal or dead  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
animals; composting facilities; collection and storage of household hazardous
wastes; and processing and storage of scrap tires at waste tire facilities
Museum or cultural facility, private                                             Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Cultural facility, branch library; aquarium (public), arboretum, zoo
Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or controlled            (public);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t 
Musical instrument, sales and supplies                                            Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Newspaper distribution center                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in Printing, lithographing, bookbinding, newspapers or publishing;
Newspaper publishing and printing                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Newsstand                                                                         Included in: Book, stationery store or newsstand;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Notions store                                                                     Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Nude modeling business                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Sexually oriented business;
Nude modeling studio                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Nursery yard or building for retail nursery sales                                 Listed as: Greenhouse or plant nursery;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Convalescent home; (compare with assisted living facility and care
Nursing home (with full medical services)                                        facility);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Office                                                                           Includes: Professional office, business office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Included in: Furniture sales, new (office or residential) in a building;
Office furniture sales                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service or
                                                                                  included in: Furniture sales, with outside storage or display (new or used) and
                                                                                  nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial services 
Office for specialist in supportive therapy, podiatry and psychological testing   Included in Health services facility; including doctor’s offices or medical
and counseling; dental, medical and optical laboratories; ambulance dispatch      clinics;
stations; prescription pharmacies; and offices, stores and display rooms for the  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
sale and rental of medical supplies and equipment                                 facilities 
One dwelling unit when part of a business                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/household living 
One-family attached (townhouse, row house)                                       Includes: townhouse, row house, triplex, fourplex;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
One-family detached dwelling                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
One-family zero lot line detached                                                Includes: Patio house, patio home;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
One-family zero lot line attached (twin home)                                    Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
                                                                                  Included in Health services facility; including doctor’s offices or medical
Optical laboratory or office                                                      clinics;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Optician                                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/retail sales
                                                                                  and service 
Orchard                                                                           Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agricultural 
                                                                                  Included in Metal, smelting, reclamation or ore reduction;
Ore reduction                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing  
                                                                                  Listed as Amusement, outdoor;
Outdoor commercial amusement enterprises                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Outdoor sales and storage                                                         Includes: Flea market, swap meets;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/industrial uses/light industrial services 
Outside storage                                                                   Listed as: Storage or display, outside;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
                                                                                  Includes: Slaughtering of animals and processing of by-products;
Packing plant                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Spray painting;
Paint mixing or spraying                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Paint store                                                                       Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Paper or pulp manufacture                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Paper box manufacture                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Includes: Recreation areas, tennis courts, swimming pools;
Park or playground (public)                                                      Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Parking area or garage, commercial or auxiliary                                  Includes: Commercial parking lot; commercial parking garage;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicular sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Parochial school                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Parole office                                                                     Listed as: Probation or parole office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Passenger station                                                                Includes: Taxi cab stand; bus station; train station;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Patio house or patio home                                                         Included in: One-family zero lot line detached;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Pattern shop                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial 
Pawn shop                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Penitentiary                                                                      Included in: Correctional facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t.
Pet cemetery                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Pet shop                                                                          Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Photostating                                                                      Included in: Copy store or commercial print center without off-set printing;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Petroleum refining or wholesale storage                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Pharmacy (drug store)                                                            Includes: Prescription pharmacy; drug store;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Center, community, recreation or welfare;
Philanthropic or eleemosynary institution                                         Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation
Photograph, portrait or camera shop and photo finishing                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Piano stores, musical instruments and supply                                      Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Church, synagogue, temple, mosque, chapel;
Place of worship                                                                 Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
                                                                                  Includes: non-worship facilities not on the same premises
Place of worship auxiliary uses                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
                                                                                  Included in: Theater, movie theater or auditorium;
Place or building of public assembly                                              Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Planing mill or woodworking shop                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial 
Plant nursery                                                                     Included in: Greenhouse or plant nursery;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Plumbing and heating appliance and supply sales, repairs and neighborhood         Listed as: Appliance, sales, supply or repair;
installation services                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility; including doctor’s office or medical
Podiatry office                                                                   clinic;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Pool hall                                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Trailer, portable; sales, construction or storage;
Portable trailers used as sales offices, construction offices or storage          Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Post office                                                                       Included in: State or federal office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
                                                                                  Included in: Salt or potash works;
Potash works                                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Poultry killing or dressing                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Power plant or central station light                                             Includes: Electric power plant;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Listed as: Electric power substation;
Power substation, water tank or reservoir, water or sewage treatment plant        Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Prescription pharmacy                                                             Included in: Pharmacy (drug store),
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Food processing (no slaughtering);
Preserving factory                                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Print centers, commercial, with off- set printing                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Printing, lithographing, bookbinding, newspapers or publishing                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Listed as: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Private club or private membership club                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Private commercial school                                                         Included in: Business college or commercial school;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Private park or recreational area                                                 Listed as: Park or playground (private);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Probation or parole office                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
Produce market retail                                                             Included in: Grocery store or meat market;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Produce market (wholesale)                                                        Included in: Wholesale, produce market, bakery or wholesale house;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/wholesale 
Professional office                                                               Included in: Office;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility, including doctor’s offices or medical
Psychological testing or counseling office                                        clinics;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Schools (public or private), elementary or secondary and in college
Public and parochial schools, colleges and universities                           or university;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Schools (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Public elementary school                                                          Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: Utility transmission or distribution line;
Public or private utilities                                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Listed as: Golf course;
Public play or private play golf courses                                          Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Public school                                                                     Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Racing, horse, dog or automotive                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Racing; horse, dog or automotive;
Racing strip or drag strip                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Radio and television sales and servicing                                          Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Railroad freight or classification yard                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Railroad roundhouse or RR car repair shop                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Railroad tracks: team, spur, loading or storage                                  Includes: Team tracks; spur tracks; loading tracks; storage tracks;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Ranch                                                                             Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agricultural 
                                                                                  Included in: Telecommunication tower;
Receiving tower                                                                   Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Recording studio                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Recreation area within buildings for occupants                                    Included in: Accessory uses for multifamily dwellings (no separate listing in
                                                                                  use tables)
                                                                                  Included in: Park or playground (public) and
Recreational area                                                                 Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  included in Park or playground (public or private) and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included as: Center, community recreation or welfare, government operated or
Recreation center                                                                 controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Recycling center                                                                  facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Recycling collection facility                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
                                                                                  Included in: Telecommunication tower;
Relay or receiving tower                                                          Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Rental of medical supplies or equipment                                           Listed as: Medical supplies or equipment sales or rental;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Residence for security purposes, temporary                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses 
                                                                                  Includes: café, cafeteria, tea room, drive-in restaurant, sandwich shop,
Restaurant, café, cafeteria                                                     delicatessen;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Retail auto parts supply                                                          Listed as: Auto parts supply, retail;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Listed as: Furniture sales, new (office or residential) in a building;
Retail furniture sales                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service or
                                                                                  Listed as: Furniture sales with outside storage or display (new or used); and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/industrial uses/light industrial services 
                                                                                  Includes: Bicycle, sales or repairs; bird store; Christmas tree sales, cigar or
                                                                                  tobacco store; confectionery store; craft or novelty store; department store;
                                                                                  dry goods or notions store; electronic media sales or servicing; florist or gift
Retail sales, general                                                            shop; fur storage or sales; gasoline sales; hardware, paint or wallpaper store;
                                                                                  jewelry store, optical goods sales; musical instrument, sales and supplies; pet
                                                                                  shop; piano stores; used clothing sales; variety store;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service  
Retail sales of prescriptions or medicines                                        Included in: Pharmacy (drug store);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Revival (temporary)                                                               Included in: Amusement, outdoor (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
                                                                                  Listed as: Stable, commercial, riding/boarding or rodeo arena;
Riding stable, riding hall                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Riverine port facilities, publicly owned                                          Included in: Passenger station or terminal: truck, freight, rail or water;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
                                                                                  Included in: Metal foundry plant or fabrication plant;
Riveting                                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Rock, cement crushers and stone quarries                                         Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Stable, commercial, riding/boarding or rodeo arena;
Rodeo arena                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Rodeo (temporary)                                                                 Included in: Amusement, outdoor (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Rolling mill                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Row house or townhouse                                                            Included in: One-family attached (townhouse, row house);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Rubber stamping, shearing or punching                                            Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Rubber stamp manufacture                                                         Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Saddle or harness repair or sales                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility, including doctor’s office and medical
Sale or rental of medical supplies or equipment                                   clinics;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
Salt or potash works                                                             Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Restaurant, café, cafeteria;
Sandwich shop                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Sanitary landfill (municipal or commercial)                                       facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Satellite antenna (dish)                                                         Listed in: Residential district use table/accessory uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/accessory uses
Savings bank                                                                      Included in: Bank, financial institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/office 
Savings and loan                                                                  Included in: Bank, financial institution;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/office 
                                                                                  Includes: Secondary school, elementary school, middle school, junior high
                                                                                  school, high school, senior high school, public school, private school,
School (public or private), elementary or secondary                              parochial school;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Secondary school                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Self service car wash or full service car wash                                    Listed as: Car wash, full or self service;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: School (public or private), elementary or secondary;
Senior high school, public, parochial or private                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/education and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Servants quarters                                                                 Obsolete use deleted, would be considered as a second dwelling unit on a lot
                                                                                  Includes: full service for minor auto repairs, lube and oil changes or
Service station                                                                   maintenance; gasoline sales;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult bath; adult cabaret; adult
                                                                                  entertainment cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult out-call
Sexually oriented business                                                       establishment; adult theater, adult video store, escort agency or service;
                                                                                  sexually oriented encounter center, nude modeling business, nude modeling studio
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Sheet metal shop                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Shelter                                                                          Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/group living and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/group living
Shoe shine shop                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Shooting gallery                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Shooting or weapons firing range                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, Indoor;
Skating rink (roller or ice)                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating
                                                                                  Listed as: Metal smelting, reclamation or ore reduction;
Smelting or reclamation of tin, copper, lead, zinc or iron ores                   Listed as a separate use due to “PD” listing;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Soap manufacture                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Soda or compound manufacture                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Bottling works, soft drinks or milk;
Soft drink bottling                                                               Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Baseball/softball facility (commercial);
Softball parks, including stadium and concession stands                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Health services facility; including doctor’s office or medical
Speech therapy clinic or office                                                   clinic;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/health care
                                                                                  facilities 
                                                                                  Listed as: Paint mixing or spraying;
Spray painting or paint mixing                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Includes: Stable, public; stable, riding; commercial boarding of horses,
Stable, commercial, riding/boarding or rodeo arena                               commercial horse rides; riding arena; riding hall;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/recreation 
Stable, private                                                                   Listed as: Stable, stockyard or feeding pen (noncommercial);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
                                                                                  Listed as: Metal stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching;
Stamping, dyeing, shearing or punching of metals                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Stationery store                                                                  Included in: Book, stationery store or newsstand;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Stockyards or feeding pens (commercial)                                          Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/other uses/agricultural uses 
Stockyards or feeding pens (noncommercial)                                       Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
                                                                                  Listed as: Monument works, stone;
Stone monument works                                                              Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Stoneyard, building stone, cutting, sawing or storage                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial 
Storage yard or junkyard for vehicles                                             Included in: Vehicle junkyard or storage yard;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Yard, contractor’s, lumber or storage;
Storage yard (non-covered) for equipment and material                             Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
Studio, art or photography                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Swimming pool, commercial                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/recreation 
                                                                                  Included in: Place of worship;
Synagogue                                                                         Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
Tailor, clothing or apparel shop                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Tallow, grease or lard manufacture                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Tannery, curing or storage of raw hides or skins                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Tar or asphalt roofing or water proofing;
Tar distillation or manufacturing                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
Tattoo parlor                                                                    Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern or cocktail lounge;
Tavern                                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
Taxicab stand                                                                     Included in: Passenger station;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Taxidermist shop                                                                 Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Restaurant, café, cafeteria;
Tea room                                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Bar, tavern, cocktail lounge; club, private or teen;
Teenage club or amusement center                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Communications antenna;
Telecommunication antenna (on a structure)                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Broadcast, relay or receiving tower, communications tower, microwave
Telecommunication tower                                                          relay/receiving tower; tower;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Place of worship;
Temple                                                                            Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/institutions and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/religious 
                                                                                  Listed as: Batch plant, concrete or asphalt (temporary);
Temporary batch plant                                                             Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses
                                                                                  Listed as: Trailer, portable; sales, construction or storage;
Temporary construction, sales, storage, fabrication or office building            Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Temporary tent or outdoor assembly                                                Included in: Amusement, outdoor (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Temporary, open retail sales booths and ancillary facilities                      Included in: Amusement, outdoor (temporary);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses 
Terminal; truck, freight, rail or water                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
Terrace garage (in required yard setbacks)                                       Listed in: Residential district use table/accessory uses/accessory uses 
Theater, drive-in                                                                Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Includes: Place or building of public assembly; motion picture theater;
Theater, movie theater or auditorium                                             legitimate theater;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Tire disposal facility                                                            facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Tobacco (chewing) manufacture or treatment                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial 
Tourist court                                                                     Included in: Hotel, motel or inn;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/lodging 
                                                                                  Listed as: Telecommunication tower;
Tower                                                                             Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Townhouse                                                                         Included in: One-family attached (townhouse, row house);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Tracks—team, spur, loading or storage or freight yard                           Listed as: Railroad tracks: team, spur, loading or storage;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
                                                                                  Listed as: Trailer, portable; sales, construction or storage;
Trailer                                                                           Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses
                                                                                  Includes: Trailer; trailer portable; sales trailer; construction trailer;
Trailer, portable; sales, construction or storage                                storage trailer;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/temporary uses/temporary uses
                                                                                  Included in: Vehicle sales or rental; including automobiles, motorcycles, boats
Trailer sales or rental                                                           or trailers;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Triplex                                                                           Included in: One-family attached (townhouse, row house);
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/residential uses/household living 
Truck garden                                                                      Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
Truck stop with fuel and accessory services                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
Truck terminal                                                                    Included in: Terminal; truck, freight, rail or water;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/transportation 
University                                                                        Included in: College or university;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/education 
Used automobile junk area                                                         Included in: Vehicle junkyard or storage yard;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Used clothing sales                                                               Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Used furniture sales within a building                                            Listed as: Furniture sales, used (in a building);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Used or new furniture with outside storage or display                             Listed as: Furniture sales, with outside storage or display (new or used);
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/industrial uses/light industrial service 
                                                                                  Includes: Public or private utilities;
Utility transmission or distribution line                                        Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Variety store                                                                     Included in: Retail sales, general;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Includes: Automobile junkyard or storage yard; used automobile junk area;
Vehicle junkyard or storage yard                                                 storage yard for vehicles;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
                                                                                  Includes: Automobile sales or rental, boat sales or rental, motorcycle sales or
Vehicle sales or rental; including automobiles, motorcycles, boats or trailers   rental, trailer sales or rental;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and service 
Vehicle steam cleaning                                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/vehicle sales and
                                                                                  service 
Veterinary clinic with indoor kennels                                             May include: Veterinary hospital;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
Veterinary clinic with outdoor kennels                                            May include: Veterinary hospital;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Veterinary clinic with indoor kennels or included in: Veterinary
Veterinary hospital                                                               clinic with outdoor kennels;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential use table/commercial uses/retail sales and service 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, indoor;
Video arcade                                                                      Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Listed as: Blacksmith or wagon shop;
Wagon shop                                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Retail sales, general;
Wallpaper store                                                                   Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/retail sales and
                                                                                  service 
Warehouse or bulk storage                                                        Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Landfill, recycling center, household hazardous waste or waste tire
Waste tire facility                                                               facility;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/waste 
Wastewater (sewage) treatment facility                                           Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Includes: Water treatment plant, elevated storage tank, ground storage tank;
Water supply, treatment or storage facility                                      Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
                                                                                  Included in: Water supply, treatment or storage facility;
Water treatment plant                                                             Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/utilities 
Welding shop                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial 
Welding shop, custom work (not structural welding)                               Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial 
                                                                                  Included as: Center, community recreation or welfare, community operated or
Welfare center                                                                    controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/recreation 
Wholesale: bakery, produce market or wholesale house                             Includes: Bakery (wholesale), produce market (wholesale), wholesale house;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/wholesale 
Wholesale office or sample room                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/wholesale 
Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum                                  Included in: Agricultural uses;
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/other uses/agriculture 
                                                                                  Included in: Brewery, distillery or winery;
Winery                                                                            Listed in: Nonresidential districts use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Wool pulling or scouring                                                          Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Includes: Lumber yard, contractor’s yard, storage yard (non-covered) for
Yard, contractor’s, lumber or storage                                          equipment and material; building material storage yards
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/light industrial
                                                                                  services 
                                                                                  Included in: Animal by-products processing;
Yeast plant                                                                       Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/industrial uses/heavy industrial
                                                                                  and manufacturing 
                                                                                  Included in: Amusement, outdoor;
Zoo (private)                                                                     Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/commercial uses/entertainment and
                                                                                  eating 
                                                                                  Included in: Museum, library or fine art center, government operated or
Zoo (public)                                                                      controlled;
                                                                                  Listed in: Residential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. and
                                                                                  Listed in: Nonresidential district use table/public and civic uses/gov’t. 
 
(Ord. 13896, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 15405, § 4, passed 1-14-2003)
APPENDIX B: CODE COMPLIANCE
   Article
      
I.   IN GENERAL
      
II.   CODE COMPLIANCE
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned and junked vehicles, see §§
22-301 et seq.
   Administration, see
Ch. 2
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 6
   Building regulations, see
Ch. 7
   Health and sanitation, see
Ch. 16
   Human relations, see
Ch. 17
   Motor vehicle junkyards, see §§
20-291 et seq.
   Planning and development department, see §§
2-310 et seq.
   Water and sewers, see
Ch. 35
   Zoning regulations, see
App. A
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 9664, § 1, adopted June 24, 1986, adding a new Ch. 11A to the 1964
Code, has been included as
Appendix B hereof at the editor’s discretion, in order to retain the section
designations as enacted. Amendments to Ord. 9664 will be indicated by a history
note cited in parentheses following the amended section. Absence of such a note
indicates the section derives unchanged from said ordinance. Subsequently, Ord.
14698, § 1, adopted July 17, 2001 amended the title of Appendix B to read as
herein set out.Section
Article I: Reserved
   
11A-1—11A-5   Reserved
Article II: Code Compliance
Division 1: Generally
   
11A-6   Authorization
   
11A-7   Definitions
Division 2: High Weeds and Grass
   
11A-8   High weeds and grass prohibited
   
11A-9   Abatement of high weeds or grass
   
11A-10   Abatement of weeds or grass in excess of 48 inches
   
11A-11   Assessment of expenses; lien
   11A-12—11A-16   Reserved
Division 3: Nuisances
Subdivision A: Generally
   
11A-17   Purpose
   
11A-18   Accumulations of animal feces and urine
   
11A-19   Keeping of swine
   
11A-20   Distance requirements for kennels; number of dogs and cats at
residences
   
11A-21   Reserved
   
11A-22   Keeping of pigeons and certain fowl
   
11A-22.2   Continuance permits
   
11A-23   Discharge of liquid waste
   
11A-24   Miscellaneous sanitation nuisances
   
11A-25   Clotheslines in front yards and on front porches
   
11A-26   Storage of discarded, used and broken items
   
11A-27   Littering prohibited
   
11A-28   Duty to maintain property free from litter
   
11A-29   Nuisance vegetation prohibited
   
11A-30   Abandoned shopping carts
   11A-31—11A-51   Reserved
Subdivision B: Abatement
   
11A-52   Nuisance abatement order
   
11A-53   Hearing after abatement without notice
   
11A-54   Assessment of expenses; lien
   11A-55—11A-89   Reserved
Division 4: Graffiti
   
11A-90   Graffiti declared a nuisance
   
11A-91   Failure to remove graffiti
   
11A-92   Offer to remove
   
11A-93   Notice and abatement
   
11A-94   Assessment of expenses; lien
   
11A-95   Penalty
   11A-96—11A-99   Reserved
Division 5: Enforcement
   
11A-100   Criminal remedies
   
11A-101   Civil remedies
ARTICLE I: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
Section 20 of Ord. 24030-02-2020, adopted February 4, 2020, repealed §§ 11A-
1 through 11A-4, which pertained to Departments Established and Organized,
Responsibilities Generally, Duties of the Department, and Appointment of
Employees. See the Code Comparative Table.
§ 11A-1—11A-5 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: CODE COMPLIANCE
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 12931, § 1 adopted March 25, 1997, amended Art. II, §§
11A-6 through 11A-11, 11A-17 through 11A-35, 11A-52 through 11A-71, 11A-90,
11A-91, concerning code enforcement, in its entirety and added new §§
11A-6 through 11A-11, 11A-17 through 11A-26, 11A-52 through 11A-54, 11A-90
through 11A-94, 11A-100, 11A-101. Former §§
11A-6 through 11A-11, 11A-17 through 11A-35, 11A-52 through 11A-71, 11A-90,
11A-91 derived from Ord. 10815, § 1, adopted April 2, 1991; Ord. 10941, § 1,
adopted October 22, 1991; Ord. 11139, § 4, adopted July 28, 1992; Ord. 11528,
§§ 2, 3, adopted April 5, 1994; Ord. 11630, § 1, adopted July 26, 1994; Ord.
11676, § 1, adopted September 20, 1994; Ord. 12274, § 1, adopted November 28,
1995; Ord. 12533, § 1, adopted May 8, 1996.
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 11A-6 AUTHORIZATION.
   The director of code compliance and all duly authorized employees of the
department of code compliance shall have the authority to enforce provisions of
the city code relating to zoning, multifamily dwellings, minimum building
standards, nuisance, environmental and health, according to specific procedures
set forth in said code chapters and ordinances, including, but not limited to:
   (a)   
Chapter 7, Article IV (minimum building standards);
   (b)   
Chapter 7, Article IX (registration and inspection of multifamily dwelling
complexes);
   (c)   
Chapter 12.5, Article VIII (solid waste and recycling);
   (d)   
Chapter 22, Section
22-160 (parking of vehicles in front and side yards);
   (e)   
Chapter 22, §§
22-162.1 through
22-162.4 (parking of large and oversize vehicles);
   (f)   
Chapter 22,
Article IX (junked vehicles);
   (g)   
Appendix A (comprehensive zoning ordinance); and
   (h)   
Appendix B, Chapter 11A (department of code compliance).
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 14698, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
18162-07-2008, § 8, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 11A-7 DEFINITIONS.
   ALLEY. A street that is not used primarily for through traffic and which
provides access to rear entrances of buildings or lots along a street.
   ANIMAL. Any living, domestic, vertebrate creature, other than homo sapiens.
   COMPOSTING. The controlled biological decomposition through microbial
activity of compatible organic wastes that have been diverted from the solid
waste stream for conversion into soil amendment or mulch.
   DIRECTOR. The director of code compliance for the City of Fort Worth or the
director’s authorized representative.
   ECTOPARASITES. Bedbugs, lice and mites.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials and/or residue
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce
and other food products.
   GRAFFITI. Any unauthorized inscription, word, signature, symbol, design or
other marking of any sort which is etched, written, painted, drawn or applied
in any other way to any structure, building, fence, wall, roadway, sidewalk or
any property of any sort or to any portion or element thereof, whether the
property is public or private.
   LITTER. Garbage, rubbish and solid waste as herein defined and all other
material which when discarded tends to endanger the public health, safety and
welfare.
   OWNER. Any person who is the owner of record to any real property, or any
person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in real or
personal property.
   PARKWAY. The unimproved portion of any street, between the roadway and the
private property line.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Organic waste such as garbage and grease trap waste that
is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to
cause odors or gases or is capable of providing food for or attracting birds,
animals and vectors.
   RECYCLABLES. Materials which have been recovered or diverted from the solid
waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling or reclamation.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility in which recyclables are collected or removed
from the waste stream for transport off-site for recycling.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or other property upon
which the public has the right to travel by foot or by vehicle.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of
combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior,
furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials; or
noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum
cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary
incinerator temperatures (1600°F to 1800°F).
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, recyclables, sludge from a waste
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control
facility, and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial,
mining and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional
activities, but does not include:
      (1)   Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or
dissolved material in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges subject
to regulation by permit issued pursuant to the Tex. Water Code Chapter 26;
      (2)   Soil, dirt, rock, sand and other natural or human-made inert solid
materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land
suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or
      (3)   Waste materials which result from activities associated with the
exploration, development or production of oil and gas and are subject to
control by the railroad commission of Texas.
   STREET. The width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way,
part of which is designed for vehicular traffic.
   UNAUTHORIZED. Without the permission of the owner or the person in control
of property, whether public or private.
   VECTOR. An animal or insect that transmits a disease-producing organism.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 14698, § 1, passed 7-17-2001; Ord.
14676, § 1, passed 6-26-2001)
DIVISION 2: HIGH WEEDS AND GRASS
§ 11A-8 HIGH WEEDS AND GRASS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Any property upon which weeds or grass exceed 12 inches in height, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, occupies or controls
any real property upon which weeds or grass exceed 12 inches in height.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person owns, occupies or controls
any real property and fails to maintain the parkway adjacent to the property
free of weeds and grass that exceed 12 inches in height.
   (d)   In a prosecution or other enforcement action of subsections (a) or (b)
above, it is an exception that the real property was a lot, tract or parcel of
land of two or more acres under common ownership and the high grass or weeds
was no closer than 100 feet to:
      (1)   Any adjacent street; or
      (2)   Any structure or other improvement on any adjacent property owned
by another person.
   (e)   The provisions of this section apply to real property located within
the City of Fort Worth.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 20277-07-2012, § 1, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 11A-9 ABATEMENT OF HIGH WEEDS OR GRASS.
   (a)   The director is hereby authorized to give notice to the owner of any
property upon which high grass and weeds exist to abate the nuisance.
   (b)   If the owner of the property does not comply with an abatement notice
issued by the director within ten days after the date the notice is received,
the director may:
      (1)   Enter the property and do or cause to be done the work required to
abate the nuisance; and
      (2)   Pay for the work done and charge the expenses to the owner of the
property.
   (c)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;
      (2)   By letter addressed the owner at the owner’s post office address;
or
      (3)   If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner’s post office
address is unknown:
         a.   By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (d)   Notice will be deemed to have been received:
      (1)   For personal service, as of the date the notice was given
personally to the owner;
      (2)   For mailed notice, three days after it was mailed;
      (3)   For notice by publication, on the date that the last notice was
published in the official newspaper; or
      (4)   For notice by posting, ten days after notice was posted.
   (e)   The director in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner commits another
violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health
and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the
city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner’s expense
and assess the expense against the property.
   (f)   If a violation covered by a notice under subsection (e) above occurs
within the one-year period, and the director has not been informed in writing
by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any
action permitted by subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) above and assess its expenses
as provided by §
11A-11.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 20277-07-2012, § 1, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 11A-10 ABATEMENT OF WEEDS OR GRASS IN EXCESS OF 48 INCHES.
   (a)   The director may abate, without notice, weeds or grass that:
      (1)   Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
      (2)   Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any
person.
   (b)   Not later than the tenth day after the date the director abates weeds
or grass under this section, the director shall give notice to the property
owner in the manner required by §
11A-9.
   (c)   This notice shall contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the property;
      (2)   A description of the violations that occurred on the property;
      (3)   A statement that the city abated the weeds or grass; and
      (4)   An explanation of the property owner’s right to request an
administrative hearing about the city’s abatement of weeds or grass.
   (d)   The director shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement
of weeds or grass under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after
the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the
director a written request for a hearing.
   (e)   An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be
conducted not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for a
hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written
information relating to the city’s abatement of the weeds.
   (f)   The director may assess expenses and create liens under this section
in accordance with §
11A-11.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 20277-07-2012, § 1, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 11A-11 ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN.
   (a)   All expenses incurred by the city to abate high grass or weeds,
including the cost of giving notice as required, shall initially be paid by the
city and charged to the owner of the property.
   (b)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk for the county in which the
property is located. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if
known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the
filing of the lien statement with the county clerk.
   (c)   The lien shall be security for the expenditures made and interest
accruing at the rate of 10% per annum on the amount due from the date of
payment by the city.
   (d)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 20277-07-2012, § 2, passed 7-10-2012)
§§ 11A12—11A-16 RESERVED.
DIVISION 3: NUISANCES
SUBDIVISION A: GENERALLY
§ 11A-17 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subdivision is to define as nuisances within the City of
Fort Worth, certain conditions which are detrimental to the health and safety
of persons or property or which are detrimental to the senses. The conditions
made unlawful by this subdivision are hereby declared to be nuisances.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-18 ACCUMULATIONS OF ANIMAL FECES AND URINE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any
property upon which the feces or urine of any animal is accumulating in an
unsanitary manner or in a manner that creates an unreasonable or noxious odor
in a public place.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
the animal waste was a deposit of manure made upon private property for the
purpose of land cultivation and the deposit was maintained so as to prevent the
breeding of flies and other vectors.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-19 KEEPING OF SWINE.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly keeps swine within
the city.
   (b)   It is an exception to a prosecution under subsection (a) above that
the swine were:
      (1)   Being kept for processing in a slaughterhouse;
      (2)   Being kept for exhibition for a period not exceeding 21 days in
connection with agricultural expositions or fairs; or
      (3)   Individual swine being kept for sale, for a period not exceeding 14
days, within the boundaries of the Fort Worth Stockyards located at 131 East
Exchange Street.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under subsection (a)
above that the swine is a “miniature swine” as defined by
Chapter 6, Animals and Fowl, of the city code, and is being kept in compliance
with that chapter.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person keeps or permits to be kept
any pig pen, lot, stable, yard, shed, sty or other place for keeping swine, in
a manner that creates an unreasonable or noxious odor and which:
      (1)   Causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof; or
      (2)   Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by
persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-20 DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR KENNELS; NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS AT
RESIDENCES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person constructs or maintains any
dog kennel within 300 feet of a structure which is designed or used as a
habitation and which is located on another person’s property.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person constructs or maintains any
dog or cat kennel closer than 100 feet from premises which are zoned as
residential or which are used for residential purposes.
   (c)   In this section, the term KENNEL shall mean:
      (1)   Any building, lot or premises where four or more dogs or cats (at
least eight weeks of age) are kept. This shall not include residentially zoned
premises or premises which are used for residential purposes, at which the
occupant is keeping his or her own dogs or cats; or
      (2)   Any building, lot or premises where dogs or cats are housed or
accepted for boarding, for which remuneration is received.
   (d)   Distances in subsection (b) above shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   For the purpose of subsection (a), above, measurement of the 300
foot distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of an existing habitation to
the nearest portion of the kennel; and
      (2)   For the purpose of subsection (b) above, measurement of the 100
foot distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of a
residentially zoned property or premises used for residential purposes, to the
nearest portion of the kennel.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person keeps, houses or maintains
more than three dogs or three cats at the person’s residence in violation of §
6-23.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 5, passed 6-26-2018,
eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 11A-21 RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 19424-11-2010, § 2, adopted November 9, 2010, repealed §
11A-21, which pertained to keeping of cattle, horses, sheep, goats, emus,
ostriches and rheas. See also the Code Comparative Table.
§ 11A-22 KEEPING PIGEONS AND CERTAIN FOWL.
   (a)   In this section, REGULATED ANIMAL means any pigeon and any fowl as
defined by this section. For purposes of this section, the term FOWL shall
include any bird used for food or sport or kept as a pet but shall not include
pigeons, emus, ostriches or rheas. For the purposes of this section ROOSTER
shall mean a male chicken (species Gallus domesticus).
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly keeps or maintains
any number of pigeons and/or fowl within 50 feet of any regulated structures as
defined in subsection (f) below.
   (c)   (1)   A person commits an offense if, on one acre or more of property,
the person knowingly:
         a.   Keeps or maintains more than 50 fowl;
         b.   Keeps or maintains more than two roosters on property that is
zoned as residential or mixed-use commercial in accordance with Appendix A of
the code of the City of Fort Worth, regardless of the total number of fowl
being kept; or
         c.   Keeps or maintains any number of fowl not contained within a coop
or pen.
      (2)   For purposes of this section a pen or coop shall include any fully
enclosed structure specifically designed and constructed to constrain animals
or birds within its confines.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if, on one-half acre or less, the person
knowingly:
      (1)   Keeps or maintains more than 12 fowl;
      (2)   Keeps or maintains more than two roosters on property that is zoned
as residential or mixed-use commercial in accordance with Appendix A of the
code of the City of Fort Worth, regardless of the total number of fowl being
kept; or
      (3)   Keeps or maintains any number of fowl not contained within a coop
or pen.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if, on more than one-half acre but less
than one acre, the person knowingly:
      (1)   Keeps or maintains more than 25 fowl;
      (2)   Keeps or maintains more than two roosters on property that is zoned
as residential or mixed-use commercial in accordance with Appendix A of the
code of the City of Fort Worth, regardless of the total number of fowl being
kept; or
      (3)   Keeps or maintains any number of fowl not contained within a pen or
coop.
   (f)   For purposes of this section, a REGULATED STRUCTURE shall be:
      (1)   Any residence, structure or building used for human habitation,
other than the person’s habitation;
      (2)   Restaurant, café or eating establishment;
      (3)   Church, school, hospital, convalescent home, nursing home or
residential treatment facility; or
      (4)   Daycare facility, facility offering medical or dental services,
hotel, motel or other lodging facility.
   (g)   If a regulated animal is kept in or confined by any building or
structure, such as a stable, barn, shed, pen or fence, the distances required
by subsection (b) above shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest
point of such building or structure to the nearest point of the closest
regulated structure.
   (h)   A person keeping or maintaining any regulated animals commits an
offense if the person fails to:
      (1)   Collect the animals’ wastes daily in a ratproof and fly-tight
container or receptacle;
      (2)   Store wastes collected pursuant to subsection (h)(1) above in a
closed fly-proof and ratproof container, and in a manner that prevents the
escape of odors from the container; and
      (3)   Dispose of wastes collected pursuant to subsection (h)(1) above at
least once each week in a manner that prevents the breeding of flies.
   (i)   These provisions shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any facility related to public safety;
      (2)   Legally operating agricultural activities; and
      (3)   Legally operating commercial enterprises where the keeping or
maintaining of regulated animals is in compliance as a use by right.
   (j)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
the animal in question is:
      (1)   Subject of a valid continuance permit issued pursuant to Ordinance
14115;
      (2)   Being kept at city-owned or operated property for exhibition for a
period not exceeding 21 days in connection with an agricultural exposition or
fair; or
      (3)   Being kept for sale, for a period not exceeding 14 days, within the
boundaries of the Fort Worth stockyards located at 131 East Exchange Street.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 14115, § 1, passed 2-29-2000; Ord.
19424-11-2010, § 3, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 23295-06-2018, § 6, passed 6-26-
2018, eff. 7-6-2018)
§ 11A-22.2 CONTINUANCE PERMITS.
   (a)   Continuance permits issued pursuant to City Ordinance 14115 allowing
the maintenance of conditions that would otherwise constitute a violation of
former §§
11A-21 or 11A-22 shall continue in effect unless suspended or revoked pursuant
to this section.
   (b)   A continuance permit is valid only for the original permittee and for
those conditions designated and approved. A continuance permit is not
transferable to any other person or any other location.
   (c)   The permit shall be automatically revoked upon a change in the status
of the permitted property or upon cessation of the uses as stated in the permit
for a period of 30 days.
   (d)   The code compliance director, or that individual’s designee, may
suspend or revoke the continuance permit if the subject of the permit is found
to be in violation of city code or state or federal law.
   (e)   This process shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the
permittee.
(Ord. 19424-11-2010, § 4, passed 11-9-2010)
§ 11A-23 DISCHARGE OF LIQUID WASTE.
   (a)   No person shall deposit or allow to accumulate on private property, or
discharge from any place onto private or public property in the city any human
or animal liquid waste, foul water or any noxious liquid waste.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person violates subsection (a)
above.
   (c)   The application of this section does not include discharges to the
city’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), which are regulated by the
city’s environment code.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-24 MISCELLANEOUS SANITATION NUISANCES.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property that contains a pond, pool or container holding unwholesome, impure or
offensive water that creates an unreasonable and noxious odor in a public place
or that is detrimental to the health of humans.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property which contains any drain, ditch, tank or gutter that is maintained in
such a manner that creates an unreasonable and noxious odor in a public place
or that is detrimental to the health of humans.
   (c)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property which has an overflowing septic tank or has sewage leaking from any
pipes onto the premises.
   (d)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property that contains a condition or place that is a breeding ground for rats.
   (e)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property that contains a collection of water that is a breeding place for
mosquitoes.
   (f)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property that contains a condition or place that is a breeding ground for flies
or cockroaches.
   (g)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of a
place where sleeping accommodations are offered to the public where
ectoparasites suspected to be disease carriers are present.
   (h)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes the
operation of a vehicle or container used to transport garbage, human excreta or
other organic material, when such vehicle or container allows the leaking or
spillage of its contents.
   (i)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of garbage on the property
in a manner that creates an unreasonable and noxious odor in a public place,
that provides a breeding ground or harborage for vectors, or that is
detrimental to the health of humans.
   (j)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of any solid waste or
recyclables upon the property except in solid waste containers of a type
approved by the director of department of environmental management.
   (k)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of solid waste or
recyclables upon the property in any leaking or unsecured solid waste
containers.
   (l)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of solid waste or
recyclables upon the property, even in approved containers, for a period in
excess of one week.
   (m)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of materials in a
composting pile or bin on such property in a manner that:
      (1)   Breeds or allows the harborage of vectors; or
      (2)   Creates an unreasonable and noxious odor in a public place.
   (n)   A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of
property and accumulates or allows the accumulation of recyclables on such
property in a manner that:
      (1)   Breeds or allows the harborage of vectors; or
      (2)   Creates an unreasonable and noxious odor in a public place.
   (o)   In a prosecution of subsections (j), (k) or (l) above, it is an
exception that the property was a solid waste facility regulated by the Texas
natural resource conservation commission or was a recycling facility.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 14698, § 1, passed 7-17-2001)
§ 11A-25 CLOTHESLINES IN FRONT YARDS AND ON FRONT PORCHES.
   A person commits an offense if the person places or maintains a clothesline
in the front yard or on the front porch of any dwelling of any lot or parcel of
land which is zoned “A” One-Family, “A-R” Residential, “B” Two-Family or “R-1"
Residential, under the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-26 STORAGE OF DISCARDED, USED AND BROKEN ITEMS.
   (a)   A person commits an offense if the person accumulates or allows the
accumulation on any property of any:
      (1)   Broken, inoperable or discarded household furnishings, appliances,
machines, tools, boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment,
toys and similar items;
      (2)   Used or discarded building materials;
      (3)   Materials or items stored on rooftops or porches of buildings when
visible from the public right-of-way or neighboring property;
      (4)   Factory or mill wastes;
      (5)   Damaged merchandise;
      (6)   Wet, broken or leaking barrels, casks or boxes;
      (7)   Used, discarded or broken automotive parts or equipment; or
      (8)   Any other materials which tend by decay to become putrid or to
provide harborage for rodents and other vectors.
   (b)   It is defense to prosecution of subsection (a) above that the person
was engaged in the business of dealing in junk, and was in compliance with the
comprehensive zoning ordinance and all other applicable provisions of the city
code relating to junk dealers.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-27 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   A person commits an offense if he or she deposits or allows to be deposited
litter on any property within the city, whether owned by the person or not.
(Ord. 14676, § 1, passed 6-26-2001)
§ 11A-28 DUTY TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY FREE FROM LITTER.
   (a)   An owner, occupant or person in control of private property commits an
offense if her or she fails to maintain the property free of litter, unless the
litter has been deposited in a trash receptacle that securely contains the
litter.
   (b)   Construction sites within the city and sidewalks, streets, alleys and
public or private properties in the vicinity of the construction sites shall be
maintained free of construction trash, litter and debris that is not securely
contained.
      (1)   Any applicant for a permit for new residential construction issued
by the City of Fort Worth department of planning and development shall identify
the owner, occupant or person in control of the property on the permit, by
name, driver’s license number and date of birth, who is responsible for
maintaining the construction site in a manner that securely contains all
construction trash, litter and debris until a final inspection is delivered or
the permit expires.
      (2)   A person or owner commits an offense under this section when the
individual identified on a permit under subsection (b)(1) above fails to
maintain the construction site in such a manner as described in this section.
(Ord. 14676, § 1, passed 6-26-2001; Ord. 17522, § 5, passed 4-24-2007)
§ 11A-29 NUISANCE VEGETATION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Offense. An owner, occupant or person in control of private property
commits an offense if he or she fails to maintain the property free of rank or
uncultivated vegetation that:
      (1)   Creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor
mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or other disease-carrying pests, regardless of the
height of the vegetation; or
      (2)   Conceals the habitual occurrence of criminal activity on the
property; and
      (3)   Such rank or uncultivated vegetation has existed on the property
for a continuous period of time in excess of 30 calendar days.
   (b)   Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
section that the vegetation is:
      (1)   An agricultural crop;
      (2)   A cultivated tree or shrub; or
      (3)   Located in an arranged or managed natural habitat preservation area
or garden where weed control or other periodic maintenance occurs.
(Ord. 23668-05-2019, § 1, passed 5-21-2019, eff. 5-26-2019)
§ 11A-30 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      ABANDONED SHOPPING CART. Any shopping cart which has been removed from a
retail establishment's premises and is unattended at the time of investigation.
Abandoned shopping carts will be assumed to be the property of the retail
business geographically closest to the cart's collection point based on logos,
branding and/or retailer's name.
      OWNER. A person that operates, manages, or controls the retail
establishment.
      PREMISES. The entire property owned or leased by the retail
establishment, which provides shopping carts for use by its customers. In the
case of a retail business located within a shopping center or shopping complex,
the premises extend to include all parking areas and other common areas shared
by the tenants therein.
      SHOPPING CART. A basket that is mounted on wheels, or a similar device,
generally used in a retail establishment by a customer to transport goods of
any kind.
   (b)   Shopping cart identification. Owners of retail establishments
providing shopping carts for customers may affix to the cart durable,
weatherproof, and legible signs or markings identifying the name of the retail
establishment. Retail establishments may employ unique color schemes and logos
in lieu of the retail establishment's name.
   (c)   Shopping cart control plan.
      (1)   Following the impoundment of 16 or more abandoned shopping carts
owned by any one retail establishment within a time period of six months, the
code compliance director or designee may place the retail establishment on a
Shopping Cart Control Plan and require the retail establishment to do any of
the following to mitigate the loss of its shopping carts:
         a.   Install wheel locks on all retail establishment shopping carts;
or
         b.   Affix to the carts a durable all-weather decal stating the
following in legible letters:
   IT IS AN OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE UP TO $500 TO POSSESS THIS SHOPPING
CART AT A LOCATION OTHER THAN ON THE PREMISES OF THE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT THAT
OWNS THIS SHOPPING CART.; or
         c.   Any other reasonable measures that the retail establishment and
the director or designee may agree to.
      (2)   A retail establishment may only be released from a Shopping Cart
Control Plan if the retail establishment complies with the requirements
provided in the Shopping Cart Control Plan and the retail establishment does
not have more than two shopping carts impounded by the city within a six month
period after the effective date of the Shopping Cart Control Plan.
   (d)   Offenses.
      (1)   The owner commits an offense if the city has impounded 16 or more
abandoned shopping carts owned by the retail establishment.
      (2)   A person commits an offense if they have failed to comply with any
requirements stated in a Shopping Cart Control Plan.
      (3)   It is a defense to prosecution if the retail establishment has
installed a functioning wheel-lock system on its shopping carts.
   (e)   Retrieval and impoundment.
      (1)   The city may collect and impound any abandoned shopping cart
located on public property. In the event an abandoned shopping cart is found on
public property and is damaged, no longer functional, has no legible
identifying markings, or presents a public health and safety concern, the city
may dispose of the cart immediately and in a method the Code Compliance
Director or designee deems appropriate.
      (2)   An abandoned shopping cart collected and impounded by the city may
be made available to the retail establishment for reclamation for a period of
30 days from the date provided in the notice to the owner of the impoundment at
a designated location determined by the city.
      (3)   Each abandoned shopping cart collected and impounded by the City of
Fort Worth will be released to an owner or employee of the retail establishment
upon payment of a recovery fee to the city, which shall be established by city
council. Each shopping cart shall be charged a separate recovery fee, A
recovery fee shall not be assessed to any abandoned shopping cart that is
collected and impounded, if it has a functioning wheel-lock system installed.
      (4)   In the event an abandoned shopping cart is not reclaimed within 30
days after the owner is notified of the impoundment, the city may dispose of
the cart in a method the code compliance director or designee deems
appropriate.
   (f)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 26022-02-2023, § 1, passed 2-28-2023, eff. 3-7-2023)
§§ 11A-31—11A-51 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION B: ABATEMENT
§ 11A-52 NUISANCE ABATEMENT ORDER.
   (a)   The director is hereby authorized to give notice to the owner of any
property upon which a nuisance under this division exists to abate the
nuisance.
   (b)   If the owner of the property does not comply with an abatement notice
issued by the director within seven days after the date the notice is received,
the director may:
      (1)   Enter the property and do or cause to be done any work or
improvements required to abate the nuisance; and
      (2)   Pay for the work or improvements done and charge the expenses to
the owner of the property.
   (c)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s post office
address; or
      (3)   If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner’s post office
address is unknown:
         a.   By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property
contains no buildings.
   (d)   Notice will be deemed to have been received:
      (1)   For personal service, as of the date the notice was given
personally to the owner;
      (2)   For mailed notice, three days after it was mailed;
      (3)   For notice by publication, on the date that the last notice was
published in the official newspaper; or
      (4)   For notice by posting, ten days after notice was posted.
   (e)   The director in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner commits another
violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health
and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the
city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner’s expense
and assess the expense against the property.
   (f)   If a violation covered by a notice under subsection (e) above occurs
within the one-year period, and the director has not been informed in writing
by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any
action permitted by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) above.
   (g)   If a nuisance presents an immediate danger to the health, life or
safety of any person or to the environment, the director may, without complying
with the notice provisions of this section or without waiting the seven-day
period, enter the subject property and:
      (1)   Do or cause to be done any work or improvements necessary to abate
the nuisance and remediate and restore the environment; and
      (2)   Pay for the work or improvements done and charge the expenses to
the owner of the property.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 27769-06-2025, § 1, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 11A-53 HEARING AFTER ABATEMENT WITHOUT NOTICE.
   (a)   Not later than the tenth day after the date the director abates a
nuisance without prior notice under §
11A-52(g), the director shall give notice to the property owner in the manner
required by § 11A-52.
   (b)   This notice shall contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the property;
      (2)   A description of the violations that occurred on the property;
      (3)   A statement that the city abated the nuisance; and
      (4)   An explanation of the property owner’s right to request an
administrative hearing about the city’s abatement of the nuisance.
   (c)   The director shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement
of the nuisance under this section if, not later than the thirtieth day after
the date of the abatement of the nuisance, the property owner files with the
director a written request for a hearing.
   (d)   An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be
conducted not later than the twentieth day after the date a request for a
hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written
information relating to the city’s abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-54 ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN.
   (a)   All expenses incurred by the city to abate a nuisance, including the
cost of giving notice as required, shall initially be paid by the city and
charged to the owner of the property.
   (b)   To obtain a lien against the property, the director shall file a
statement of expenses with the county clerk for the county in which the
property is located. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if
known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the
filing of the lien statement with the county clerk.
   (c)   The lien shall be security for the expenditures made and interest
accruing at the rate of 10% per annum on the amount due from the date of
payment by the city.
   (d)   The lien is inferior only to:
      (1)   Tax liens; and
      (2)   Liens for street improvements.
   (e)   A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead
provisions of the Texas Constitution.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§§ 11A-55—11A-89 RESERVED.
DIVISION 4: GRAFFITI
§ 11A-90 GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (a)   The city council hereby finds that graffiti that is visible from a
public place, public right-of-way or the property of others:
      (1)   Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
      (2)   Tends to reduce the value of private property;
      (3)   Invites vandalism, additional graffiti and other criminal
activities; and
      (4)   Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of the City of Fort Worth.
   (b)   The presence of graffiti on property where it is visible from a public
place, public right-of-way or from another person’s property is therefore
declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
§ 11A-91 FAILURE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, a person commits an offense if
the person is the owner of property and, after receiving notice from the city
in accordance with §
11A-93, knowingly fails to remove, or knowingly fails to cause the removal of
graffiti from the property, when the graffiti is visible from:
      (1)   A public place;
      (2)   Public right-of-way; or
      (3)   Another person’s property.
   (b)   In accordance with state law, a person is excepted from subsection (a)
above and from any requirement to remove graffiti from the owner’s property if
and only if:
      (1)   The graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; and
      (2)   The removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person
performing the removal.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 18771-08-2009, § 1, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 11A-92 OFFER TO REMOVE.
   (a)   Prior to issuing a citation under §
11A-91, sending a notice to abate in accordance with § 11A-93, or taking action
to abate pursuant to § 11A-93, the city shall make an offer to remove the
graffiti from the owner’s property free of charge. The offer may be made orally
or in writing.
   (b)   If an offer is made orally, it must be made:
      (1)   In person to the property owner; or
      (2)   Via telephone or telephone message to the property owner but only
if the city has a current, valid telephone number for the property owner.
   (c)   If an offer is in writing, it must be made:
      (1)   In person to the property owner;
      (2)   By first class United States mail or common or contract carrier
addressed to the property owner at the property owner’s address as contained in
the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located;
      (3)   By publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation;
      (4)   By posting the offer on or near the front door of each building on
the property to which the offer relates; or
      (5)   By posting the offer on a placard attached to a stake driven into
the ground on the property to which the offer relates.
   (d)   For purposes of making an offer, the property owner shall be the
individual identified as the current owner of the property according to the
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located.
   (e)   Service by publication under subsection (c)(3) above may include more
than one piece of property and more than one property owner so long as each
address and owner is clearly identified.
   (f)   An offer will be deemed to have been received:
      (1)   For oral or written personal service, as of the date the offer was
made in person to the property owner;
      (2)   For telephone service, as of the date the offer was made via
telephone or telephone message to the property owner;
      (3)   For service via mail or common or contract carrier, three days
after the date that the offer was deposited in the mail or given to the
carrier;
      (4)   For service by publication, on the date that the offer was
published in the newspaper; or
      (5)   For service by posting, three days after the date on which the
offer was posted.
   (g)   If an owner does not contact the city to accept an offer by 5:00 p.m.
on the third business day after the date an offer is deemed received, it shall
be presumed that the owner has refused the offer, and the city may proceed as
though the owner actually refused the offer effective the date of that third
day.
(Ord. 18771-08-2009, § 2, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 11A-93 NOTICE AND ABATEMENT.
   (a)   The city must notify the property owner of a violation of this
article, and must give the owner the opportunity to remove the graffiti before:
      (1)   Issuing a citation for a violation of §
11A-91; or
      (2)   Entering the property and doing the work necessary to abate the
nuisance.
   (b)   Notice must require a property owner to remove the graffiti or cause
the graffiti to be removed on or before the fifteenth day after the date that
the property owner is deemed to have received the notice.
   (c)   Notice may be given no earlier than the date:
      (1)   On which the property owner actually refuses the city’s offer of
removal; or
      (2)   On which the offer of removal is presumed to have been refused
under §
11A-92(g).
   (d)   Notice must be in writing and must be given:
      (1)   To the owner in person;
      (2)   By letter addressed to the property owner at the property owner’s
address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the
property is located, and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested; or
      (3)   If service cannot be obtained under subsection (d)(1) or (d)(2)
above:
         a.   By publication at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation;
         b.   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the notice relates; or
         c.   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the notice relates.
   (e)   Notice will be deemed to have been received:
      (1)   For personal service, as of the date the notice was given
personally to the owner;
      (2)   For mailed notice, three days after the date on which the notice
was deposited in the mail;
      (3)   For notice by publication, on the date that the notice was
published in the official newspaper; or
      (4)   For notice by posting, ten days after the date on which notice was
posted.
   (f)   If a property owner does not comply with the notice to abate on or
before the fifteenth day after the date on which the property owner is deemed
to have received the notice, a citation for a violation of §
11A-91 may be issued.
   (g)   If a property owner does not comply with the notice to abate on or
before the fifteenth day after the date on which the property owner is deemed
to have received the notice, the city may enter the property and do all work
necessary to abate the graffiti.
   (h)   If the city does the abatement work pursuant to subsection (g) above,
the city shall initially pay for the work done, and shall charge the expenses
to the owner of the property in accordance with a fee schedule adopted annually
by the city council.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 18771-08-2009, § 3, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 11A-94 ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN.
   (a)   The city may assess expenses for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to
§
11A-93 against the real property on which the work was done.
   (b)   To obtain a lien against the property, the city must file a statement
of expenses with the county clerk of the county in which the property is
located. By adoption of this ordinance, the city council designates the city
manager or that individual’s authorized representative to file the statement of
expense on behalf of the city council.
   (c)   The statement of expenses must contain:
      (1)   The name of the property owner, if known;
      (2)   The legal description of the property; and
      (3)   The amount of expenses incurred under §
11A-93(h).
   (c)   The lien is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing
at the rate of 10% per annum on the amount due from the date of payment by the
city.
   (d)   The lien attaches to the property on the date on which the statement
of expenses is filed in the real property records and is subordinate only to:
      (1)   Any previously recorded lien; and
      (2)   The rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquires an
interest in the property before the statement of expenses is filed.
   (e)   A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead
provisions of the Texas Constitution.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 18771-08-2009, § 4, passed 8-25-2009)
§ 11A-95 PENALTY.
   An offense as defined under this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 18771-08-2009, § 5, passed 8-25-2009)
§§ 11A-96—11A-99 RESERVED.
DIVISION 5: ENFORCEMENT
§ 11A-100 CRIMINAL REMEDIES.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, an offense under this chapter is a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 in accordance with §
1-6(c). Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   If an offense defined under this chapter does not include a culpable
mental state, then intent, knowledge, or recklessness suffices to establish
criminal responsibility.
   (c)   If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this chapter that
within three years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has been
once previously convicted of an offense under this chapter:
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (c)(2) below, upon conviction the
defendant shall be fined not less than $250; and
      (2)   If it is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the
defendant was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time
of the alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less
than $1,000.
   (d)   If it is shown on trial of an alleged offense under this chapter that
within three years prior to the alleged offense date the defendant has been
previously convicted of two or more offenses under this chapter:
      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (d)(2) below, upon conviction the
defendant shall be fined not less than $500; and
      (2)   If is also shown on trial of the alleged offense that the defendant
was not a residential occupant of the property involved at the time of the
alleged offense, upon conviction the defendant shall be fined not less than
$2,000.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997; Ord. 14402, § 1, passed 11-7-2000; Ord.
23569-02-2019, § 2, passed 2-12-2019, eff. 2-23-2019)
§ 11A-101 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   (a)   The city may invoke Tex. Local Government Code §§ 54.011 through
54.017 and petition the state district court or the applicable county court at
law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties
or both injunctive relief and civil penalties, whenever it appears that a
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter
that relates to:
      (1)   The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real property;
      (2)   The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a
building or other structure or improvement;
      (3)   Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements; or
      (4)   Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other
matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents.
   (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.016, the city may obtain
against the owner or the operator of a facility, a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, that:
      (1)   Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this chapter
that relates to any matter specified in subsection (a) above; or
      (2)   Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary
for compliance with any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (a) above.
   (c)   (1)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code § 54.017 of the, the city
may recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 per day for each violation
of any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified in
subsection (a) above, if the city proves that:
         a.   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the
chapter; and
         b.   After the defendant received notice of the chapter provisions,
the defendant committed acts in violation of the chapter or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with the chapter.
      (2)   The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response, remediation, abatement
and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or
at common law.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective
actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator and any other
factors as justice requires.
(Ord. 12931, § 1, passed 3-25-1997)
APPENDIX C: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17154, § 1, adopted September 12, 2006, amended the code by adding
provisions designated as a new App. C, Subdivision Ordinance. Subsequently,
Ord. 17851, § 1, adopted October 30, 2007, repealed Ch. 31 and replaced the
contents with the contents of former App. C. Section 2 of said ordinance
amended the title of
Chapter 31 from “Subdivision Regulations” to “Subdivision Ordinance.” See
Chapter 31, Subdivision Ordinance. See the Code Comparative Table for a
detailed analysis of inclusion.
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
References to Texas Codes
References to 1964 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference                                              Code Section
Title 4, §§ 15.1 through 15.13                                 16-135
Title 4, § 15.2                                                 16-135
Title 22 § 663.21                                               App. A, 4.403,
                                                                 App. A, 4.404
Title 25                                                         16-101
Title 25, § 169.27                                              6-42
Title 25, § 217.1                                               16-135
Title 25, Chapter 228                                            16-121
Title 25, §§ 229.41 et seq.                                    16-121
Title 25, § 229.162(42)                                         16-135
Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter L                       16-457
Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter M, §§ 265-301 through 16-501
265.308
Title 25, Chapter 265                                            16-466
                                                                 16-462,
                                                                 16-463,
Title 25, Chapter 265, Subchapter L                              16-467,
                                                                 16-468,
                                                                 16-473
Title 25, Chapter 265 Subchapter M                               16-503,
                                                                 16-504
Title 25, Chapter 265 Subchapter M, §§ 265.306                 16-504
Title 25, § 265.192                                             16-462,
                                                                 16-463
Title 26, Part 1, Chapter 746                                    16-428
Title 28                                                         13-2
Title 28, Part I                                                 13-2
Title 28, § 34.720                                              13-2
                                                                 16-504,
Title 30                                                         26-2,
                                                                 35-158
Title 30, Chapter 21                                             26-2
Title 30, Chapter 30                                             35-158
30 TAC Chapter 101                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 106                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 111                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 112                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 113                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 114                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 115                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 116                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 117                                               12.5-210
30 TAC Chapter 118                                               12.5-210
Title 30, Chapter 122                                            12.5-210
                                                                 26-2,
                                                                 35-167,
Title 30, Chapter 210                                            35-178,
                                                                 35-182,
                                                                 35-185
Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 210, Rule 210.24                       26-2
Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 210, Rule 210.56                       26-2
Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 210, Rule 210.83                       26-2
Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 210, Rule 210.84                       26-2
Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 210, Rule 210.85                       26-2
Title 30, § 210.25                                              35-184
Title 30, § 210.33                                              35-56
Title30, § 210.4(a)(4)(F)                                       35-181
Title 30, § 290.44                                              12.5-525
Title 30, § 290.47(i)                                           35-167
Title 30, § 312.142                                             12.5-706
Title 30, Chapter 330                                            12.5-103,
                                                                 App. A, 4.305
Title 30, Chapter 330, § 330.3                                  App. A, 4.305,
                                                                 App. A, 5.149
Title 30, Chapter 335, § 335.1                                  App. A, 4.305,
                                                                 App. A, 5.149
Title 30, § 335.505                                             12.5-103
Title 30, Chapter 344                                            35-159
43 TAC Chapter 18, subchapter 18.89                              34-180.1
Chapter 210.25                                                   35-186
 
AGRICULTURE CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
13.101 et seq.      Ch. 20, Art. IV
251.002             35-158,
                    35-160
 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
11.38               Ch. 4
61.36               Ch. 4
109.33              4-4
Chapter 27          4-4
Chapter 72          4-4
Chapter 102         4-4
 
BUSINESS AND COMMERCE CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
43                  23-22,
                    App. A, 9.101
 
CIVIL PRACTICE AND REMEDIES CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 101         2-290
 
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference Code Section
                    7-76,
Article 18.05       7-403,
                    7-424
Article 18.17       27-43
Article 42.18       App. A, 9.101
Article 45.0511     10-7
Article 45.052      10-7
Article 45.052      10-11
Article 45.053      10-11
Article 45.056      10-11
Article 45.051      22-245
Article 45.052      22-245
Chapter 62          App. A, 5.203
Article 102.014     10-12
Article 102.0174    10-11
Article 103.0031    10-9.1
 
EDUCATION CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
21.033              App. A, 9.101
61.003(8)           6-1
                    
 
ELECTION CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
1.015               2-237
Title 15            2-237
 
FAMILY CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 31          23-19
51.08               23-19
 
FINANCE CODE
 
Statutory Reference       Code Section
                          20-451,
Chapter 393, Subchapter G 20-453,
                          20-455
393.601                   20-451
393.627                   20-459
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference Code Section
Title 2             10-1
Chapter 29          Ch. 10
Chapter 29.101      Ch. 10
Chapter 30          10-1
30.00005            7-102B
30.00005(c)         10-1
30.00005(d)         10-1
30.00014(f)         10-10
418.1015            2-177.7,
                    2-177.10
Chapter 441         Ch. 19, Art. II,
                    Ch. 24
442.001(3)          30-19,
                    Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
442.016             App. A, 4.401
                    17-96,
                    2-241,
Chapter 551         2-236,
                    2-251,
                    2-253,
                    34-212
                    2-282,
Chapter 552         2-289.2,
                    34-202
552.002(c)          12.5-513
Chapter 572         2-263
Chapter 573         16-186
Chapter 791         5-1,
                    5-3
802.1012            2.5-6
Chapter 2251        20-371,
                    20-373
Chapter 2253        9-205
Chapter 2254        21-7
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference              Code Section
Title 5, § 341.064              16-461
Title 9, Subtitle A, Chapter 757 7-47
Chapter 142                      20-474
142.003(a)(19)                   20-474
Chapter 241                      5-45
Chapter 242                      20-474
242.003(3)                       20-474
Chapter 246                      20-474
Chapter 247                      20-474
247.004(4)                       20-474
Chapter 252                      20-474
Chapter 260                      20-470,
                                 20-486
260.0051                         20-499
Chapter 341                      12.5-414,
                                 16-121
                                 16-457,
                                 16-462,
341.064                          16-467,
                                 16-468,
                                 16-473
Chapter 361                      12.5-853,
                                 12.5-862
Chapter 361, Subchapter W        12.5-412
361.013(g)                       12.5-843
361.032                          12.5-121
361.805                          12.5-414,
                                 12.5-419
364.034                          12.5-843
                                 12.5-107,
Chapter 365                      12.5-862,
                                 22-1,
                                 22-301
Chapter 366                      35-132
366.002                          35-160
Chapter 382                      12.5-107
Chapter 431                      16-121
437.001.(2-b)                    16-135, App. A,
                                 5.116.A
Chapter 43, Subchapter G         16-101
Chapter 481                      34-340
Chapter 483                      34-340
483.041                          5-44
                                 16-462,
Chapter 757                      16-467,
                                 16-468,
                                 16-473
773.003(1)                       5-3
773.003(2)                       5-3
773.003(13)                      5-31
773.046                          5-3
773.047                          5-3
773.048                          5-3
773.049                          5-3
773.0495                         5-3
773.051                          5-1
Chapter 822                      6-15.1
822.0424                         6-15.3,
                                 6-15.5
822.102, Subchapter E            6-62
Chapter 823                      6-75
823.005                          6-75
                                 6-23,
Chapter 826                      6-41,
                                 6-75
826.002                          6-42
826.017                          6-1
826.021                          6-41
                                 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference Code Section
42.002              20-474
51.002              20-474
Chapter 102         20-496
Chapter 112         20-496
121.002             6-1
Chapter 123         App. A,
                    9.101
                    7-418,
Chapter 123.001     7-429,
                    App. A, 5.110
 
INSURANCE CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 1954        34-207
                    
 
LABOR CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Title 5             2-294
21.151              17-65
                    
 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference       Code Section
202.008                   2-289.4
Title 6, subtitle C       2-278
Title 8                   2-14
26.041                    Ch. 2, Art. II
Chapter 53                1-1
53.006                    1-1,
                          1-8
Chapter 54                7-67,
                          7-108
Chapter 54, Subchapter B  7-112,
                          10-1
54.001 et seq.            App. A, 4.401
54.004                    20-470
54.012 through 54.017     16-153,
                          App. B, 11A-101
54.012 through 54.017     12.5-123
54.012 through 54.019     7-417,
                          7-426
                          7-351,
                          7-417,
54.016                    7-426,
                          12.5-123,
                          16-153,
                          App. B, 11A-101
                          7-417,
                          7-426,
54.017                    12.5-123,
                          16-153,
                          App. B, 11A-101
54.032                    7-77.1
54.043                    7-77.1
Chapter 132               2-11
                          2-180,
Chapter 143               2.5-1,
                          13-25
143.014                   27-24
143.014(g)                13-24
143.014(h)                13-24
143.307                   27-24
Chapter 145               2-262
171.002(a)(1)             2-237
171.002(a)(2)             2-237
171.002(b)                2-237
171.004                   2-239
Chapter 172               2-190
Chapter 175               2-190
Chapter 211               App. A, 2.100
211.001 et seq.           App. A, 4.401
211.003                   App. A, 4.400
211.008 through 211.011   App. A, 2.101
211.011                   App. A, 3.304,
                          App. A, 3.405
                          2-70,
                          31-2,
Chapter 212               31-61,
                          35-70.6,
                          App. A, 4.103,
                          App. A, 6.506
212.009(b-2)              31-5
212.0091                  31-5
212.0093                  31-5
212.012                   31-150
212.013                   31-42
212.015(b)                31-42
212.015(g)                31-42
212.016                   30-172
Chapter 214               7-67,
                          7-108
Chapter 214, Subchapter A 10-1
Chapter 214, Subchapter C 7-48
214.001 et seq.           App. A, 4.401
214.003                   7-109,
                          7-111
215.075                   20-470
Chapter 241               3-261,
                          Ch. 3, Art. VI, Div. 2
Chapter 241, Subchapter D 3-272
241.044                   3-273
241.903                   17-86
243.0075                  App. A, 5.210
250.007                   17-120,
                          17-122
Chapter 252               2-9
252.022                   21-7
Chapter 273               Ch. 30
Chapter 283               30-19
283.057(a) and (b)        Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
Chapter 284               30-19,
                          Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
Chapter 284, Subchapter C Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.002                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.002(12)(B)(1)         Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.003                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.003(a)(1)(C)          Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.003(a)(2)(C)          Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.003(a)(3)(B)          Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.056                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.101(a)(3) and (b)     Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.102                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.102(1)                Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.103                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.104(a)                Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.105                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.107                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.108                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.108(a)(1)-(2)         Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.109                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.110                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.301                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.302                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
284.304                   Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
315.006                   App. A, 4.401
                          32-30,
Chapter 334               32-50,
                          32-60,
                          32-70
334.043                   32-31
Chapter 341               Ch. 27
Chapter 392               7-394
                          30-153,
Chapter 395               30-191,
                          35-68,
                          35-70.13
395.022                   30-195
395.025                   30-193
395.0575                  30-191,
                          35-70.13
395.058                   30-159,
                          35-69.1
Chapters 551 through 580  Ch. 28,
                          Ch. 35
551.002                   12.5-511
                          12.5-337,
Chapter 552               Ch. 15,
                          35-9
Chapter 552, Subchapter C 12.5-336
552.045                   12.5-337
552.046                   12.5-337
552.049                   12.5-342
Chapter 552.050           12.5-341
Chapter 552.053           12.5-346
Chapter 580.003           12.5-346
Chapter 2253              9-309
 
NATURAL RESOURCES CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 91          12.5-103
 
OCCUPATIONS CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference Code Section
53.023              20-391
Chapter 801         6-61
Ch. 1702            6-1,
                    6-63
1702.286            12-9
Chapter 1956        20-385
1956.001(7)         20-384
1956.001(8)         20-384
1956.001(9)         20-384
1956.021            20-391
1956.031(a)(1)      20-386
1956.033            20-385
1956.0331           20-385
Chapter 2001        29.5-1,
                    29.5-3
Chapter 2301        34-177
Chapter 2303        34-177
Chapter 2308        34-177,
                    34-180
 
PARKS AND WILDLIFE CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 31          34-177
 
PENAL CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference   Code Section
6.02(c)               1-6,
                      6-5
12.23                 5-32
                      20-497,
Chapter 19            34-208,
                      34-340
Chapter 20            20-497,
                      34-340
20.04                 34-208
Chapter 20A           34-208
Chapter 21            34-340,
                      App. A, 5.203
21.02                 20-497,
                      34-208
21.08                 20-471,
                      20-497
21.11                 20-497,
                      34-208
21.12                 20-497,
                      34-208
21.15                 20-497
                      20-471,
Chapter 22            34-340,
                      App. A, 5.203,
                      App. A, 5.204
22.01                 20-497
22.011                20-497,
                      34-208
22.02                 20-497
22.021                20-497,
                      34-208
22.04                 20-497
22.041                20-497
22.05                 20-497
22.07                 20-497
22.08                 20-497
Chapter 25            App. A, 5.203,
                      App. A, 5.204
25.031                20-497
25.08                 20-497,
                      34-208
28.02                 20-497
Chapter 29            34-340
29.02                 20-497
29.03                 20-497,
                      34-208
Chapter 30            34-340
30.02                 20-497
30.05(a)(2)           Ch. 20, Art. IV
Chapter 31            20-497,
                      34-340
Chapter 32            34-340
32.45                 20-497
32.36                 20-497
33.021                20-497
34.02                 20-497
35A.02                20-497
Chapter 37            34-340
37.12                 20-497
42.01(a)(7), (8), (9) 20-497
42.09                 20-497
                      34-340,
Chapter 43            App. A, 5.203,
                      App. A, 5.204
43.25                 34-208
43.251                34-208
43.26                 34-208
43.261                34-208
Chapter 46            34-340
47.01(4)(b)           23-22 ,
                      App. A, 9.101
49.08                 34-208
                      
 
PROPERTY CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
Chapter 81          7-394
Chapter 92          20-496
Chapter 301         17-91,
                    17-96
                    
 
REVISED CIVIL STATUTES
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference                  Code Section
Article 1.03, title 79               35-70.11
Article 46e                          3-210
Article 46e-11                       3-240
Article 46e-11(1)                    3-206
Article 179d                         20-26
Article 1015(32)                     Ch. 33
Article 1175(20)                     Ch. 34
Article 1175(21)                     Ch. 34
Article 1269m                        10-6
Article 4476-15                      18-37
Article 4477-9a                      20-292
Article 5069-51.02                   20-258
Article 6228f                        10-6
Article 6243i                        2.5-3,
                                     2.5-5
Article 6243i, § 1.02(4)            2.5-1
Article 6243i, § 2.01               2.5-2
Article 6701a                        22-117
Article 6701d                        22-86,
                                     22-178
Article 6701d, § 24(a)              22-78
Article 6701d, § 54A                22-68
Article 6701d, § 124                22-8,
                                     22-79
Article 6701d , § 132               22-322
Article 6701d, § 139                22-116
Article 6701d, § 166                22-86
Article 6701d, § 166, paragraph (b) 22-86
Article 6701d, § 166, paragraphs (c)22-86
Article 8751                         26-2
 
TAX CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference                 Code Section
11.18                               20-474
11.24                               App. A, 4.401
Chapter 23, Subchapters B through H App. A, 4.401
23.23                               App. A, 4.401
26.01                               App. A, 3.403
34.02                               2-13
34.06                               2-13
156.001                             20-474
Chapter 351                         Ch. 32, Art. II
351.1015                            32-17
 
TRANSPORTATION CODE
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference       Code Section
Title 7                   3-96,
                          22-69
                          Ch. 3,
Chapter 22                3-192,
                          3-227
Chapters 311 through 317  Ch. 30
Chapter 316               Ch. 30
Ch. 501 et seq.           Ch. 22
Chapter 501               34-177
Chapter 502               34-177
522.003                   22-95
541.001(3)                22-1
541.002                   22-7
541.002(4)                22-1
541.156                   22-8,
                          22-79
541.201                   22-1
541.201(3)                22-1
541.201(7)                22-95
541.201(9)                22-1
541.201(11)               22-1
541.201(13)               22-1
541.201(15), (16)         22-1
541.201(17)               22-1
541.201(20)               22-1
541.201(22)               22-1
541.201(23)               22-1
541.301                   22-1
541.302(2)                22-1
541.302(3)                22-1
541.302(5)                22-1
541.302(8)                22-1
541.302(9)                22-1
541.302(11)               22-1
541.302(16)               22-1
541.303                   22-1
541.304                   22-1
541.304(3)                22-1
541.401(6)                22-1
541.401(8)                22-1
541.401(9)                22-1
541.401(10)               22-1
541.501                   22-6
Ch. 542                   22-20
542.003                   22-9
542.202                   22-4
543.111 through 543.116   10-7
                          3-97,
                          Ch. 22, Art. II,
Ch. 544                   22-39,
                          22-90,
                          Ch. 22, Art. VI,
                          Ch. 22, Art. VII
544.002                   Ch. 22, Art. II
544.002(c)                Ch. 22, Art. II
544.004                   22-37
544.005                   22-48
544.006                   22-47
544.007                   22-38
544.008                   22-43
544.010                   22-70
Chapter 545               34-177
545.051                   22-66
545.053 through 545.055   22-67
545.056                   22-68,
                          22-69
545.057                   22-68,
                          22-69
545.101 through 545.107   22-78
545.151 through 545.153   22-72
545.153                   22-70
545.155                   22-76
545.351                   22-86
545.351(c)(1) through (5) 22-86
545.352                   22-86
545.416                   22-13
545.420                   22-361
Ch. 546                   5-33,
                          22-8
Chapter 547               22-323
547.501                   22-10,
                          22-11
552.002                   22-45
Chapter 601               2-299
Chapter 682               10-9.1
Chapter 683               3-98,
                          22-314
                          10-1,
                          22-303,
Chapter 683, Subchapter E 22-304,
                          22-305,
                          22-306
 
UTILITIES CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
11.003              Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
51.002              Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
Chapter 66          30-19
 
VERNON’S CITATIONS
Statutory Reference Code Section
Statutory Reference                               Code Section
V.A.C.S.
V.A.C.S. Art. 999b                                27-1
V.A.C.S. Art. 1175(22)                            Ch. 20, Art. II, Div. 3
V.A.C.S., Civil Stats., Article 1175, par. 16     Ch. 16, Art. XIII
V.A.C.S. Article 1175, par. 19                    Ch. 16, Art. XIII
V.A.C.S. Article 4421                             Ch. 16, Art. XIII
V.A.C.S. Article 4436b                            Ch. 16
V.A.C.S. Art. 4447o, §§ 1.01—3.18             Ch. 5
V.A.C.S. Art. 4447o, § 3.10                      Ch. 5
V.A.C.S. Article 4477-1, §§ 1 to 4 and 7        Ch. 16, Art. XIII
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 2(j)                     Ch. 16, Art. XV
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 10                       Ch. 35
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, §§ 11 through 13, 20      Ch. 35
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 21                       Ch. 16, Art. XV
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477-1, § 22                       Ch. 35
V.A.C.S. Article 4477-1, § 23                    Ch. 16, Art. XIII
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477, Rule 54a(a)                   Ch. 16, Art. XVI
V.A.C.S. Art. 4477, Rules 34a through 55a         Ch. 16, Art. XVI
V.A.C.S. Article 4477-9a, § 5.03                 22-302
V.A.C.S. Article 5221k                            Ch. 17
V.A.C.S. Article 5221k, § 4.01                   Ch. 17
V.A.C.S. Art. 6080                                Ch. 18
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 26                        Ch. 22
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 27                        Ch. 22
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 38 to 49                22-136
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 43 to 49                22-138
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 49                        22-138
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 49(b)                     23-7
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 51                        22-92
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 61                        22-88
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 62                        22-89
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 77                        22-281
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 78                        22-283
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 80                        22-282
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 81(c)                   22-284
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 81(d)                   22-284
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 94                        22-222
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 95                        Ch. 22, Art. VI
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 96                        22-166,
                                                  Ch. 22, Art. VI
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 97                        22-167,
                                                  22-222
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 100                       22-93
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 101                       22-94
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 132                       22-322
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 134(a)                    22-321
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, §§ 166—172               22-86
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 175                       22-87
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d, § 187                       22-91
V.A.C.S. Art. 6701d-5                             20-207
V.A.C.S. Art. 6889-7, §§ 1—19                 Ch. 9
V.A.C.S. Art. 6889-7, § 8(c)                     Ch. 9
V.A.C.S. Art. 9009                                Ch. 20, Art. VII
V.A.C.S. Art. 9009a                               Ch. 20, Art. VII
V.A.C.S. Art. 9203, § 1                          23-1
V.C.S.
V.C.S. Article 5190.6                             23-20
V.T.C.A.
V.T.C.A. Government Code § 29.003                1-6
V.T.C.A. Government Code § 312.011(7)            1-2
V.T.C.A. Government Code § 312.011(14)           1-2
V.T.C.A. Government Code § 312.011(18)           1-2
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code §§ 241.001 et seq4.405
V.T.C.A. Tax Code § 31.08                        2-8
V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 101.008                     Ch. 20
V.T.C.A. Water Code § 16.315                     Ch. 7, Art. VIII, Div. 1
V.T.C.S.
V.T.C.S. Article 6701d-11, § 3                   22-17
V.T.C.S. Article 6701d-12a                        22-17
V.T.C.S. Article 6701d-19a                        22-17
V.T.R.C.S.
V.T.R.C.S. Article 6701a                          22-17
 
WATER CODE
 
Statutory Reference Code Section
                    12.5-103,
Chapter 26          12.5-107,
                    12.5-400,
                    App. B, 11A-7
26.014              12.5-121
26.015              12.5-121
26.121              12.5-123
Chapter 32          12.5-139
 
REFERENCES TO 1964 CODE
1964 Code 2014 Code
1964 Code 2014 Code
1-1       1-1
1-2       1-3
1-3       1-4
1-4       1-5
1-5       1-6
1-7       1-7
1-8       1-8
1-9       1-9
1-10      1-10
2-2       2-1
2-2.1     2-2
2-3       2-3
2-4       2-4
2-5       2-5
2-6       2-6
2-7       2-7
2-8       2-8
2-33      2-81
2-34      2-82
2-50      24-39
2-51      24-40
2-52      24-41
2-52.1    24-42
2-52.2    24-43
2-52.3    24-44
2-53      17-1
2-54      17-16
2-55      17-17
2-56      17-18
2-57      17-19
2-58      17-20
2-59      17-21
2-60      2-161
2-61      2-162
2-62      2-163
3-3       23-13
4-6       3-20
4-7       3-21
4-9       3-23
4-10      3-24
4-16      3-46
4-17      3-47
4-18      3-50
4-19      3-48
4-20      3-49
4-22      3-66
4-23      3-67
5-1       4-1
5-2       4-2
5-3       4-3
5-4       4-4
5-5       4-6
5-35      2-83
10-1      7-186
10-2      7-187
10-3      7-188
10-4      7-189
10-5      7-190
10-6      7-191
10-7      7-192
10-8      7-193
11-1      20-41,
          20-42
11-3      20-44
11-4      20-43
11-5      20-45
11-6      20-46
11-7      20-47
11-8      20-48
13-1      20-61
13-2      20-62
13-3      20-64
13-4      20-63
13-5      20-65
13-6      20-69
13-7      20-72
13-8      20-66
13-9      20-67
13-10     20-68
13-12     20-73
13-13     20-70
13-14     20-71
13-15     20-74
13-16     20-75
13-17     20-76
13-19     20-77
13-20     20-78
13-21     20-79
13-23     20-80
13-25     20-91
13-26     20-93
13-27     20-94
13-28     20-95
13-29     20-96
13-30     20-98
13-31     20-99
13-32     20-100
13-33     20-97
13-34     20-101
13-35     20-102
13-36     20-103
13-37     20-104
13-39     20-92
13-40     20-26
13A-11    17-46,
          17-47
13A-12    17-48
13A-13    17-46
13A-14    17-49
13A-15    17-52
13A-16    17-53
13A-21    17-66
13A-22    17-67
13A-23    17-68
13A-24    17-69
13A-25    17-71
13A-29    17-72
15A-3     13-25
15A-4     13-26
17-1      15-1
17-2      15-2
17-5      15-3
17-6      15-4
17-7      15-5
19-1      16-31
19A-1     32-16
19-1.1    16-32
19-1.2    16-33
19-1.3    16-34
19-1.4    16-35
19-1.5    16-36
19A-2     32-17
19A-3     32-18
19A-4     32-19
19A-5     32-20
19A-6     32-21
19-21     16-406
19-21.1   16-407
19-351    16-371
19-352    16-372
19-353    16-373
19-354    16-374
19-355    16-375
19-356    16-376
19-357    16-377
19-358    16-378
19-359    16-379
19-360    16-380
19-361    16-381
19-362    16-382
19-363    16-383
19-364    16-384
19-365    16-385
19-366    16-386
19-367    16-387
19-368    16-388
19-369    16-389
19-370    16-390
19-384    16-294
19-385    16-295
19-386    16-296
19-387    16-297
19-388    16-298
19-399    16-308
19-400    16-309
19-401    16-310
19-402    16-311
19-403    16-312
19-404    16-313
19-404.1  16-314
19-407    35-131
19-408    35-132
19-409    35-133
19-410    35-134
19-411    35-135
19-434    16-1
19-436    16-2
19-437    16-3
19-439    16-11
19-440    16-12
19-440.1  16-13
19-440.2  16-14
19-461    16-15
22-1      20-251
22-2      20-271
22-3      20-272
22-4      20-273
22-5      20-274
22-6      20-275
22-7      20-276
22-8      20-252
22-9      20-253
22-10     20-254
22-11     20-255
22-12     20-256
22-13     20-257
22-14     20-258
22-16     20-291
22-17     20-292
22-18     20-293
22-19     20-294
22-20     20-295
22-21     20-296
22-22     20-297
23-1      18-1
23-2      18-2
23-3      18-3
23-4      18-3
23-10     18-36
23-11     18-37
23-12     18-38
23-13     18-39
23-14     18-40
23-15     18-41
23-16     18-42
24-1      20-1
25-4      22-4
25-51     23-11
26-1      22-1
26-2      22-2
26-3      22-3
26-5      22-5
26-6      22-6
26-7      22-7
26-8      22-8
26-9      22-9
26-11     22-281
26-12     22-283
26-13     22-282
26-14     22-284
26-15     22-321
26-16     22-322
26-17     22-323
26-18     22-323
26-19     22-10
26-20     22-11
26-21     22-12
26-22     22-13
26-23     22-14
26-24     22-15
26-25     22-16
26-27     22-17
26-28     22-18
26-30     22-37
26-31     22-38
26-32     22-39
26-33     22-40
26-34     22-41
26-35     22-42
26-36     22-43
26-37     22-44
26-38     22-45
26-39     22-47
26-40     22-48
26-40.1   22-49
26-41     22-66
26-42     22-67
26-43     22-68
26-44     22-69
26-45     22-70
26-46     22-70
26-47     22-71
26-49     22-73
26-50     22-74
26-51     22-75
26-52     22-76
26-53     22-77
26-54     22-78
26-55     22-79
26-56     22-80
26-57     22-81
26-57.1   22-46
26-58     22-36
26-59     22-82
26-60     22-83
26-61     22-84
26-62     22-85
26-63     22-86
26-64     22-87
26-65     22-88
26-66     22-89
26-67     22-90
26-68     22-91
26-69     22-92
26-70     22-93
26-71     22-94
26-74     22-112
26-75     22-113
26-76     22-114
26-77     22-115
26-78     22-116
26-80     22-117
26-84     22-137
26-85     22-138
26-86     22-156
26-87     22-157
26-88     22-158
26-89     22-159
26-90     22-161
26-91     22-162.1
26-92     22-163
26-93     22-164
26-94     22-165
26-95     22-166
26-96     22-167
26-97     22-168
26-98     22-169
26-99     22-170
26-102    22-173
26-102.1  22-174
26-102.2  22-175
26-102.3  22-176
26-102.4  22-177
26-103    22-191
26-104    22-192
26-105    22-193
26-106    22-194
26-107    22-195
26-108    22-196
26-110    22-197
26-111    22-198
26-112    22-199
26-113    22-200
26-114    22-201
26-118    22-205
26-119    22-206
26-120    22-207
26-121    22-208
26-122    22-221
26-123    22-222
26-129    22-171
26-130    22-171
26-200    22-20
27-1      23-1
27-2      23-1
27-3      23-2
27-5      23-3
27-7      35-22
27-8      23-4
27-9      23-5
27-10     23-6
27-11     23-7
27-18     23-8
27-19     24-1
27-19(3)  24-3,
          24-12
27-19(4)  24-4
27-19(5)  24-5
27-19(6)  24-6
27-19(7)  24-7
27-19(9)  24-8
27-19(10) 24-9
27-19(11) 24-10
27-19(12) 24-11
27-19(14) 24-13
27-19(15) 24-14
27-19(16) 24-15
27-19(17) 24-2
27-19(18) 24-16
27-19(19) 24-17
27-19(20) 24-18
27-21     30-18
27-28     23-9
27-42     22-341
27-43     22-342
27-48     20-2
27-49     30-16
27-52     23-12
27-54     22-160
27-73     22-111
29A-3     27-25
29A-3.1   27-26
29A-3.2   27-27
29A-4     27-41
29A-5     27-42
29A-6     27-43
29A-7     27-44
29A-8     27-45
29A-9     27-46
29A-10    27-47
29A-11    27-48
29A-12    27-1
29A-13    27-2
29A-14    27-3
30-1      28-1
30-2      28-2
30-3      28-3
30-4      28-16
30-5      28-17
30-6      28-18
30-7      28-19
30-8      28-20
30-9      28-21
30-10     28-22
30-11     28-23
30-12     28-24
30-13     28-25
31-2      20-207,
          20-208
31-5      20-209
31-6      20-210
31-7      20-211
31-8      20-212
31-9      20-213
31-10     20-214
31-12     20-215
31-13     20-216
31-14     20-217
31-15     20-218
31-16     20-219
31-17     20-220
31-18     20-221
31-19     20-222
31-20     20-223
31-21     20-224
31-22     20-225
31-23     20-226
31-24     20-227
31-25     20-228
31-26     20-229
31-27     20-230
31-29     20-232
31-30     20-233
31-31     20-234
33-1      30-1
33-2.1    30-2
33-3      30-3
33-4      30-4
33-5      30-5
33-6      30-6
33-8      30-8
33-9      30-9
33-10     30-31,
          30-32
33-11     30-33
33-12     30-34
33-13     30-51,
          30-52
33-14     30-53
33-15     30-54
33-17     30-10
33-18     30-11
33-19     30-12
33-20     30-13
33-20.1   30-14
33-20.2   30-15
33-21     30-66
33-22     30-67
33-23     30-68
33-24     30-69
33-25     30-70
33-26     30-71
33-27     30-72
33-28     30-73
33-29     30-74
33-30     30-75
33-31     30-75
33-34     30-76
34-27.1   34-17
34-48     34-36
34-49     34-37
34-50     34-38
34-51     34-56
34-52     34-57
34-53     34-58
34-54     34-59
34-55     34-60
34-56     34-61
34-57     34-62
34-58     34-63
34-59     34-64
34-60     34-65
34-61     34-66
34-62     34-67
34-63     34-68
34-64     34-69
34-66     34-70
34-67     34-39
34-68     34-40
34-69     34-41
34-70     34-86
34-71     34-87
34-72     34-88
34-73     34-89
34-74     34-90
34-75     34-91
34-76     34-92
34-77     34-42
34-78     34-43
34-79     34-44
34-80     34-93
36-2      33-2
36-6      33-3
36-7      33-4
36-9      33-5
36-10     33-6
36-11     33-7
37-1      35-1
37-2      35-3
37-3      35-4
37-3.1    35-5
37-6      35-8
37-7      35-9
37-8      35-10
37-9      35-11
37-10     35-12
37-11     35-13
37-12     35-14
37-14     35-16
37-15     35-17
37-16     35-18
37-17     35-19
37-18     35-20
37-19     35-21
37-20     35-36
37-21     35-37
37-22     35-38
37-23     35-39
37-24     35-40
37-25     35-56
37-26     35-57,
          35-57.7
37-26.1   35-58
37-27     35-59
37-28     35-59
37-29     35-60
37-30     35-61
37-31     35-62
37-32     35-63
40-4      19-19
40-5      19-20
40-6      19-21
40-7      19-22
40-8      19-23
40-9      19-24
40-10     19-25
41-7      2-117
42-1      2-146,
          2-147
42-2      2-147,
          2-148
42-3      2-148
42-4      2-149
43-5      2-261
43-6      2-262
43-7      2-263
43-8      2-264
44-1      8-1
44-2      8-2
44-3      8-3
44-4      8-4
44-5      8-5
44-6      8-6
44-7      8-7
44-8      8-8
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
7/1974 - 2/1998
Ord. No. Section No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord.  Section No.     Date    Code Section
No.                   Passed
101   § I            7-22-   3-226
                      1974
     § II                  3-227
     § III                 3-228
     § IV                  3-229
     § V                   3-230
     § VI                  3-231
     § VIII                3-232
     § IX                  3-233
     § X                   3-234
     § XI                  3-235
     § XII                 3-236
     § XIII                3-237
     § XIV                 3-238
     § XV                  3-239
     § XVI                 3-240
     § XVII                3-241
     § XVIII               3-242
     § XIX                 3-243
2082                 10-1-   Repealed by Ord. 13896
                      1940
2110                 5-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1941
2147                 10-7-   App. A, App. A
                      1942
2429                 7-16-   App. A, App. A
                      1947
2434                 8-2-    App. A, App. A
                      1947
2437                 7-30-   App. A, App. A
                      1947
2082                 9-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1947
2514                 2-25-   App. A, App. A
                      1948
2570                 8-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1948
2745                 2-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1950
2754                 3-22-   App. A, App. A
                      1950
2777                 6-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1950
2789  § 2            - -     22-172
2803                 9-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1950
3011                 11-26-  Repealed by Ord. 13896
                      1952
3063                 4-22-   App. A, App. A
                      1953
3230                 8-25-   App. A, App. A
                      1954
3340                 5-18-   App. A, App. A
                      1955
3409                 12-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1955
3411  § 2            - -     22-206
3534                 9-19-   App. A, App. A
                      1956
3709                 9-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1957
3747                 1-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1958
3770                 2-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1958
3795                 4-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1958
3939                 9-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1958
4086                 5-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1959
4087                 5-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1959
4160                 7-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1959
4187                 10-9-   App. A, App. A
                      1959
4368                 9-16-   App. A, App. A
                      1960
4635                 5-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1962
4750  § 4            - -     22-115
4751                 10-29-  App. A, App. A
                      1962
4792                 1-7-    App. A, App. A
                      1963
4793                 1-7-    App. A, App. A
                      1963
4794                 1-7-    App. A, App. A
                      1963
4795                 1-7-    App. A, App. A
                      1963
4796                 1-7-    App. A, App. A
                      1963
4883  § 2            - -     22-115
5045  § 1            - -     22-71
5047  § 1            - -     22-206
5062                 11-27-  App. A, App. A
                      1963
5127                 3-9-    App. A, App. A
                      1964
5358                 4-19-   App. A, App. A
                      1965
5419  § 1            - -     30-14,
                              30-15
5432  § 1            - -     35-56
     § 2                   35-57.7,
                              35-57
5572                 5-16-   App. A, App. A
                      1966
                              24-1—
5637  § 1            - -     24-12,
                              24-14—
                              24-18
5756                 3-9-    App. A, App. A
                      1967
5700  § 1            - -     28-16
     § 2                   28-17
     § 3                   28-18
     § 4                   28-19
     § 5                   28-20
     § 6                   28-21
     § 7                   28-22
     § 8                   28-23
     § 9                   28-24
     § 10                  28-25
5715  § 1            - -     35-39
5736  § 1            - -     Repealed by Ord. 9509
                              17-1,
                              17-16,
5802  § 1            - -     17-17,
                              17-18,
                              17-19
5815  § 1            - -     17-16,
                              17-17
5875  §§ 1—6      - -     35-57,
                              35-57.7
5879  § 1            - -     17-16,
                              17-17
5892  § 1            - -     30-2
5911                 - -     22-114
5925  § 1            - -     35-58
5960  § 1            6-10-   17-20,
                      1968    17-21
5991  § 2            - -     22-115
5996                 9-9-    App. A, App. A
                      1968
6066                 3-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1969
6081                 4-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1969
6184                 10-27-  App. A, App. A
                      1969
6197                 11-17-  App. A, App. A
                      1969
6205  § 1            11-24-  17-48
                      1968
     §§ 2, 3              17-46
     § 3                   17-47
     § 4                   17-49
     § 5                   17-52
     § 7                   17-53
6229                 1-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1970
6235                 1-26-   2.5-226
                      1970
6293                 5-18-   11-2
                      1970
6311                 6-8-    App. A, App. A
                      1970
6325  § 1            6-29-   35-39
                      1970
     § 2                   35-56
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
                              24-1—
6360  § 1            8-31-   24-12,
                      1970    24-14—
                              24-18
                      eff.
6372                 10-12-  11-2
                      1970
6381                 10-28-  App. A, App. A
                      1970
6404                 12-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1970
6410  §§ 1—5      12-21-  Repealed by Ord. 9664
                      1970
6430  § 2            2-1-    20-215
                      1971
     § 3                   20-216
     § 4                   20-217
6439                 3-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1971
6447  § 1            3-1-    17-1
                      1971
6505  §§ 1, 2       6-28-   17-46
                      1971
     § 2                   17-47
6527                 8-9-    App. A, App. A
                      1971
6542  § 1            8-30-   32-16—
                      1971    32-21
6564                 10-11-  App. A, App. A
                      1971
6566                 10-11-  App. A, App. A
                      1971
6567                 10-18-  App. A, App. A
                      1971
6597  §§ 1—5      12-13-  27-1
                      1971
6609                 1-10-   App. A, App. A
                      1972
6613  §§ 1—3      1-24-   Repealed by Ord. 9509
                      1972
6639  §§ 1—4      3-6-    27-2
                      1972
6643                 3-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1972
6651  § 4            3-20-   Repealed by Ord. 9852
                      1972
     §§ 5, 6              22-171
                      5-8-    22-191—
6668  § 1            1972    22-200,
                              22-208
                              24-1—
6681  § 1            6-5-    24-12,
                      1972    24-14—
                              24-18
6685  § 1            6-19-   35-5
                      1972
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
6687  § 1            6-19-   3-191
                      1972
     § 2                   3-192
     § 3                   3-193
6687  § 4            6-10-   3-194
                      1972
     § 5                   3-195
     § 6                   3-196
     § 7                   3-197
     § 8                   3-198
     § 9                   3-199
     § 10                  3-200
     § 11                  3-201
     § 12                  3-202
     § 13                  3-203
     § 14                  3-204
     § 15                  3-205
     § 16                  3-206
     § 17                  3-207
     § 18                  3-208
     § 19                  3-209
     § 21                  3-210
6702  § 1            7-31-   20-291—
                      1972    20-297
6738  § 1            10-18-  20-91
                      1972
     § 2                   20-95
     § 3                   20-102
     § 4                   20-92
6786  § 1            1-29-   20-103
                      1973
6888  § 1            8-13-   35-56
                      1973
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
6891  § 1            8-13-   22-38
                      1973
     § 2                   22-41
     § 3                   22-42
     § 4                   22-43
     § 5                   22-45
6904  § 1            9-5-    Repealed by Ord. 9664
                      1973
6920  § 1            10-1-   22-1
                      1973
     § 2                   22-3
     § 4                   22-37
     § 6                   22-36
     § 7                   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
     § 9                   22-20
                              24-1—
     § 10                  24-12,
                              24-14—
                              24-18
                              24-1—
6945  § 1            1-14-   24-12,
                      1974    24-14—
                              24-18
6963  §§ 1, 2       3-4-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1974
7015  § 1            6-3-    22-1
                      1974
     § 2                   22-3
     § 3                   22-71
     § 4                   22-84
     § 5                   22-156
7016  § 1            6-3-    22-221
                      1974
     § 2                   22-222
7022                 6-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1974
7052  § 1            8-26-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1974
7059  § 1            9-16-   35-58
                      1974
7060  § 1            9-16-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1974
7091  § 1            11-11-  35-39
                      1974
7094  §§ 1, 2       11-11-  35-57,
                      1974    35-57.7
7108  §§ 1, 2       12-23-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1974
7110  § 1            1-6-    22-49
                      1975
7116  § 1            1-20-   35-58
                      1975
7117  § 1            1-20-   20-2
                      1975
7145  § 1            3-10-   22-191
                      1975
     § 2                   22-205
     § 3                   22-207
7148  § 1            3-17-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1995
7190  § 1            7-11-   22-159
                      1975
7198  § 1            7-21-   1-10
                      1975
                      8-11-   19-16—19-18 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
7207  § 1            1975    19-19—
                              19-22
7208  § 2            8-11-   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1975
     § 3                   24-42—
                              24-44
7211  § 1            8-11-   30-16
                      1975
7213  §§ 1—3      8-18-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1975
7217  § 1            8-25-   22-221
                      1975
     § 2                   22-222
7234                 9-29-   Repealed by Ord. 17154
                      1975
7258                 1-5-    App. A, App. A
                      1976
7278  § 1            12-22-  17-66
                      1975
     § 2                   17-67
     § 3                   17-68
     § 4                   17-69
     § 5                   17-71
     § 9                   17-72
7279  § 1            12-22-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1975
7280  § 1            12-29-  2-115; 2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1975
7286                 1-20-   App. A, App. A
                      1976
7293  § 1            1-26-   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1976
7294  § 1            1-26-   22-221
                      1976
7314  § 1(1)         3-17-   7-216
                      1976
     § 1(2)                7-219
     § 1(3)                7-220
     § 1(4)                7-221
     § 1(5)                7-222
     § 1(6)                7-223
     § 1(7)                7-217
     § 1(8)                7-224
     § 1(8.1)              7-226
     § 1(9)                7-227
     § 1(10)               7-225
     § 1(11)               7-218
     § 1(12)               7-228
     § 1(13)               7-229
     § 1(15)               7-242
     § 1(16)               7-243
     § 1(17)               7-244
     § 1(18)               7-245
     § 1(19)               7-246
     § 1(20)               7-247
     § 1(21)               7-248
     § 1(22)               7-261
     § 1(24)               7-263
     § 1(25)               7-264
     § 1(26)               7-265
     § 1(27)               7-266
     § 1(29)               7-282
     § 1(30)               7-283
7327                 4-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1976
7337  § 1            4-26-   24-8
                      1976
                              24-1—
                              24-7,
                      4-26-   24-9,
7338  § 1            1976    24-10—
                              24-12,
                              24-14—
                              24-18
7339  § 1            4-26-   18-36—
                      1976    18-42
7343                 5-10-   App. A, App. A
                      1976
7361  § 1            6-7-    22-221
                      1976
7364                 6-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1976
7367  § 1            6-14-   Repealed by Ord. 9664
                      1976
7380  § 1            7-12-   35-56
                      1976
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
                      8-9-    17-66,
7400  § 1            1976    17-67,
                              17-71
7407  §§ 1, 2       8-16-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1976
7413  § 1            8-30-   35-58
                      1976
7419  § 1            9-13-   30-2
                      1976
7437                 11-18-  App. A, App. A
                      1976
7452  § 1            12-20-  27-3
                      1976
7469                 1-10-   App. A, App. A
                      1977
7501  §§ 1, 2       2-14-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1977
7508  § 1            2-28-   22-137
                      1977
7512  § 1            3-7-    16-314
                      1977
7519                 3-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1977
7547  §§ 1—10     5-17-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1977
7582  § 1            7-26-   Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
                      1977
7584  § 1            7-26-   22-221
                      1977
7586  § 1            8-2-    35-56
                      1977
7599  1               8-16-   Repealed by Ord. 9692
                      1977
7609  §§ 1, 2       8-30-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1977
7621  § 1            9-13-   35-58
                      1977
7622                 9-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1977
                      10-25-  Ch. 2, Art VII, Div. 5 (note),
7650  § 1            1977    2-261—
                              2-264, 2-265 repealed by Ord. 21845-08-2015
7657  § 1            11-8-   23-11
                      1977
7671  § 1            12-8-   27-41—
                      1977    27-48
7673  § 1            12-13-  35-58
                      1977
7703                 2-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1978
7704  § 1            2-21-   Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
                      1978
7710  § 1            3-7-    35-58
                      1978
7711  § 1            3-14-   Repealed by Ord. 9780
                      1978
7737  §§ 1, 2       5-2-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1978
7746  §§ 1, 2       5-23-   Repealed by Ord. 9780
                      1978
7753  § 1            6-6-    35-58
                      1978
7784  § 1            8-15-   Ch. 2, Art VII, Div. 5 (note),
                      1978    2-261
7786                 8-24-   App. A, App. A
                      1978
7788  § 1            8-15-   22-191,
                      1978    22-192
7805                 9-24-   App. A, App. A
                      1978
7830  § 1            10-17-  Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
                      1978
7851  § 1            11-30-  35-58
                      1978
7864  § 1            12-26-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1978
7887  § 1            2-27-   22-117
                      1979
7889  § 2            3-6-    22-116
                      1979
7893  § 1            3-13-   35-58
                      1979
7906  §§ 1, 3       5-1-    17-46
                      1979
     § 1                   17-47
     § 2                   17-48
7908  § 1            9-12-   35-58
                      1978
7922  § 1            6-12-   35-58
                      1979
7923  § 1            6-12-   22-222
                      1979
7935  § 1            7-17-   22-169
                      1979
7961  § 1            8-21-   22-221
                      1979
7962  § 1            8-28-   17-48
                      1979
     § 2                   17-49
7969  § 2            9-4-    32-17
                      1979
7974  § 1            9-11-   35-58
                      1979
7981  § 1            9-18-   35-56
                      1979
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8018  §§ 1—6      12-18-  Repealed by Ord. 9509
                      1979
8019  § 1            12-18-  35-58
                      1979
8023  § 1            12-27-  1-11
                      1979
8024  §§ 1—3      12-27-  Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1979
8027  §§ 1, 2       12-27-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1979
8038  §§ 1, 2       1-29-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1980
8041  § 1            2-5-    Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
                      1980
8063  § 1            3-11-   35-58
                      1980
8066  § 1            3-19-   Repealed by Ord. 9664
                      1980
8077  § 1            4-1-    22-1
                      1980
     § 2                   22-112
     § 3                   22-113
     § 4                   22-114
     § 5                   22-115
8095                 5-20-   7-304
                      1980
8106  § 1            6-10-   35-58
                      1980
8112  § 1            6-17-   23-12
                      1980
8121  §§ 1—3      7-1-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1980
8122  § 1            7-1-    35-58
                      1980
8133  § 1            7-8-    22-174
                      1980
8158  § 1            8-18-   35-56
                      1980
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8165  § 1            9-9-    35-58
                      1980
8179  § 1            9-23-   34-17
                      1980
                              24-1—
8225  § 1            12-3-   24-12,
                      1980    24-14—
                              24-18
8241  § 1            12-23-  35-58
                      1980
8242  § 1            12-23-  22-85
                      1980
                              24-1—
8255  § 1            1-20-   24-12,
                      1981    24-14—
                              24-18
8264  § 1            2-10-   35-56
                      1981
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8269  § 1            2-17-   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1981
8286  § 1            3-10-   34-60
                      1981
     § 2                   34-61
     § 3                   34-39
     § 4                   34-41
                              34-86—
     § 5                   34-88,
                              34-90—
                              34-93
     § 6                   34-89
     § 7                   34-42
     § 8                   34-44
8287  § 1            3-10-   35-58
                      1981
8288  § 1            3-10-   22-175—
                      1981    22-177
8290                 3-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1981
8294  §§ 1, 2       3-17-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1981
8307  § 1            3-31-   8-1—
                      1981    8-8
8308  § 1            3-31-   35-37
                      1981
8360  § 1            6-16-   35-39
                      1981
8361  § 1            6-16-   35-58
                      1981
8379                 8-1-    App. A, App. A
                      1981
8387  § 1            9-1-    35-56
                      1981
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8408  § 1            9-8-    Repealed by Ord. 9664
                      1981
8410                 9-18-   App. A, App. A
                      1981
8423  § 1            9-22-   35-58
                      1981
8433  § 1            9-19-   27-1—
                      1981    27-3
                              27-21 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
     § 2                   27-25—
                              27-27
8486  § 1            12-15-  Repealed by Ord. 11921
                      1981
8487  § 1            12-15-  35-58
                      1981
8542  § 1            3-30-   35-58
                      1982
8576  § 1            6-1-    35-58
                      1982
8613  § 1            8-3-    2-2
                      1982
8618  § 1            8-17-   35-56
                      1982
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8619  §§ 1, 2       8-17-   35-56
                      1982
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8629  § 1            8-31-   22-191,
                      1982    22-192
8645  §§ 1—3      9-21-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1982
8648  § 1            9-28-   16-31—
                      1982    16-36
                              13-21,
8649  § 1            9-28-   13-22 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
                      1982    13-25,
                              13-26
8652  § 1            9-28-   16-407
                      1982
     § 2                   16-13
     § 3                   16-14
8658  § 1            10-5-   2-146—
                      1982    2-149
     § 2                   22-2
8661  § 1            10-5-   35-58
                      1982
8663                 11-1-   App. A, App. A
                      1982
8680  § 1            11-16-  35-39
                      1982
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8698  § 1            12-7-   2-161—
                      1982    2-163
8700  § 1            2-14-   Repealed by Ord. 12027
                      1982
8703                 12-24-  App. A, App. A
                      1982
8706  § 1            12-21-  35-58
                      1982
8743                 2-26-   App. A, App. A
                      1983
8744                 2-      App. A, App. A
                      26,1983
8758  § 1            3-15-   2-81—
                      1983    2-83
8767  § 1            3-29-   23-8
                      1983
8778  § 1            4-12-   Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
                      1983
8785                 4-22-   App. A, App. A
                      1983
8787  § 1            4-19-   24-42
                      1983
8804  § 1            5-10-   7-226
                      1983
8806  § 1            5-10-   30-31,
                      1983    30-32
     § 2                   30-51,
                              30-52
8807  § 1            5-10-   Repealed by Ord. 10840
                      1983
8809  § 2            5-10-   34-64
                      1983
     § 3                   34-89
8811  § 1            5-10-   20-63
                      1983
8818  § 1            5-10-   20-41
                      1983
8819  § 1            5-10-   20-296
                      1983
8820  § 1            5-10-   16-13
                      1983
                              3-16, 3-17, 3-19 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
                              3-21,
                              3-23—
8840  § 1            6-7-    3-25 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
                      1983    3-46—
                              3-50,
                              3-66,
                              3-67
8865  § 1            7-12-   35-58
                      1983
8898  §§ 1, 2       8-16-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1983
8900  § 1            8-23-   32-17
                      1983
8902  § 1            8-23-   16-13
                      1983
8905  §§ 1, 2       8-30-   35-56
                      1983
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8906  § 1            8-30-   35-56
                      1983
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
8907  § 1            8-30-   7-166,
                      1983    7-167
     § 2                   7-168
8908  § 1            8-30-   19-22
                      1983
8915                 9-23-   App. A, App. A
                      1983
8918  § 1            9-13-   16-15
                      1983
8923  § 1            9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 11921
                      1983
8925  § 1            9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1983
8934                 9-27-   App. A, App. A
                      1983
8949  § 1            10-18-  22-73
                      1983
8950  § 1            10-18-  Repealed by Ord. 22650-04-2017
                      1983
     § 2                   Repealed by Ord. 22650-04-2017
8951  § 1            10-18-  20-26
                      1983
8952  § 1            10-18-  35-58
                      1983
8957  § 1            10-25-  17-71
                      1983
8958  § 1            10-25-  35-39
                      1983
     § 2                   2-117
8971  § 1            11-15-  2-83
                      1983
8976                 11-23-  App. A, App. A
                      1983
8987  § 1            12-6-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1983
8995  § 1            12-22-  35-58
                      1983
9007  § 1            1-3-    2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1984
9017                 1-17-   Repealed by Ord. 9509
                      1984
9029  § 1            2-7-    27-1
                      1984
9035  § 1            2-21-   19-23
                      1984
     § 2                   19-24
     § 3                   19-25
9036  § 1            2-21-   4-4
                      1984
9050  § 1            3-13-   22-195
                      1984
9089  § 1            5-8-    2-131—2-134, replaced by Ord. 11062
                      1994
     § 2            5-8-    2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1984
9117  § 1            5-29-   Repealed by Ord. 9509
                      1984
9121                 6-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1984
9122                 6-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1984
9123                 6-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1984
9124                 6-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1984
9126  § 1            6-19-   35-58
                      1984
9148  §§ 1, 2       7-17-   Repealed by Ord. 9509
                      1984
9153  § 1            7-24-   23-2
                      1984
9161  § 1            7-31-   30-31,
                      1984    30-32
     § 2                   30-51,
                              30-52
9164  §§ 1, 6       8-7-    26-1
                      1984
     §§ 2—5             26-2
     § 7                   26-3
                              20-251—
9175  § 3            8-21-   20-258,
                      1984    20-271—
                              20-276
9179  § 1            8-28-   35-39
                      1984
     § 2                   35-56
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
9180  §§ 1, 2       8-28-   35-56
                      1984
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
9215                 9-16-   App. A, App. A
                      1984
9227  1               10-2-   Repealed by Ord. 10553
                      1984
9230  § 2            10-2-   16-13
                      1984
9231  § 1            10-2-   Repealed by Ord. 22686-05-2017
                      1984
9234                 10-17-  App. A, App. A
                      1984
9252  § 1            11-13-  22-1
                      1984
     § 2                   22-3
     § 3                   22-71
     § 4                   22-84
9254  § 1            11-20-  17-16
                      1984
     § 2                   17-17
9261  § 1            12-11-  Repealed by Ord. 22838-08-2017
                      1984
9270  § 1            12-18-  35-58
                      1984
9272  § 1            12-13-  2-82
                      1984
     § 2                   2-83
9280  § 1            3-3-    7-46
                      1985
     § 2                   7-47
     § 3                   7-48
9281  §§ 1, 3       1-3-    13-1
                      1985
     § 2                   13-2
     § 4                   13-3
     § 6                   13-4
9282  §§ 1—15, 17,1-3-    Repealed by Ord. 11388
                      1985
9287  § 1(2)         1-8-    Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1985
9295                 1-26-   App. A, App. A
                      1985
9306  §§ 1, 2       2-5-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1985
9316  § 1(1)         2-12-   13-24
                      1985
9317  § 1            2-12-   19-26
                      1985
9432  §§ 1, 2       7-23-   35-56
                      1985
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
9433  § 1            7-23-   35-39
                      1985
     § 2                   35-56
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
9438  § 1            7-30-   35-58
                      1985
9452  §§ 1, 2       8-6-    16-13
                      1985
9457                 8-20-   App. A, App. A
                      1985
9469  § 1            8-27-   Repealed by Ord. 12553
                      1982
9453  § 1            8-6-    22-19
                      1985
9497  §§ 1, 2       10-15-  Repealed by Ord. 12553
                      1985
9500                 12-1-   App. A, App. A
                      1985
9501                 10-22-  App. A, App. A
                      1985
9508                 11-5-   App. A, App. A
                      1985
9509  § 1            11-5-   10-1—
                      1985    10-6
9528  § 1            12-12-  1-11.1
                      1985
9529  § 1            12-12-  19-26
                      1985
9534  § 1            12-17-  35-58
                      1985
9537                 1-4-    App. A, App. A
                      1986
9538                 1-4-    App. A, App. A
                      1986
9544  §§ 1, 2       1-7-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1986
9558                 1-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1986
9572  § 1            2-25-   Repealed by Ord. 13009
                      1986
     § 2                   Repealed 34-16, 34-18
9602                 3-29-   App. A, App. A
                      1986
9643  § 3            6-3-    13-2
                      1986
9654  § 1            6-17-   35-58
                      1986
9664  § 1            6-24-   Repealed by Ord. 14698
                      1986
   § 2                   Repealed 16-251—16-265, 16-281—16-293, 16-299—16-307
9680  § 1            7-22-   30-33
                      1986
     § 2                   30-53
9692  § 1            8-12-   Repealed 9-1—9-9
                      1986
     § 2                   Repealed by Ord. 11592
9696  §§ 1—3      8-19-   35-56
                      1986
     §§ 4—6             35-57,
                              35-57.7
9705                 8-23-   App. A, App. A
                      1986
9716                 9-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1986
9717                 9-19-   App. A, App. A
                      1986
9721  §§ 1—10     9-23-   35-58.1
                      1986
9730  § 1            9-30-   Repealed by Ord. 10402
                      1986
9741  § 1            10-14-  23-14,
                      1986    23-15
9742  § 1            10-14-  Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1986
9759                 11-11-  App. A, App. A
                      1986
9760                 11-11-  App. A, App. A
                      1986
                      eff.
9780                 12-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1986
9780  § 5            12-9-   Repealed 23-10
                      1986
9781                 12-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1986
9798                 1-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1987
9805  §§ 1—10     1-27-   35-58.1
                      1987
9815  § 1            2-10-   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1987
     § 2                   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
9816  § 1            2-10-   7-167
                      1987
     § 4                   7-168
9823                 2-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1987
9827  § 1            2-17-   Repealed by Ord. 12553
                      1987
9832  § 1            2-2-    7-46
                      1987
     § 2                   7-47
9852  § 1            3-31-   22-1
                      1987
     § 2                   22-159
     §§ 3, 4              22-171
     § 5                   22-221
     § 6                   22-222
                              22-301,
     § 7                   22-302,
                              22-314,
                              22-315, Portions of § 7 (which added 22-303—22-312) repealed by Ord. 12938
9853  §§ 1—9      3-31-   35-58.1
                      1987
9863  § 1            4-21-   22-160
                      1987
9865  § 1            4-27-   27-28
                      1987
9880  § 2            6-4-    Repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
                      1987
9881  § 1            6-4-    20-352—
                      1987    20-363
9892  § 1            6-16-   35-58
                      1987
9893  §§ 1, 2       6-16-   7-167
                      1987
9899  § 1            6-30-   2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1987
9915  § 2            7-28-   2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1997
9916  § 1            7-28-   22-160
                      1987
9918  § 1            8-28-   26-1
                      1987
     § 2                   26-2
     § 3                   26-3
9925  § 1            8-11-   3-66
                      1987
9937  § 1            8-25-   35-61
                      1987
     § 2                   35-64
     § 3                   35-65
9938  § 1            8-25-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1987
9943  § 1            9-1-    2-290—
                      1987    2-298
9957                 9-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1987
9958                 9-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1987
9960  §§ 1—3      9-22-   7-47
                      1987
9961  § 1            9-22-   7-167
                      1987
9962  § 1            9-2-    Repealed by Ord. 11388
                      1987
9963  §§ 1, 2       9-22-   26-2
                      1987
9972  § 1            9-29-   27-29
                      1987
9982  § 1            10-13-  35-57,
                      1987    35-57.7
9983  §§ 1—6      10-13-  22-117
                      1987
     § 7                   22-118
     § 8                   22-119
     § 9                   Repealed by Ord. 12274
10012 § 1            11-24-  22-117
                      1987
10026 § 1            12-18-  35-4
                      1987
     § 2                   35-5
     § 3                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
10029 § 1            12-22-  3-116
                      1987
     § 2                   3-170
10030 § 1            12-22-  35-58
                      1987
10031 § 1            12-22-  2-117
                      1987
10032 § 1            12-22-  10-7
                      1987
10034 § 1            12-22-  16-13
                      1987
10035 § 1            12-22-  16-407
                      1987
10041 § 1            1-12-   22-192
                      1988
10056 § 1            2-9-    Repealed by Ord. 11998
                      1988
10075 § 1            3-15-   35-57,
                      1988    35-57.7
10086 § 1            4-5-    Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1988
10091 §§ 1—3      4-12-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1988
10093 § 1            4-22-   17-71
                      1988
10094 § 1            4-12-   Repealed by Ord. 13667
                      1988
10095                4-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1988
10096                4-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1988
10097                4-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1988
10105 § 1            4-26-   13-1
                      1988
     § 2                   13-2
     § 3                   13-3
     § 4                   13-4
10107 § 1            5-3-    22-155
                      1988
     § 2                   10-16—
                              10-26
10115 § 1            5-17-   7-46
                      1988
     § 2                   7-47
     § 3                   7-48
     § 4                   7-49
10120 § 1            6-2-    32-17
                      1988
10121 § 2            6-2-    3-260—
                      1988    3-274
10122 § 1            6-7-    35-58
                      1988
10143 §§ 1—4      7-26-   35-56
                      1988
10157 §§ 1—3      8-30-   7-167
                      1988
10158 § 1            8-30-   26-2
                      1988
10160 § 2            8-30-   10-18
                      1988
     § 3                   10-21
     § 4                   10-22
     § 5                   10-23
     § 6                   10-24
     § 7                   10-25
     § 8                   10-27
10167 §§ 1, 2       9-13-   7-47
                      1988
10169                9-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1988
10173 § 1            9-27-   35-56
                      1988
     § 2                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
10182 § 1            10-11-  Repealed by Ord. 11998
                      1988
10196 §§ 1—3      9-17-   35-56
                      1991
10204                11-15-  App. A, App. A
                      1988
10220 § 1            12-13-  35-58
                      1988
10222                12-13-  App. A, App. A
                      1988
10248 § 1            1-31-   22-171.5
                      1989
10267 § 1            3-7-    22-178
                      1989
10273                3-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1989
10275 §§ 1—3      3-21-   7-167
                      1989
10281 § 1            3-28-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1989
10315 § 1(1)—(4)   5-30-   Repealed by Ord. 13009
                      1989
10326 § 1            6-20-   35-58
                      1989
10327 § 1            6-20-   7-46
                      1989
     § 2                   7-47
     § 3                   7-48
     § 4                   7-49
10328 § 1            6-20-   13-1
                      1989
     § 2                   13-2
     § 3                   13-3
     § 4                   13-4
10334                6-27-   App. A, App. A
                      1989
10335                6-27-   App. A, App. A
                      1989
10340                7-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1989
10362                8-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1989
10365 § 1            8-22-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1989
10368 § 1            8-29-   16-407
                      1989
10373 §§ 1—6      8-29-   35-56
                      1989
10374 §§ 1, 2       8-29-   35-57,
                      1989    35-57.7
10377 § 1            8-29-   Repealed by Ord. 22838-08-2017
                      1989
10386 §§ 1, 2       9-12-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1989
10388 §§ 1, 2       9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1989
10389 § 1            9-19-   23-11
                      1989
10402 § 1            9-26-   Repealed 20-336 through 20-347
                      1989
10423 § 1            10-31-  1-6
                      1989
10444                11-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1989
10445                11-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1989
10446                11-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1989
10447                11-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1989
10452 § 1            12-5-   13-2
                      1989
10463 § 1            12-12-  35-58
                      1989
10534 § 1            2-27-   3-47
                      1990
10548 §§ 1, 2       3-20-   26-2
                      1990
10553 § 1            3-27-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1990
10567                4-10-   App. A, App. A
                      1990
10583 § 1            5-25-   35-58
                      1990
10586 § 1            5-16-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1990
10601 § 1(1.01)      6-5-    35-66
                      1990
     § 1(1.02)             35-67
     § 1(1.03)             35-68
     § 1(1.04)             35-69
     § 1(1.05)             35-70
     § 1(1.06)             35-70.1
     § 1(1.07)             35-70.2
     § 1(1.08)             35-70.3
     § 1(1.09)             35-70.4
     § 1(1.10)             35-70.5
     § 1(1.11)             35-70.6
     § 1(1.12)             35-70.7
     § 1(1.13)             35-70.8
     § 1(1.14)             35-70.9
     § 1(1.15)             35-70.10
     § 1(1.16)             35-70.11
     § 1(1.17)             35-70.12
     § 1(1.18)             35-70.13
     § 1(1.19)             35-70.14
     § 1(1.20)             35-70.15
     § 1(1.21)             35-70.16
     § 1(1.22)             35-70.17
     § 1(2.01)             35-71
     § 1(2.02)             35-72
     § 1(2.03)             35-73
     § 1(2.04)             35-74
     § 1(2.05)             35-75
     § 1(2.06)             35-75.1
     § 1(3.01)             35-76
     § 1(3.02)             35-77
     § 1(3.03)             35-78
     § 1(3.04)             35-79
     § 1(3.05)             35-80
     § 1(3.06)             35-80.1
10613 § 1            6-19-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1990
                      6-26-   Ch. 2, Art VII, Div. 5 (note),
10617 § 1 (2)        1990    2-261—
                              2-264, 2-265 repealed by Ord. 21845-08-2015
     § 1 (3)               Ch. 2, Art VII, Div. 2 (note),
                              Ch. 2, Art VII, Div. 4 (note)
10622 § 1            6-26-   35-58
                      1990
10632 §§ 1, 2       7-12-   13-2
                      1990
10633 § 1            7-12-   30-32
                      1990
10653 §§ 1—8      8-14-   7-47
                      1990
10654 §§ 1, 2       8-14-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1990
10658                8-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1990
                      8-28-   20-292,
10661 § 1            1990    20-295—
                              20-297
10670 § 1            9-18-   Repealed 20-206
                      1990
10671 § 1, 2, 6      9-18-   Repealed by Ord. 12841
                      1990
10672 §§ 1—3      9-18-   35-56
                      1990
10676 §§ 1, 2       9-25-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1990
10678 § 1            9-25-   35-57,
                      1990    35-57.7
10681 § 1            10-2-   16-13
                      1990
10696 §§ 1, 2       10-16-  26-2
                      1990
10697 § 1            10-16-  7-47
                      1990
10727                9-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1990
10730 § 1            11-20-  16-13
                      1990
10734 § 1            11-15-  20-67
                      1990
10735 § 1            11-15-  20-96
                      1990
10750                12-12-  App. A, App. A
                      1990
10752 § 1            12-18-  35-58
                      1990
10761                1-3-    App. A, App. A
                      1990
10762 § 1            1-10-   13-2
                      1991
10770 § 1            1-22-   18-4
                      1991
     § 3                   18-6
     § 4                   18-36
     § 5                   18-37
     § 6                   18-38
10773 § 1            1-22-   18-50—
                      1991    18-64
10780 § 1            2-5-    2-294
                      1991
10788                2-21-   App. A, App. A
                      1991
10793 § 1            2-19-   7-47
                      1991
10798 § 1            2-26-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1991
10815 § 1            4-2-    Repealed by Ord. 12931
                      1991
10818 § 1            4-9-    Repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
                      1991
10831 § 1            4-16-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1991
10840 § 1            5-7-    16-13, portion of § 1 repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1991
                           Repealed 16-408
10842                5-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1991
10852 § 1            5-28-   23-16
                      1991
10855 § 1            6-4-    35-58
                      1991
10858 § 1            6-11-   32-17
                      1991
10871 § 1            7-2-    35-70.5
                      1991
     § 2                   35-70.3
10876                7-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1991
10878 §§ 1, 2       7-16-   26-2
                      1991
10880 §§ I(1)—(7)(7-23-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1991
10904 § 1            8-20-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1991
10910 § 1            9-3-    2-10
                      1991
10941 § 1            10-22-  Repealed by Ord. 12931
                      1991
10932 § 1            10-8-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1991
10934 §§ 1—3      10-15-  Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1991
10936 § 1            10-8-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1991
10937                10-15-  App. A, App. A
                      1991
                              3-17, 3-19 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020),
                              3-20,
                              3-24,
                              3-48,
                      11-12-  3-49,
10953 § 9            1991    3-99, 3-100,
                              3-137,
                              3-140—
                              3-143,
                              3-145,
                              3-147, 3-169, 3-170
     § 10                  3-81, 3-169
10954                11-12-  App. A, App. A
                      1991
10973                12-10-  App. A, App. A
                      1991
10978 § 1            12-19-  35-58
                      1991
10992 § 1            1-7-    Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1992
11015                2-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1992
11016                2-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1992
11062 § 1            4-7-    Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1992
11072                4-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1992
11073                4-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1992
11075 § 1            4-21-   17-86—
                      1992    17-106
11083 § 1            4-28-   2-117
                      1992
11113 §§ 1, 3, 4    6-9-    Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1992
11130                7-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1992
11131 § 1            7-21-   22-21
                      1992
11139 § 1—3        7-28-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1992
     § 4                   Repealed by Ord. 12931
11146 § 1            8-11-   35-131—
                      1992    35-135
11148 § 1            8-11-   18-4
                      1992
11165 §§ 1—4      9-8-    Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1992
11167 § 1(A)         9-8-    17-96
                      1992
     § 1(B)                17-98
11172 §§ 1, 2       9-22-   35-56
                      1992
11187                10-13-  App. A, App. A
                      1992
11188                10-13-  App. A, App. A
                      1992
11189 § 1            10-20-  20-47
                      1992
11194 § 1            11-5-   22-115
                      1992
11209 § 1            11-24-  16-328,
                      1992    16-329
     § 3                   16-420—
                              16-440
11214 § 1            12-3-   3-20
                      1992
     § 3                   3-24
11224 § 1            12-8-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1992
11225 § 1            12-8-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1992
11227 § 1            12-15-  Repealed by Ord. 12841
                      1992
11256                2-2-    App. A, App. A
                      1993
11268 § 1            3-26-   7-166
                      1993
     § 1(Exh. B)           7-167
     § 2                   7-168
11280 § 1            3-23-   26-1
                      1993
     § 2                   26-2
     § 3                   26-3
11281                3-23-   App. A, App. A
                      1993
11285 § 1(1)—(5)   3-30-   Repealed by Ord. 13009
                      1993
11288 § 1            3-30-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1993
11289 § 1            3-30-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1993
11293                4-13-   App. A, App. A
                      1993
11298 §§ 1—3      4-20-   35-56
                      1993
11300 § 1            4-20-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1993
11327 § 1            5-25-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1993
11328 §§ 1, 2       6-1-    35-70.3
                      1993
     §§ 3, 4              35-70.3
     § 5                   35-71
     § 6                   35-72
     § 7                   35-76
     § 8                   35-77
11336 §§ 1—3      6-15-   35-56
                      1993
11342 § 1            6-22-   27-31
                      1993
11348 § 1            6-29-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1993
11351 § 1            7-6-    24-5
                      1993
     § 2                   24-6
11353 § 1            7-6-    2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1993
11384 § 1(A)         8-17-   17-89
                      1993
     § 1(B)                17-96
     § 1(C)                17-98
11388 § 2            8-24-   7-46
                      1993
     § 3                   7-47
     § 4                   7-48
     § 5                   7-49
11389 § 1            8-24-   13-1
                      1993
     § 2                   13-2
     § 3                   13-3
     § 4                   13-4
11395 §§ 1—3      9-14-   35-56
                      1993
11419 §§ 1—3      10-12-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1993
11425                10-12-  App. A, App. A
                      1993
11444 § 1            11-19-  Repealed by Ord. 21917-09-2015
                      1993
11464 § 1            12-7-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1993
11466 § 1            12-14-  2-116, repealed by Ord. 11653
                      1993
11474                12-21-  App. A, App. A
                      1993
11475                12-21-  App. A, App. A
                      1993
11476                12-21-  App. A, App. A
                      1993
11478                12-21-  App. A, App. A
                      1993
11515 § 1            3-8-    7-47
                      1994
11517 § 1            3-22-   7-385—
                      1994    7-392
11528 § 1            4-5-    Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1994
     §§ 2, 3              Repealed by Ord. 12931
11530 §§ 1—3      4-5-    Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1994
11540 § 1            4-12-   Repealed by Ord. 12841
                      1994
                              7-47,
                              24-2,
                              24-5,
                              24-6,
                              24-8,
                              24-10,
                      4-12-   24-16,
11541 § 1(c)         1994    24-18,
                              24-36 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020), 24-38—
                              24-41,
                              30-13,
                              33-1,
                              33-2,
                              33-6,
                              33-7
                           Portion of § 1(c) regarding 30-76.11—30-88 repealed by Ord. 12274
                           Portion of § 1(c) regarding 20-163, 20-165 repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
     § 2                   24-37,
                              24-42
     § 3                   24-45
11547 § 1            4-19-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1994
11572 § 1            5-24-   35-23
                      1994
     § 2                   35-24
     § 3                   35-25
     § 4                   35-26
11592 § 1A           6-6-    1-11
                      1994
     § 1B                  Repealed Ch. 13, Art. II, Div. 2
     § 2(9-1)              11.5-1
     § 2(9-2)              11.5-2
     § 2(9-3)              11.5-3
     § 2(9-4)              11.5-4
     § 2(9-5)              11.5-5
     § 2(9-6)              11.5-6
     § 2(9-7)              11.5-7
     § 2(9-8)              11.5-8
     § 2(9-9)              11.5-9
     § 2(9-10)             11.5-10
     § 2(9-11)             11.5-11
11593 § 1            6-14-   23-19
                      1994
11598 § 1            6-21-   17-16
                      1994
11603 § 1            6-28-   Repealed by Ord. 23159-04-2018
                      1994
11610 § 1            7-5-    Repealed by Ord. 23159-04-2018
                      1994
11612 § 1            7-5-    Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1994
11615 §§ 1, 2       7-12-   23-19
                      1994
11616 § 1            7-12-   26-2
                      1994
11629 § 1            7-6-    23-17
                      1994
11630 § 1            7-16-   Repealed by Ord. 12931
                      1994
11638 § 1            8-9-    26-2
                      1994
11653 § 2            8-23-   Repealed 2-115, 2-116
                      1994
11662 § 1            9-6-    22-114,
                      1994    22-115
11676 § 1            9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 12274 and 12931
                      1994
11677 § 1            9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
                      1994
11678 §§ 1—3      9-20-   35-56
                      1994
11682 § 1            9-20-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1994
11707                10-11-  App. A, App. A
                      1994
11717 §§ 1—4, 8   11-1-   35-56
                      1994
     §§ 5, 6              Repealed by Ord. 12274
     § 7                   35-39
     § 9                   35-57,
                              35-57.7
11734                11-15-  App. A, App. A
                      1994
11753 § 1            12-6-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1994
11769                12-13-  App. A, App. A
                      1994
11771 §§ 2, 3       12-20-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1994
11843                2-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
11844                2-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
11888 § 1            3-21-   Repealed by Ord. 12841
                      1995
11897 § 1            3-28-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1995
11899 §§ 1, 2       4-4-    13-2
                      1995
11919 § 1            4-11-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1995
11921 § 1            4-18-   2-83
                      1995
     § 2                   Replaced Ch. 2, Art. V, 2-176—2-189
     § 2 (1)               Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
     § 2 (2)               Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
     § 2 (3)               2-178
     § 2 (4)               2-179
     § 2 (5)               2-180
     § 2 (6)               2-181
     § 2 (7)               Repealed by Ord. 21197-04-2014
     § 2 (8)               Repealed by Ord. 21197-04-2014
     § 2 (9)               Repealed by Ord. 21197-04-2014
     § 2 (11)              2-185
     § 2 (11)              2-186
     § 2 (12)              2-187
     § 2 (13)              2-188
     § 2 (14)              2-189
11922 §§ 1, 3       4-18-   Repealed by Ord. 12274
                      1995
     § 2                   35-61
11923                4-18-   Repealed by Ord. 15530
                      1995
11942 § 1            5-9-    10-4
                      1995
11970                5-23-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
11975 §§ 1, 2       5-30-   4-4
                      1995
                              7-301—
                              7-303,
                              7-304,
                              7-316,
                      6-13-   7-317,
11998 § 1            1995    7-331—
                              7-334,
                              7-346—
                              7-354,
                              7-371—
                              7-384
                              2-276—
12027 § 1            7-11-   2-289,
                      1995    2-289.1—
                              2-289.4
12036                7-11-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
12047 § 1            7-11-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1995
12059 § 1            8-3-    19-26
                      1995
12076 § 1            8-15-   35-57,
                      1995    35-57.7
     § 2                   35-57.1—
                              35-57.6
12087                8-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
12088                8-15-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
12109 § 1            8-29-   4-4
                      1995
12113 §§ 1—3      8-20-   35-56
                      1995
12114 §§ 1—3      8-20-   35-56
                      1995
12125                9-5-    App. A, App. A
                      1995
12156 § 1            9-12-   Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025
                      1995
12169                9-12-   App. A, App. A
                      1995
12193 § 1            10-3-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1995
12204 § 1            10-10-  10-8
                      1995
12261                11-14-  App. A, App. A
                      1995
12264 § 1            11-21-  13-2
                      1995
                           Repealed
                              Ch. 21
                              12.5-100—
                              12.5-107,
                              12.5-111—
                              12.5-116,
                              12.5-118—
                              12.5-123,
                              12.5-136—
                              12.5-140,
                              12.5-145—
                              12.5-147,
                              12.5-155—
                              12.5-158,
                              12.5-165,
                              12.5-200—
                              12.5-202,
                              12.5-210,
                              12.5-211,
                              12.5-300—
                              12.5-306,
                              12.5-315—
                              12.5-321,
                              12.5-500—
                              12.5-504,
                              12.5-511—
                              12.5-514,
                              12.5-525—
                              12.5-538,
                              12.5-543,
                              12.5-548,
                              12.5-549,
                              12.5-555—
                              12.5-562,
12274 § 1            11-28-  12.5-570—
                      1995    12.5-573,
                              12.5-600—
                              12.5-604,
                              12.5-610—
                              12.5-614,
                              12.5-620—
                              12.5-623,
                              12.5-630—
                              12.5-633,
                              12.5-639—
                              12.5-641,
                              12.5-643—
                              12.5-648,
                              12.5-651—
                              12.5-662,
                              12.5-670—
                              12.5-678,
                              12.5-700—
                              12.5-702,
                              12.5-705—
                              12.5-716,
                              12.5-730,
                              12.5-731,
                              12.5-731.1,
                              12.5-732,
                              12.5-800—
                              12.5-805,
                              12.5-830—
                              12.5-832,
                              12.5-840—
                              12.5-843,
                              16-294,
                              16-295
                              Repealed
                           Ch. 14, 16-4—16-10, 16-226—16-250, 16-266—16-280, Ch. 18, Art. II, 20-311—20-
                              335, 22-120, 30-76.11—30-88, 35-6, 35-7, 35-15, 35-101—35-130
12347                1-20-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12348                1-20-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12405                2-23-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12413 § 1            2-27-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1996
12436 § 1            3-14-   22-162.1
                      1996
12458 § 1            4-2-    27-32
                      1996
12495 § 1            4-23-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1996
12525                5-24-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12526                5-24-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12533 § 1            5-8-    6-11 (Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018),
                      1996    16-122
12541                6-4-    App. A, App. A
                      1996
                              16-101—
                              16-105,
                              16-111—
                              16-116,
                              16-121,
                              16-123,
                              16-124,
                      6-18-   16-131—
12553 § 1            1996    16-134,
                              16-140—
                              16-142,
                              16-146—
                              16-153,
                              16-346—
                              16-349,
                              16-351,
                              16-352
                           Repealed
                              Ch. 16, Arts. V through VIII
12561 §§ 1—3      6-25-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1996
                      7-9-    17-66—
12570 § 1            1996    17-69,
                              17-71
12582 § 1            7-16-   35-26
                      1996
12610                8-6-    App. A, App. A
                      1996
12620 § 1            8-13-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1996
12621 § 1            8-13-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1996
12622 § 1            8-13-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1996
12628                8-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12654 § 1            9-3-    2-12
                      1996
12665                9-14-   App. A, App. A
                      1996
12669 §§ 1, 2       9-10-   35-56,
                      1996    35-57
12670 §§ 1—3      9-10-   35-56,
                      1996    35-57
12707 § 1            10-8-   16-115
                      1996
12708 § 1            10-8-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1996
12726 § 3            10-15-  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                      1996
12741 § 1            10-19-  Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1996
12768                11-12-  App. A, App. A
                      1996
                              7-393—
                              7-396,
12791 § 1            12-3-   7-400—
                      1996    7-404,
                              7-410,
                              7-416
12795 § 1            12-12-  13-27
                      1996
12812                12-25-  App. A, App. A
                      1996
12837 § 1            1-28-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                      1997
12841 §§ 1, 2       1-28-   Repealed by Ord. 15994
                      1997
12842 § 1            1-28-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1997
12924 § 2            3-18-   Repealed by Ord. 23222-05-2018
                      1997
                              App. B, 11A-6—
                              App. B, 11A-11,
                              App. B, 11A-17—
                              App. B, 11A-20,
                              App. B, 11A-22—
12931 § 1            3-25-   App. B, 11A-26,
                      1997    App. B, 11A-52—
                              App. B, 11A-54,
                              App. B, 11A-90—
                              App. B, 11A-95,
                              App. B, 11A-100,
                              App. B, 11A-101
12932 § 1            3-25-   Repealed by Ord. 13743
                      1997
12938 § 1            4-1-    22-1
                      1997
                              22-303—
     § 2                   22-312,
                              22-314,
                              22-315
12958 § 1            4-8-    Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1997
12977 § 1            4-22-   Reserved during 2014 recodification
                      1997
12989 § 1            4-29-   Repealed by Ord. 13743
                      1997
13009                5-20-   Repealed by Ord. 17719
                      1997
13038                6-17-   App. A, App. A
                      1997
13092                7-22-   App. A, App. A
                      1997
13145 §§ 1, 2       9-2-    35-56
                      1997
13146 §§ 1, 2       9-2-    35-56
                      1997
13164 § 1            9-23-   22-174
                      1997
                              7-394,
                              7-396,
13181 § 1            10-2-   7-401,
                      1997    7-402,
                              7-404,
                              7-410
13245 § 1            11-18-  32-17
                      1997
     § 2                   32-21
     § 3                   32-21.1
     § 4                   32-21.2
13286                2-2-    App. A, App. A
                      1998
 
1998 - 2014
Editor’s note:
Beginning with Ord. 13287, passed January 6, 1998, the References to Ordinances
Table is comprehensive. All ordinances passed are listed in numerical order,
with passage date and a brief description. If codified, the number of the
section is listed.
 
Ord. No. Date Passed/Eff. Description
Ord.   Date
No.    Passed/   Description
       Eff.
13287  1-6-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper Fund)
13288  1-7-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13289  1-7-1998  Fund (Park and Recreation Improvement Fund)
13290           1-6-1998Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13291  1-6-1998  Fund (Water Commercial Paper Fund)
13292  1-6-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13293  1-6-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13294  1-6-1998  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13295  1-6-1998  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13296  1-6-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13297  1-6-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13298  1-6-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13299  1-13-1998 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
13300  1-13-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13301  1-13-1998 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
13302  1-13-1998 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
13303  1-13-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13304  1-13-1998 Fund (Golf Capital Projects Fund)
13305  1-13-1998 Fund (Golf Capital Projects Fund)
13306  1-13-1998 Fund (Special Assessment Fund)
13307  1-13-1998 Fund (New Development Fund)
13308  1-13-1998 Rezoning
13309  1-20-1998 Fund (Rollover Encumbrances, Designated Expenditures, Budget Corrections Fund)
13310  1-20-1998 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
13311  1-20-1998 Fund (Equipment Services Fund)
13312  1-20-1998 Fund (Capital Projects Fund)
13313  1-20-1998 Fund (Engineering Fund)
13314  1-20-1998 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
13315  1-20-1998 Base rate reductions (Texas Utilities Electric Company)
13316  1-20-1998 Vacation (Seminary Hill Addition)
13317  1-20-1998 Vacation (Seminary Hill Addition)
13318  1-20-1998 Vacation (University Place Addition)
13319  1-20-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13320  1-20-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13321  1-20-1998 Fund (Parks and Recreation Improvement Fund)
13322  1-20-1998 Fund (Parks and Recreation Fund)
13323  1-27-1998 General obligation bond election
13324  1-27-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13325  1-27-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13326  1-27-1998 Fund (various funds)
13327  1-27-1998 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
13328  1-27-1998 Vacation (utility easement)
13329  1-27-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13330  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13331  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13332  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13333  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13334  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13335  1-27-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13336  2-3-1998  Operating authority (Yellow Checker Cab Co. Of D/FW)
13337  2-3-1998  Operating authority (Checker Cab Company)
13338  2-3-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13339  2-10-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13340  2-10-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13341  2-10-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13342  2-10-1998 Vacation (Linwood Addition)
13343  2-10-1998 City boundary limit extension
13344  2-10-1998 City boundary limit extensions
13345  2-10-1998 City boundary limit extensions
13346  2-10-1998 City boundary limit extensions
13347  2-10-1998 City boundary limit extensions
13348  2-10-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13349  2-10-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13350  2-10-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13351  2-10-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13352  2-10-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13353  2-10-1998 Rezoning
13354  2-13-1998 Bond election results
13355  2-17-1998 Franchise (Coserv Electric)
13356  2-17-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13357  2-17-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13358  2-17-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13359  2-17-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13360  2-17-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13361  2-17-1998 Fund (Insurance Fund)
13362  2-17-1998 Fund (Airport Operating Fund)
13363  2-17-1998 Fund (Aviation Improvement Capital Projects Fund)
13364  2-17-1998 Vacation (Bailey Gardens Addition)
13365  2-18-1998 Vacation (Texas & Pacific Railway; Sprint Communications)
13366  2-24-1998 Vacation (utility easements in Ridgmar Mall)
13367  2-24-1998 Fund (Special Assessments; Street Improvements Fund)
13368  2-24-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13369  2-24-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13370  3-6-1998  Fund (Golf Fund)
13371  3-3-1998  Rezoning (various)
13372  3-3-1998  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13373  3-3-1998  Vacation (utility easement in Hyde Jennings Subdivision)
13374  3-3-1998  Vacation (access easement in Summerfields Addition)
13375  3-3-1998  Vacation (Stonegate Addition)
13376  3-3-1998  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13377  3-3-1998  Fund (General Fund)
13378  3-3-1998  Fund (Public Safety Improvements Fund)
13379  3-3-1998  Fund (Grant Fund)
13380  3-3-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13381  3-12-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13382  3-12-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13383  3-12-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13384  3-12-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13385  3-12-1998 Rezoning
13386            
13387            
13388  3-17-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13389  3-17-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Chapel Ridge Addition)
13390  3-17-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Stone Glen)
13391  3-17-1998 Vacation (Fossil Creek Estates)
13392  3-17-1998 Annexation (173.160 acre tract of land)
13393  3-18-1998 Fund (Special Assessment Fund)
13394  3-24-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13395  3-24-1998 Tax and revenue certificates series 1998
13396  - -       Fund (General Fund)
13397  3-24-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13398  3-24-1998 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13399  3-24-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13400  3-24-1998 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
13401  3-24-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13402  3-24-1998 Fund (Library Improvement Fund)
13403  3-24-1998 Rezoning
13404  3-24-1998 Enacted § 18E, landscape requirements, which was replaced by Ord. 13896
13405  - -       Fund (Grant Fund)
13406  3-31-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13407  3-31-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13408  3-31-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13409  3-31-1998 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13410  3-31-1998 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
13411  - -       Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13412  - -       Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
13413  - -       Bond (Water and sewer)
13414  4-7-1998  Fund (Insurance Fund)
13415  4-7-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13416  4-14-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Ridgmar Addition)
13417  4-14-1998 Vacation (water utility in Greenwood Cemetery)
13418  4-14-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13419  4-14-1998 Amended § 19 to provide references for accessible parking spaces, which was
                 replaced by Ord. 13896
13420  4-14-1998 Rezoning
13421  4-21-1998 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
13422  4-21-1998 Rezoning (abatement reinvestment)
13423  4-21-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13424  4-24-1998 Rezoning
13425  4-28-1998 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
13426  - -       Fund (General Fund)
13427  4-28-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13428  4-28-1998 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13429  4-28-1998 Revenue bond (water and sewer system)
13430  4-28-1998 Tax and revenue certificates, series 1998
13431  - -       Fund (Property and Casualty Fund)
13432  4-28-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13433  4-28-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13434  4-28-1998 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13435  4-28-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13436  4-28-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13437  4-28-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13438  5-5-1998  Youth programs - standards of care
13439  5-5-1998  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
13440  5-5-1998  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
13441  5-5-1998  Vacation (Oak Hill Circle)
13442  5-5-1998  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
13443  5-5-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
                 2-111,
13444  5-12-1998 2-112,
                 2-113,
                 2-114
13445  5-12-1998 Annexation (148.377 acre tract of land)
13446  5-12-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13447  5-12-1998 Rezoning
13448  5-19-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13449  5-19-1998 23-19
13450  5-19-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13451  5-19-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13452  5-19-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13453  5-19-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13454  5-26-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13455  5-26-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13456  5-26-1998 11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
13457  5-26-1998 Obligations: commercial paper notes
13458  5-26-1998 Fund (Commercial Paper G.O. Construction Fund)
13459  5-26-1998 Obligations: commercial paper notes
13460  5-26-1998 Fund (Cable Special Trust Fund)
13461  5-26-1998 Fund (Cable Special Trust Fund)
13462  5-26-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13463  5-26-1998 Vacation (Cobblestone Addition)
13464  5-26-1998 Vacation (Riverbend West Business Park)
13465  5-26-1998 Vacation (Cityview Addition)
13466  5-26-1998 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
13467  5-26-1998 Fund (New Development Fund)
13468  6-2-1998  Special election
13469  6-2-1998  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
13470  6-2-1998  Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
13471  6-2-1998  Amending Ord 11923
13472  6-2-1998  Amending Ord 7323, revising boundaries of district 2, 4, 7
13473  6-2-1998  Vacation (Colonial Park Addition)
13474  6-2-1998  Vacation (Homeacres Addition)
13475  6-2-1998  Vacation (Wedgewood Addition)
13476  6-2-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13477  6-2-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13478  6-9-1998  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13479  6-9-1998  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13480  6-9-1998  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
13481  6-9-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13482  6-9-1998  Rezoning
13483  6-16-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13484  6-16-1998 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
13485  6-16-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13486  6-16-1998 Moratorium on the acceptance of applications for building permits
13487  6-16-1998 Moratorium on the acceptance of applications for building permits and
                 certificates of occupancy
13488  6-23-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13489  6-23-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13490  6-23-1998 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13491  6-23-1998 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
13492  6-23-1998 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
13493  6-23-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Summerfield’s Phase I Addition)
13494  6-23-1998 Vacation (sanitary sewer easements in Masonic Temple Addition)
13495  6-23-1998 Vacation (sanitary sewer utility easement in River Park Addition)
13496  6-23-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13497  6-23-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13498  6-23-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13499  6-23-1998 Authorizing promissory notes
13500  6-23-1998 Rezoning
13501  6-30-1998 Fund (Special Trust Funds)
13502  6-30-1998 Vacation (partial street right-of-way in Seminary Hills Addition)
13503  6-30-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13504  6-30-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13505  6-30-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13506  6-30-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13507  6-30-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13508  7-7-1998  Fund (Grant Fund)
13509  7-7-1998  Fund (Special Gift Fund)
13510  7-7-1998  Fund (General Fund)
13511  7-7-1998  Fund (State Revolving Fund-Sewer)
13512  7-7-1998  Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 30
13513  7-7-1998  Vacation (utility easement in Bellaire Estates Addition)
13514  7-7-1998  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13515  7-7-1998  Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
13516  7-7-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13517  7-7-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13518  7-7-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13519  7-7-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       7-14-     7-166,
13520  1998;     7-167,
       eff. 8-   7-168,
       29-1998   7-169
       7-14-     26-1,
13521  1998;     26-2,
       eff. 8-   26-3
       29-1998
13522  7-14-1998 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
13523  7-14-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13524  7-14-1998 Fund (Golf Fund)
13525  7-14-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13526  7-14-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Oakmont Meadows Addition)
13527  7-14-1998 Rezoning
13528  7-14-1998 Enacted §§ 18A; 18B; 18C, which was replaced by Ord. 13896
13529  7-21-1998 Approving Res.98-06-148 and 98-07-179 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International
                 Airport Board
       7-21-
13530  1998;     Amending Ord. 13152 by revising the name of the party granted a license
       eff. 8-
       19-1998
13531  7-21-1998 Fund (Airports Fund)
13532  7-28-1998 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
                 Department
13533  7-28-1998 2-13
13534  7-28-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13535  7-28-1998 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
13536  7-28-1998 Fund (General Fund)
       7-28-
13537  1998;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
       eff. 8-6-
       1998
13538  7-28-1998 Disannexation (2.693 acre tract of land)
13539  7-28-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13540  8-11-1998 Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
13541  8-11-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13542  8-11-1998 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
13543  8-11-1998 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13544  8-11-1998 Vacation (3 approach rights-of-way connected to Ridgmar Boulevard
13545  8-11-1998 Annexation (119.020 acre tract of land)
13546  8-11-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13547  8-11-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13548  8-11-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13549  8-11-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13550  8-11-1998 Rezoning
13551  8-18-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13552  8-18-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13553  8-18-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13554  8-25-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
                 12.5-850,
                 12.5-851,
                 12.5-852,
                 12.5-853,
                 12.5-854,
       8-25-     12.5-855,
13555  1998;     12.5-856,
       eff. 9-8- 12.5-857,
       1998      12.5-858,
                 12.5-859,
                 12.5-860,
                 12.5-861,
                 12.5-862,
                 12.5-863
13556  8-25-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13557  8-25-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13558  8-25-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13559  8-25-1998 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13560  8-25-1998 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
13561  8-25-1998 Rezoning
13562  9-1-1998  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13563  9-1-1998  Vacation (alley in MG Ellis Addition)
13564  9-1-1998  Vacation (alley in Grandview Addition)
13565  9-1-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13566  9-1-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13567  9-1-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13568  9-1-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13569  9-8-1998  Fund (Grants Fund)
13570  9-8-1998  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13571  9-8-1998  Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
13572  9-8-1998  Rezoning
13573  9-15-1998 Fund (Insurance Fund)
13574  9-15-1998 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
13575  9-15-1998 35-56
13576  9-15-1998 35-56
13577  9-15-1998 Annexation (2.850 acre tract of land)
13578  9-15-1998 Annexation (194.167 acre tract of land)
13579  9-15-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13580  9-15-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13581  9-22-1998 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue water and sewer system
                 revenue bonds
13582  9-22-1998 Fund (Municipal Parking Fund)
13583  9-22-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13584  9-22-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13585  9-22-1998 Vacation (utility easement in Western Hills Addition)
13586  9-22-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13587  9-22-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13588  9-22-1998 Fund (Sewer Commercial Paper Fund)
       9-29-
13589  1998;     Repealed by Ord. 15750
       eff. 10-
       30-1998
       9-29-
13590  1998;     Repealed by Ord. 15750
       eff. 10-
       30-1998
13591  9-18-1998 13-2
13592  9-29-1998 Repealed by Ord. 15655
13593  9-29-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13594  9-29-1998 23-4,
                 23-5
13595  9-29-1998 Fund (Insurance Fund)
13596  9-29-1998 Fund (Insurance Fund)
13597  9-29-1998 Fund (Capital Projects reserve Fund)
13598  9-29-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13599  9-29-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13600  9-29-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13601  9-29-1998 Superseded by Ord. 16188
13602  9-29-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13603  10-6-1998 Approving a project plan and reinvestment zone financing plan for Tax Increment
                 Financing Reinvestment Zone No. 3
13604  10-6-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13605  10-6-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13606  10-6-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13607  10-6-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13608  10-6-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13609  10-13-    Vacation (sewer and utility easements located in Ryan Southwest Addition)
       1998
13610  10-13-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13611  10-13-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13612  10-13-    Fund (Capital Project Reserve Fund)
       1998
13613  10-13-    Fund (Information System Services and Reserve Fund)
       1998
13614  10-13-    Fund (General Fund)
       1998
13615  10-13-    Rezoning
       1998
13616  10-20-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       1998      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
13617  10-20-    Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
       1998
13618  10-20-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       1998      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
13619  10-20-    Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
       1998
13620  10-20-    Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       1998
13621  10-20-    Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
                 16-13,
13622  10-20-    16-15,
       1998      16-32
                 Repealed 16-51—16-100
13623  10-20-    Vacation (utility easement in Enchanted Forest Addition)
       1998
13624  10-20-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
       10-27-    7-46,
13625  1998;     7-47,
       eff. 12-  7-48,
       3-1998    7-49
13626  10-27-    11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       1998
13627  10-27-    Repealed by Ord. 15953
       1998
13628  10-27-    Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
       1998
13629  10-27-    Vacation (alley in J.S. Smith Addition)
       1998
13630  10-27-    Vacation (utility easement in Summerfields Addition)
       1998
13631  10-27-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13632  10-27-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1998
13633  10-27-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1998
13634  10-27-    Fund (Water Commercial Paper Fund)
       1998
13635  11-3-1998 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       11-3-     13-1,
13636  1998;     13-2,
       eff. 12-  13-3,
       10-1998   13-4
13637  11-3-1998 Fund (Grant Fund)
13638  11-3-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13639  11-3-1998 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13640  11-10-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
       1998      and improvement bonds series 1998
       11-10-
13641  1998;     Agreement with Millennium Telecom LLC
       eff. 12-
       29-1998
13642  11-10-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       1998
13643  11-10-    Amending the Comprehensive Plan
       1998
13644  11-10-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       1998
13645  11-10-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1998
13646  11-10-    Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Park Glen Addition)
       1998
13647  11-10-    Annexation (4.221 acre tract of land)
       1998
13648  11-10-    Fund (Sewer Commercial Paper Fund)
       1998
13649  11-10-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13650  11-10-    Rezoning
       1998
13651  11-17-    Agreement with Coserv LLC
       1998
13652  11-17-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13653  11-17-    Rezoning
       1998
13654  11-24-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       1998
13655  11-24-    Vacation (portion of Trinity Boulevard right-of-way)
       1998
13656  11-24-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1998
13657  11-24-    Amended § 17A, “signs,” concerning permitted alteration of nonconforming signs,
       1998      which was replaced by Ord. 13896
13658  12-1-1998 Fund (General Fund)
13659  12-1-1998 Fund (Grants Fund)
13660  12-8-1998 Rezoning
13661  12-15-    12.5-703,
       1998      12.5-707
13662  12-15-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1998
13663  12-15-    Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       1998
13664  12-15-    Fund (Aviation Improvements Project Fund)
       1998
13665  12-15-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1998
13666  12-15-    Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
       1998
13667  12-15-    Repealed by Ord. 22613-02-2017
       1998
13668  12-15-    Zoning; permitted uses in specific locations
       1998
13669  1-5-1999  Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
13670  1-5-1999  Fund (General Fund)
13671  1-5-1999  Fund (Golf Enterprise Fund)
13672  1-5-1999  Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13673  1-5-1999  Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13674  1-5-1999  Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13675  1-5-1999  Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
13676  1-5-1999  Fund (Golf Capital Improvements Fund)
13677  1-5-1999  Vacation (alley in Forest Park Addition)
13678  1-5-1999  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
13679  1-5-1999  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13680  1-5-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13681  1-5-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13682  1-12-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13683  1-12-1999 Fund (Van Zandt Special Trust Fund)
13684  1-12-1999 Rezoning
13685  1-19-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
       1-19-
13686  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       11-1999
13687  1-19-1999 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
13688  1-19-1999 Fund (Grant Fund)
13689  1-26-1999 Fund (various funds)
13690  1-26-1999 Fund (Airports Fund)
13691  1-26-1999 Vacation (portion of Harmonson Road)
13692  2-2-1999  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13693  2-2-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13694  2-2-1999  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13695  2-2-1999  Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
13696  2-2-1999  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
13697  2-2-1999  Fund (General Fund)
13698  2-2-1999  Fund (Grant Fund)
13699  2-2-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13700  2-9-1999  Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper Fund)
13701  2-9-1999  Authorizing issuance of equipment tax notes
13702  2-9-1999  Vacation (alley in Stallcups Second Addition)
13703  2-9-1999  Annexation (314.437 acre tract of land)
13704  2-9-1999  Fund (Airports Fund)
13705  2-9-1999  Rezoning
13706  2-16-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13707  2-16-1999 Approving rate schedules for Texas Utilities Electric Co.
13708  2-16-1999 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 31
13709  2-16-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13710  2-16-1999 Vacation (street right-of-way and utility easement in Eagle Mountain Lake
                 Estates Addition)
13711  2-16-1999 Fund (Grant Fund)
13712  2-16-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13713  2-16-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13714  2-16-1999 Rezoning
13715  2-23-1999 Ordering election
13716  2-23-1999 Amending Ord. 7323 by revising boundaries of single member districts 2, 4 and 6
13717  2-23-1999 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13718  3-2-1999  Amending Ord. 8291, 10193 and 12105 regarding control of cable television system
                 from Marcus Cable Associates LLC to Paul G. Allen
13719  3-2-1999  Fund (Cable Communications Fund)
13720  3-2-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13721  3-2-1999  7-47
13722  3-2-1999  7-167
13723  3-2-1999  26-2
13724  3-2-1999  11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
13725  3-2-1999  Fund (Van Zandt Special Trust Fund)
13726  3-2-1999  Rezoning
13727  3-11-1999 Amending the Arlington Heights 1984 special sector plan to reflect expansion of
                 Osteopathic Medical Center of Texas
13728  3-11-1999 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
13729  3-11-1999 Fund (Grant Fund)
13730  3-11-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13731  3-11-1999 Rezoning
13732  3-16-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13733  3-16-1999 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13734  3-16-1999 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
13735  3-16-1999 Vacation (alley and miscellaneous easements in Byers and McCart Addition)
13736  3-16-1999 Vacation (utility easement in the Highlands Phase I)
13737  3-16-1999 Vacation (utility drainage easement in Park Glen Addition)
13738  3-23-1999 Amending Ord. 13715 by changing location of certain polling places
13739  3-23-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13740  3-23-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13741  3-23-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13742  3-23-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
                 7-66,
                 7-67,
                 7-68,
                 7-76,
                 7-77,
                 7-86,
                 7-87,
                 7-88,
                 7-89,
                 7-90,
                 7-91,
                 7-92,
                 7-93,
                 7-94,
                 7-95,
                 7-96,
                 7-97,
                 7-98,
13743  3-23-1999 7-99,
                 7-100,
                 7-101,
                 7-102,
                 7-103,
                 7-104,
                 7-105,
                 7-106,
                 7-107,
                 7-108,
                 7-109,
                 7-110,
                 7-111,
                 7-112,
                 7-121,
                 7-122,
                 7-123,
                 7-124,
                 7-125,
                 7-126
       3-23-
13744  1999;     7-47
       eff. 4-
       30-1999
       3-23-
13745  1999;     11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       eff. 4-
       30-1999
       3-23-
13746  1999;     26-2
       eff. 4-
       30-1999
       3-23-
13747  1999;     7-167
       eff. 4-
       30-1999
13748  3-23-1999 Fund (General Fund)
                 16-101,
                 16-121,
                 16-125,
13749  3-23-1999 16-131,
                 16-140,
                 16-141,
                 16-435,
                 16-463 (Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025)
13750  3-23-1999 Vacation (partial street right-of-way in Western Hills Addition)
13751  3-23-1999 Changing the name of Stoneywell Terrace West to West Dover Terrace and
                 Stoneywell Terrace South to South Dover Terrace
13752  3-23-1999 Fund (alley and portion of Thrall Street)
13753  3-30-1999 Amending Ord. 13715 regarding polling places
13754  3-30-1999 Declaring elected to office unopposed candidates
13755  3-30-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13756  3-30-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13757  3-30-1999 Vacation (utility easements in Jennings South Addition)
13758  3-30-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13759  3-30-1999 Vacation (utility easement in Overton West Addition)
13760  3-30-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13761  3-30-1999 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13762  3-30-1999 Fund (General Fund)
       3-30-
13763  1999;     Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 3-3-
       1999
13764  4-6-1999  Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions in the Fire
                 Department
13765  4-6-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13766  4-6-1999  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13767  4-6-1999  Repealed by Ord. 17522
13768  4-6-1999  Providing for the appointment of Fort Worth Health Authority
13769  4-6-1999  Fund (General Fund)
13770  4-13-1999 Fund (Grant Fund)
13771  4-13-1999 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
13772  4-13-1999 Rezoning
13773  4-20-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13774  4-20-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13775  4-20-1999 Readopting and amending the standards for care for youth programs
13776  4-20-1999 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
13777  4-20-1999 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
13778  4-20-1999 Vacation (drainage easements in River Hills Addition Phase II)
13779  4-20-1999 Fund (General Fund)
13780  4-20-1999 Rezoning
13781  4-27-1999 Amending Ord. 13471 by amending Attachment 1
13782  4-27-1999 Fund (General Fund)
13783  4-27-1999 Fund (Parks Improvement Capital Projects Fund)
13784  4-27-1999 Fund (Rental Rehab Program Fund)
13785  4-27-1999 Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
                 Permitting and regulating the use of certain public rights-of-way within the
13786  5-4-1999  city for construction, maintenance and operation of a long distance telephone
                 system by Level 3 Communications LLC
13787  5-4-1999  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13788  5-4-1999  Fund (Parks Capital Projects Fund)
13789  5-4-1999  Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Carter Industrial Park Addition)
13790  5-4-1999  Vacation (utility easements in Hillcrest Addition)
13791  5-4-1999  Vacation (utility easements in Mira Vista Addition)
13792  5-4-1999  Vacation (partial street right-of-way in White Settlement Road)
13793  5-4-1999  Vacation (utility easement in Loop 820 Shopping Center Addition)
13794  5-4-1999  Vacation (utility easement in Treetop Addition)
13795  5-4-1999  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
13796  5-4-1999  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13797  5-4-1999  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
13798  5-4-1999  Fund (Grants Fund)
13799  5-4-1999  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
13800  5-11-1999 Fund (Grant Fund)
13801  5-11-1999 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
13802  5-11-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13803  5-11-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13804  5-11-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
13805  5-11-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
13806  5-18-1999 Fund (Insurance Fund)
13807  5-18-1999 Granting license to Metricom, Inc.
                 12.5-300,
                 12.5-302,
                 12.5-330,
13808  5-18-1999 12.5-331,
                 12.5-332,
                 12.5-333,
                 12.5-334,
                 12.5-335
13809  5-18-1999 Rezoning
                 35-70.2,
       5-25-     35-70.3,
13810  1999;     35-71,
       eff. 6-5- 35-72,
       1999      35-76,
                 35-77
       5-25-
13811  1999;     7-47
       eff. 6-3-
       1999
       5-25-
13812  1999;     7-167
       eff. 6-3-
       1999
       5-25-
13813  1999;     26-2
       eff. 6-3-
       1999
       5-25-
13814  1999;     11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       eff. 6-3-
       1999
       5-25-
13815  1999;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 5-
       26-1999
13816  5-25-1999 Vacation (2 street rights-of-way at May and St. Louis Streets)
       5-25-
13817  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 5-
       26-1999
       5-25-
13818  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 5-
       26-1999
       6-1-1999;
13819  eff. 6-2- Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13820  eff. 6-2- Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
13821  6-1-1999  Approving a project plan and reinvestment zone financing plan for Tax Increment
                 Financing Reinvestment Zone No. 2
       6-1-1999;
13822  eff. 6-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13823  eff. 6-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13824  eff. 6-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13825  eff. 6-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13826  eff. 6-2- Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       1999
       6-1-1999;
13827  eff. 6-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
13828  6-8-1999  Rezoning
13829  6-15-1999 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 1999
13830  6-15-1999 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue water and sewer system
                 subordinate lien revenue bonds
       6-15-
13831  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       16-1999
13832  6-15-1999 Vacation (utility easement in Lost Creek Garden Homes Addition)
13833  6-15-1999 Vacation (sanitary sewer easements in WW Wheat Survey)
13834  6-15-1999 Vacation (portion of Haslet Roanoke Road)
13835  6-15-1999 Vacation (portion of Lipscomb Street right-of-way)
13836  6-15-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13837  6-15-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13838  6-15-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13839  6-15-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-15-
13840  1999;     Fund (Library Improvements Fund)
       eff. 6-
       16-1999
13841  6-15-1999 Rezoning
13842  6-22-1999 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
13843  6-22-1999 Fund (utility easement in Lost Creek Addition)
       6-22-
13844  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       23-1999
       6-22-
13845  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 6-
       23-1999
       6-29-
13846  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
13847  6-29-1999 Vacation (portion of Margaret Street)
13848  6-29-1999 Vacation (portion of Rio Grande Avenue)
       6-29-
13849  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
       6-29-
13850  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
       6-29-
13851  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
       6-29-
13852  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
       6-29-
13853  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 6-
       30-1999
13854  7-6-1999  Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at the officer
                 classification in the Police Department
13855  7-6-1999  Vacation (portion of Papurt Avenue)
       7-6-1999;
13856  eff. 7-7- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
       7-6-1999;
13857  eff. 7-7- Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
       7-6-1999;
13858  eff. 7-7- Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
13859  7-6-1999  Rezoning
       7-20-
13860  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       21-1999
13861  7-20-1999 Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
                 revenue bonds series 1999
13862  7-20-1999 Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
       7-20-
13863  1999;     Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
       eff. 7-
       21-1999
       7-20-
13864  1999;     Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 7-
       21-1999
13865  7-20-1999 Vacation (2 temporary access easements in R.H. Calloway Survey)
13866  7-20-1999 Vacation (access easement and miscellaneous utility easements in Cityview
                 Addition)
13867  7-20-1999 Vacation (utility easement in Woodhaven East Addition)
13868  7-20-1999 Rezoning
       7-27-     Permitting and regulating the use of certain public rights-of-way within the
13869  1999;     city for construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system
       eff. 8-   by Enron Communications Inc.
       26-1999
13870  7-27-1999 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 1999
13871  7-27-1999 Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds series 1999
13872  7-27-1999 Vacation (utility easement in Lost Creek Addition)
13873  7-27-1999 Vacation (portion of Richland Street)
13874  7-27-1999 Vacation (street rights-of-way for Cooper Street)
13875  7-27-1999 Vacation (portion of East Ninth Street and Grove Street)
13876  7-27-1999 Changing the name of Leamside Drive to Quorum Drive
13877  7-27-1999 Changing the names of Suffolk Court East and Suffolk Court West to Suffolk Drive
       7-27-
13878  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       7-27-
13879  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       7-27-
13880  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       7-27-
13881  1999;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       7-27-
13882  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       7-27-
13883  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       28-1999
       8-3-1999;
13884  eff. 8-4- Fund (Airports Fund)
       1999
       8-3-1999;
13885  eff. 8-4- Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
13886  8-10-1999 Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
       8-10-
13887  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 8-
       11-1999
13888  8-10-1999 Annexation (231.06 acre tract of land)
13889  8-10-1999 Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 2
       8-10-
13890  1999;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 8-
       11-1999
       8-10-
13891  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       11-1999
13892  8-10-1999 Vacation (ingress-egress easement in Bell Industrial District)
13893  8-10-1999 Vacation (ingress-egress and utility easement in Nathan Proctor Survey and John
                 F. Heath Survey)
13894  8-10-1999 Annexation (87.4 acre tract of land)
       8-10-
13895  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 8-
       11-1999
                 Zoning ordinance;
                 App. A, Preface,
                 App. A, 1.100,
                 App. A, 1.101,
                 App. A, 1.102,
                 App. A, 1.103,
                 App. A, 2.100,
                 App. A, 2.101,
                 App. A, 2.102,
                 App. A, 2.103,
                 App. A, 3.100,
                 App. A, 3.101,
                 App. A, 3.200,
                 App. A, 3.201,
                 App. A, 3.202, App. A, 3.203  repealed by Ord. 21816-08-2015 , App. A, 3.204
                 repealed by Ord. 21816-08-2015 ,
                 App. A, 3.300,
                 App. A, 3.301,
                 App. A, 3.302,
                 App. A, 3.303,
                 App. A, 3.304,
                 App. A, 3.305,
                 App. A, 3.400,
                 App. A, 3.401,
                 App. A, 3.402,
                 App. A, 3.403,
                 App. A, 3.404,
                 App. A, 3.405,
                 App. A, 3.406,
                 App. A, 3.500,
                 App. A, 3.501,
                 App. A, 3.502,
                 App. A, 3.503,
                 App. A, 3.504,
                 App. A, 3.505,
                 App. A, 3.506,
                 App. A, 3.600,
                 App. A, 5.100,
                 App. A, 5.101,
                 App. A, 5.102,
                 App. A, 5.103,
                 App. A, 5.104,
                 App. A, 5.106,
                 App. A, 5.107,
                 App. A, 5.108,
                 App. A, 5.109,
                 App. A, 5.110,
                 App. A, 5.111,
                 App. A, 5.112,
                 App. A, 5.113,
                 App. A, 5.114,
                 App. A, 5.115,
                 App. A, 5.116,
                 App. A, 5.117,
                 App. A, 5.118,
                 App. A, 5.120,
                 App. A, 5.121,
       10-12-    App. A, 5.122,
13896  1999      App. A, 5.123,
                 App. A, 5.124,
                 App. A, 5.125,
                 App. A, 5.126,
                 App. A, 5.127,
                 App. A, 5.128,
                 App. A, 5.129,
                 App. A, 5.130,
                 App. A, 5.131,
                 App. A, 5.132,
                 App. A, 5.135,
                 App. A, 5.136,
                 App. A, 5.137,
                 App. A, 5.138,
                 App. A, 5.139,
                 App. A, 5.141,
                 App. A, 5.142,
                 App. A, 5.143,
                 App. A, 5.300,
                 App. A, 5.302,
                 App. A, 5.303,
                 App. A, 5.304,
                 App. A, 5.305,
                 App. A, 5.306,
                 App. A, 5.400,
                 App. A, 5.401,
                 App. A, 5.402,
                 App. A, 5.403,
                 App. A, 5.404,
                 App. A, 5.405,
                 App. A, 6.100,
                 App. A, 6.101,
                 App. A, 6.200,
                 App. A, 6.201,
                 App. A, 6.202,
                 App. A, 6.203,
                 App. A, 6.300,
                 App. A, 6.301,
                 App. A, 6.500,
                 App. A, 6.501,
                 App. A, 6.502,
                 App. A, 6.503,
                 App. A, 6.504,
                 App. A, 6.505,
                 App. A, 6.506,
                 App. A, 7.100,
                 App. A, 7.101,
                 App. A, 7.102,
                 App. A, 7.103,
                 App. A, 7.104,
                 App. A, 7.105,
                 App. A, 7.106,
                 App. A, 7.107,
                 App. A, 8.100,
                 App. A, 8.101,
                 App. A, 9.100,
                 App. A, App. A,
                 App. A, App. B,
                 App. A, App. C
13897  8-10-1999 Rezoning
13898  8-17-1999 27-3
       8-17-
13899  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13900  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13901  1999;     Vacation (portion of Despain Drive)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13902  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13903  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13904  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13905  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13906  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-17-
13907  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       18-1999
       8-24-
13908  1999;     Closing benefit hearing and levying assessments for part of the cost of
       eff. 8-   improving a portion of Basswood Boulevard
       25-1999
13909  8-24-1999 10-9
       8-24-
13910  1999;     Fund (Special Projects Fund)
       eff. 8-
       25-1999
13911  8-24-1999 Fund (State Revolving Fund-Sewer)
13912  8-24-1999 35-23
13913  8-24-1999 Disannexation (21.3 acre tract of land)
13914  8-24-1999 Vacation (alleyway in Edward Heir’s Addition)
13915  8-24-1999 Vacation (easements in Winterhaven/Beach Street Addition)
       8-31-
13916  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
       8-31-
13917  1999;     Fund (Insurance Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
13918  8-31-1999 Fund (General Fund)
13919  8-31-1999 Approving project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 4
13920  8-31-1999 Vacation (easements in Western Hills Addition)
       8-31-
13921  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
       8-31-
13922  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
       8-31-
13923  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
       8-31-
13924  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-1-
       1999
13925  8-31-1999 Rezoning
       9-7-1999;
13926  eff. 9-8- Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
13927  9-7-1999  Repealed by Ord. 17522
13928  9-7-1999  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
       9-7-1999;
13929  eff. 9-8- Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
       1999
13930  9-7-1999  Fund (sanitary sewer easement in West/Loop 820 Partners Tract)
13931  9-7-1999  App. A, 6.301
                 § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
13932  9-7-1999  Rezoning
13933  9-7-1999  Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
13934  9-16-1999 Fund (Library Improvements Fund)
       9-16-
13935  1999;     Fund (Aviation Operating Fund)
       eff. 9-
       17-1999
       9-16-
13936  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 9-
       17-1999
       9-16-
13937  1999;     Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
       eff. 9-
       17-1999
13938  9-21-1999 Annexation (48.562 acre tract of land)
       9-16-
13939  1999;     Fund (Golf Special Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-
       17-1999
       9-16-
13940  1999;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 9-
       17-1999
13941  9-16-1999 Rezoning
13942  9-21-1999 Repealed by Ord. 13743
13943  9-21-1999 10-17
13944  9-21-1999 35-56
13945  9-21-1999 Fund (utility easement in Eastland Avenue Addition)
13946  9-21-1999 Vacation (ingress-egress and utility easements in Summerfields Addition)
       9-21-
13947  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-
       22-1999
13948  9-28-1999 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
13949  9-28-1999 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
13950  9-28-1999 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
13951  9-28-1999 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
13952  9-28-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13953  9-28-1999 Repealed by Ord. 23159-04-2018
13954  9-28-1999 Authorizing issuance of equipment tax notes
13955  9-28-1999 Superseded by Ord. 16188
13956  9-28-1999 Vacation (partial vacation of alley right-of-way in Daggett’s Addition)
13957  9-28-1999 Vacation (South Camp Court and miscellaneous utility easements in Eagle Mountain
                 Lake Two Addition)
13958  9-28-1999 Rezoning
13959  9-28-1999 Changing the name of Mantanzas Drive to Milford Drive
       9-28-
13960  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       29-1999
13961  10-5-1999 11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
13962  10-5-1999 7-167
13963  10-5-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-5-
13964  1999;     Fund (Grant Fund)
       eff. 10-
       6-1999
13965  10-12-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       1999
       10-12-
13966  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 10-
       13-1999
13967  10-12-    Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 32
       1999
13968  10-12-    Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 33
       1999
13969  10-12-    Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
       1999
13970  10-12-    Annexation (293.786 acre tract of land)
       1999
13971  10-12-    Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
       1999
13972  10-12-    Rezoning
       1999
13973  10-19-    Changing the name of a portion of Crooked Stick Drive to Sanctuary Lane
       1999
       10-19-
13974  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 10-
       20-1999
13975  10-19-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
       10-19-
13976  1999;     Fund (1998 Capital Improvements Program)
       eff. 10-
       20-1999
13977  10-19-    Rezoning
       1999
       10-26-
13978  1999;     Granting a franchise to Millennium Telcom LLC
       eff. 11-
       29-1999
13979  10-26-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       1999
13980  10-26-    Fund (General Fund)
       1999
                 17-1,
                 17-16,
                 17-17,
                 17-18,
                 17-19,
                 17-20,
                 17-21,
                 17-46,
                 17-47,
                 17-48,
                 17-49,
                 17-52 ,
                 17-53 ,
                 17-66,
                 17-67,
                 17-68,
                 17-69,
                 17-71 ,
                 17-72 ,
13981  10-26-    17-86,
       1999      17-87,
                 17-88,
                 17-89,
                 17-90,
                 17-91,
                 17-92,
                 17-93,
                 17-94,
                 17-95,
                 17-96,
                 17-97,
                 17-98,
                 17-99,
                 17-100,
                 17-101,
                 17-102,
                 17-103,
                 17-104,
                 17-105,
                 17-106
       10-26-
13982  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       27-1999
       10-26-
13983  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       27-1999
       10-26-
13984  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 10-
       27-1999
13985  10-26-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
13986  10-26-    Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       1999
       11-2-
13987  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
       11-2-
13988  1999;     Fund (Year XXV CDBG Grant Project)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
       11-2-
13989  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
       11-2-
13990  1999;     Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
       11-2-
13991  1999;     Fund (Golf Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
       11-2-
13992  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 11-
       3-1999
13993  11-9-1999 Rezoning
       11-9-
13994  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 11-
       10-1999
13995  11-9-1999 Fund (Grants Fund)
13996  11-9-1999 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
13997  11-9-1999 Annexation (251.30 acre tract of land)
       11-9-
13998  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       10-1999
13999  11-9-1999 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       11-9-
14000  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       10-1999
       11-9-
14001  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       10-1999
14002  11-9-1999 Rezoning
       11-16-
14003  1999;     22-191
       eff. 11-
       30-1999
       11-16-    Permitting and regulating the use of certain public rights-of-way within the
14004  1999      city for construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system
                 by Qwest Communications Corp.
14005  11-16-    Moratorium on acceptance of building permits
       1999
       11-16-
14006  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       17-1999
14007  11-16-    Rezoning
       1999
       11-23-
14008  1999;     Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       24-1999
14009  11-23-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
       1999      revenue bonds series 1999A
14010  11-23-    Vacation (2 utility easements in San Roe Addition)
       1999
14011  11-23-    Vacation (utility easement in Park Glen Addition)
       1999
14012  11-23-    Vacation (City Lake Boulevard West emergency access, utility and private
       1999      drainage easements in Cityview Addition)
14013  12-7-1999 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
       12-7-
14014  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 12-
       8-1999
14015  12-7-1999 Vacation (alley and utility easements in Prospect Heights Addition)
14016  12-7-1999 Vacation (utility easement in Alta Mere Addition)
14017  12-7-1999 Vacation (portion of Polaris Street)
       12-7-
14018  1999;     Fund (Information Systems Fund)
       eff. 12-
       8-1999
       12-7-
14019  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 12-
       8-1999
       12-7-
14020  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 12-
       8-1999
14021  12-14-    Repealed by Ord. 22838-08-2017
       1999
       12-14-
14022  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 12-
       15-1999
       12-14-
14023  1999;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 12-
       15-1999
14024  12-14-    Superseded by Ord. 17154
       1999
14025  12-14-    Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       1999
14026  12-14-    Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       1999
14027  12-14-    Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
       1999
14028  12-14-    Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
       1999
14029  12-14-    Rezoning
       1999
14030  12-21-    Repealed 3-51
       1999
                 2-96,
14031  12-21-    2-97,
       1999      2-98,
                 2-99
       12-21-
14032  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       12-21-
14033  1999;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       12-21-
14034  1999;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       12-21-
14035  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       12-21-
14036  1999;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       12-21-
14037  1999;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 12-
       22-1999
       1-4-2000;
14038  eff. 1-5- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14039  eff. 1-5- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14040  eff. 3-1- 11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14041  eff. 3-1- 7-167
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14042  eff. 3-1- 26-2
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14043  eff. 3-1- 7-47
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14044  eff. 1-5- Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2000
14045  1-4-2000  Vacation (street rights-of-way in Fostepco Heights Revised Addition)
14046  1-4-2000  Vacation (alleyway in Fairmont Addition)
14047  1-4-2000  Annexation (1,559.1 acre tract of land)
       1-4-2000;
14048  eff. 1-5- Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       2000
       1-4-2000;
14049  eff. 1-5- Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       2000
14050  1-4-2000  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14051  1-4-2000  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
14052  1-11-2000 Fund (General Fund)
       1-11-
14053  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       12-2000
       1-11-
14054  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       12-2000
14055  1-11-2000 Annexation (28.001 acre tract of land)
       1-11-
14056  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 1-
       12-2000
14057  1-11-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14058  1-11-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1-11-
14059  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 1-
       12-2000
14060  1-11-2000 Rezoning
14061  1-11-2000 Annexation (290.23 acre tract of land)
14062  1-11-2000 Rezoning
14063  1-18-2000 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 34
14064  1-18-2000 Vacation (portion of Sherril Street)
14065  1-18-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Green Oaks Addition)
14066  1-18-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Lake Oaks Estates Addition)
14067  1-18-2000 Vacation (ingress-egress easement in Overton South Addition)
14068  1-18-2000 Vacation (street right-of-way in Morgan Heights Addition)
14069  1-18-2000 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
14070  1-18-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14071  1-18-2000 Rezoning
       1-25-
14072  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       26-2000
14073  2-1-2000  Fund (various funds)
       2-1-2000;
14074  eff. 2-2- Fund (Airports Fund)
       2000
14075  2-1-2000  Rezoning
14076  2-8-2000  Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2000
14077  2-8-2000  Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2000A
14078  2-8-2000  Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
       2-8-2000;
14079  eff. 2-9- Fund (General Fund)
       2000
14080  2-8-2000  Vacation (portion of Lexington Street)
14081  2-8-2000  Vacation (utility easement in Ridglea Addition)
       2-8-2000;
14082  eff. 2-9- Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       2000
       2-8-2000;
14083  eff. 2-9- Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       2000
       2-8-2000;
14084  eff. 2-9- Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2000
14085  2-8-2000  Rezoning
14086  2-15-2000 Amending Ord. 14062 to correct legal description
       2-15-
14087  2000;     Fund (Insurance Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14088  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14089  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
14090  2-15-2000 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
       2-15-
14091  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14092  2000;     Fund (Office Services Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14093  2000;     Fund (Office Services Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14094  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
14095  2-15-2000 Fund (Public Events Improvement Fund)
       2-15-
14096  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
       2-15-
14097  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       16-2000
14098  2-15-2000 Rezoning
14099  - -2000   Dallas-Forth Worth International Airport joint revenue obligations
14100  - -2000   Dallas-Forth Worth International Airport joint revenue obligations series 2000A
       2-22-
14101  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 2-
       23-2000
14102  2-22-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
       2-22-
14103  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 2-
       23-2000
14104  2-22-2000 Vacation (600 through 800 blocks of Sixth Avenue)
       2-22-
14105  2000;     Fund (Grant Fund)
       eff. 2-
       23-2000
14106  2-22-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2-22-
14107  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       23-2000
       2-22-
14108  2000;     Fund (Parks and Community Service Improvement Fund)
       eff. 2-
       23-2000
14109  2-22-2000 Rezoning
       2-29-
14110  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
       2-29-
14111  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
14112  2-29-2000 Nominating two areas as enterprise zones
14113  2-29-2000 Amending Ord. 7323 by revising the boundaries of single-member Council districts
                 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8
14114  2-29-2000 Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
14115  2-29-2000 App. B, 11A-21,
                 App. B, 11A-22
14116  2-29-2000 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2000A
14117  2-29-2000 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2000
       2-29-
14118  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
       2-29-
14119  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
       2-29-
14120  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
       2-29-
14121  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 3-1-
       2000
14122  3-7-2000  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14123  3-7-2000  Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
14124  3-8-2000  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
14125  3-7-2000  Repealed by Ord. 15655
14126  3-8-2000  Vacation (partial public access easement in Wilshire Addition)
14127  3-7-2000  Vacation (portion of Fifth Avenue)
14128  3-8-2000  Vacation (utility easement in Park Vista Park Business Addition)
14129  3-8-2000  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14130  3-21-2000 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 35
       3-21-
14131  2000;     120 day moratorium on construction and alteration of off-premises signs in the
       eff. 3-   extraterritorial jurisdiction
       29-2000
       3-21-
14132  2000;     Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
14133  3-21-2000 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Police Department
14134  3-21-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14135  3-21-2000 Changing the name of Park Glen Boulevard to Heritage Trace Parkway
       3-21-
14136  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
       3-21-
14137  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
14138  3-21-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14139  3-21-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       3-21-
14140  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
14141  3-21-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       3-21-
14142  2000;     Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
       3-21-
14143  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       22-2000
14144  3-21-2000 Rezoning
14145  3-21-2000 Adopting a 90 day moratorium on acceptance of applications for permits for
                 development
       3-28-
14146  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 3-
       29-2000
14147  3-28-2000 10-3
14148  3-28-2000 Appointing municipal judges
14149  3-28-2000 Appointing substitute municipal judges
14150  3-28-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
       3-28-
14151  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       29-2000
14152  3-28-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       3-28-
14153  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       29-2000
       4-4-200;
14154  eff. 4-5- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
       4-4-200;
14155  eff. 4-5- Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2000
       4-4-200;
14156  eff. 4-5- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
       4-4-200;
14157  eff. 4-5- Fund (State Revolving Fund)
       2000
       4-4-200;
14158  eff. 4-5- Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
       2000
14159  4-4-2000  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
14160  4-11-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
       4-11-
14161  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
       4-11-
14162  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
       4-11-
14163  2000;     Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
       4-11-
14164  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
       4-11-
14165  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
       4-11-
14166  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 4-
       12-2000
14167  4-11-2000 Rezoning
       4-18-
14168  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 4-
       19-2000
14169  4-18-2000 Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
       4-25-
14170  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 4-
       26-2000
14171  4-25-2000 7-50
14172  4-25-2000 Readopting and amending the standards of care for youth programs
       4-25-
14173  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 4-
       26-2000
14174  4-25-2000 Rezoning
       5-2-2000;
14175  eff. 5-3- Fund (Municipal Airport Fund)
       2000
       5-2-2000;
14176  eff. 5-3- Fund (Grant Fund)
       2000
       5-2-2000; 7-87,
14177  eff. 5-   7-91
       15-2000
       5-2-2000;
14178  eff. 5-3- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
14179  5-2-2000  Fund (Grants Fund)
14180  5-2-2000  Fund (Grants Fund)
14181  5-2-2000  Vacation (utility easement in Wedgewood Addition)
14182  5-2-2000  Vacation (five utility easements in Mathews Subdivision)
14183  5-2-2000  Vacation (five utility easements in United forum Addition)
       5-9-2000;
14184  eff. 5-   Fund (Grant Fund)
       10-2000
14185  5-9-2000  Fund (Grants Fund)
14186  5-9-2000  Disannexation (152.893 acre tract of land)
14187  5-9-2000  Vacation (street rights-of-way located in portions of East Bluff Street and
                 North Jones Street)
14188  5-9-2000  Annexation (58.744 acre tract of land)
14189  5-9-2000  Annexation (31.279 acre tract of land)
14190  5-9-2000  Annexation (205.201 acre tract of land)
       5-9-2000;
14191  eff. 5-   Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       10-2000
       5-9-2000;
14192  eff. 5-   Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       10-2000
14193  5-9-2000  Rezoning
       5-16-
14194  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 5-
       17-2000
       5-16-
14195  2000;     Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 5-
       17-2000
14196  5-16-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14197  5-16-2000 Vacation (partial street right-of-way in SK Smith Survey)
       5-16-
14198  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 5-
       17-2000
14199  5-16-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14200  5-16-2000 Rezoning
14201  5-23-2000 Fund (General Fund)
14202  5-23-2000 Fund (Grant Fund)
14203  5-23-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14204  5-23-2000 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14205  5-23-2000 Fund (Grants Fund)
14206  5-23-2000 Zoning; permitted uses by location
       5-30-
14207  2000;     Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       eff. 5-
       31-2000
       5-30-
14208  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 5-
       31-2000
14209  5-30-2000 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
       5-30-
14210  2000;     Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       eff. 5-
       31-2000
       5-30-
14211  2000;     Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
       eff. 5-
       31-2000
14212  5-30-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14213  5-30-2000 Fund (State Revolving Sewer Loan Fund)
14214  5-30-2000 Fund (Public Events Improvements Fund)
14215  6-6-2000  Amending Ord. 14125 by providing a new effective date
14216  6-13-2000 Suspending until the earlier of 9-28-2000 or the effectiveness of a rate order
14217  6-13-2000 Vacation (drainage and utility easement in the Estates and Villas of Fossil
                 Creek)
14218  6-13-2000 Vacation (drainage and utility easement in Summerbrook Addition)
14219  6-13-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Centreport Addition
14220  6-13-2000 Vacation (drainage and utility easement in Mira Vista Addition)
14221  6-13-2000 Disannexation (21.837 acre tract of land)
14222  6-13-2000 Changing the name of Audrey Ann Lane to Blue Heron Court
14223  6-13-2000 Changing the name of Van Norstrand Court to Cahoba Terrace
       6-13-
14224  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 6-
       14-2000
14225  6-13-2000 Rezoning
       6-20-
14226  2000;     Fund (Airports Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14227  6-20-2000 Repealed by Ord. 15953
14228  6-20-2000 Extending a moratorium on the acceptance of application for permits for
                 development
       6-20-
14229  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
       6-20-
14230  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
       6-20-
14231  2000;     Fund (Park and recreation Development Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14232  6-20-2000 Repealing Ord. 12547, 13105 and 13337
14233  6-20-2000 Operating authority (Darya Inc.)
14234  6-20-2000 Operating authority (Cowboy Cab Company Inc.)
       6-20-
14235  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14236  6-20-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Wm. Mann Survey)
14237  6-20-2000 Vacation (alley in Smith, Jones and Daggett Addition)
14238  6-20-2000 Vacation (portion of Old Denton Road)
14239  6-20-2000 Vacation (portion of an alley in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
14240  6-20-2000 Vacation (alley in the original Town of Fort Worth)
14241  6-20-2000 Vacation (street rights-of-way 250 block of West Thirteenth Street and 1100
                 block of South Jennings Street)
14242  6-20-2000 Vacation (a portion of Washburn Avenue and 2 parallel alleys)
       6-20-
14243  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
       6-20-
14244  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14245  6-20-2000 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14246  6-20-2000 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14247  6-20-2000 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14248  6-20-2000 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
       6-20-
14249  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
       6-20-
14250  2000;     Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14251           Contained note that Hunter demolition and Wrecking did work so no need for an
                 ordinance
14252           [missing]
       6-20-
14253  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 6-
       21-2000
14254  6-20-2000 Zoning; permitted uses by location
14255  7-11-2000 Superseded by Ord. 17872-11-2007
       7-11-
14256  2000;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
       eff. 7-
       20-2000
       7-11-
14257  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 7-
       12-2000
14258  7-11-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14259  7-11-2000 Annexation (111.833 acre tract of land)
14260  7-11-2000 Annexation (204.234 acre tract of land)
14261  7-11-2000 Disannexation (0.946 acre tract of land)
       7-11-
14262  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund; Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
       eff. 7-
       12-2000
       7-11-
14263  2000;     Fund (Grant Fund)
       eff. 7-
       12-2000
       7-11-
14264  2000;     Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
       eff. 7-
       12-2000
       7-11-
14265  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 7-
       12-2000
14266  7-11-2000 Fund (General Fund)
14267  7-11-2000 Rezoning
       7-18-
14268  2000;     Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       eff. 7-
       19-2000
14269  7-18-2000 Amending Ord. 13967 by redesignating certain property as Tax Abatement
                 Reinvestment Zone No. 32
14270  7-18-2000 Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds series
                 2000
14271  7-18-2000 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
14272  7-18-2000 Fund (General Fund)
       7-18-
14273  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       19-2000
       7-18-
14274  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       19-2000
       7-18-
14275  2000;     Fund (Engineering Services Fund)
       eff. 7-
       19-2000
       7-18-
14276  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 7-
       19-2000
       7-25-
14277  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 7-
       26-2000
14278  7-25-2000 Fund (CDGB Year XXIII Fund)
       7-25-
14279  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 7-
       26-2000
14280  7-25-2000 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
14281  7-25-2000 Rezoning
       8-1-2000;
14282  eff. 8-2- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2000
       8-1-2000;
14283  eff. 8-2- Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       2000
14284  8-1-2000  Extending a moratorium on acceptance of applications for permits for development
14285  8-1-2000  Adopting the 2000 Comprehensive Plan
14286  9-12-2000 Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
14287  8-8-2000  Annexation (11.385 acre tract of land)
14288  8-8-2000  Annexation (75.695 acre tract of land)
14289  8-8-2000  Annexation (282.650 acre tract of land)
14290  8-8-2000  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       8-8-2000;
14291  eff. 8-9- Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2000
       8-8-2000;
14292  eff. 8-9- Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2000
14293  8-8-2000  Rezoning
       8-15-
14294  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       16-2000
       8-15-
14295  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       16-2000
14296  8-15-2000 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 36
14297  8-15-2000 Appointing substitute municipal judges
14298  8-15-2000 7-317
       8-15-
14299  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       16-2000
       8-15-
14300  2000;     Granting a franchise to Wideopenwest Texas LLC
       eff. 8-
       16-2000
14301  8-15-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       8-15-
14302  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       16-2000
14303  8-15-2000 Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
14304  8-15-2000 Fund (General Fund)
14305  8-15-2000 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
14306  8-22-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Frank M. Anderson Subdivision)
14307  8-22-2000 Vacation (utility easements in John F. Heath Survey)
14308  8-22-2000 Vacation (alley in Factory Place Addition)
14309  8-22-2000 Vacation (utility easement in First United Methodist Church of Fort Worth
                 Addition)
14310  8-22-2000 Vacation (portion of Old Handley Road)
14311  8-22-2000 Vacation (alley in University Place Addition)
       8-22-
14312  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 8-
       23-2000
14313  8-29-2000 Extending a moratorium on acceptance of applications for permits for erection of
                 any attached on-premises sign exceeding 500 square feet in area
14314  8-29-2000 Suspending until the earlier of 11-30-2000 or the effectiveness of a rate order
14315  8-29-2000 Vacation (utility easement in Oakmont Meadows Addition)
14316  8-29-2000 Vacation (two utility easements in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
14317  8-29-2000 Disannexation (4.00 acre tract of land)
14318  8-29-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       8-29-
14319  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 8-
       30-2000
14320  8-29-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14321  9-5-2000  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       9-5-2000;
14322  eff. 9-6- Fund (Miscellaneous Park Improvement Fund)
       2000
       9-5-2000;
14323  eff. 9-6- Fund (Information Systems Fund)
       2000
14324  9-5-2000  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
14325  9-5-2000  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14326  9-5-2000  Fund (Grants Fund)
       9-5-2000;
14327  eff. 9-6- Fund (Capital Project Reserve Fund)
       2000
       9-5-2000;
14328  eff. 9-6- Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       2000
       9-5-2000;
14329  eff. 9-6- Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
       2000
       9-5-2000;
14330  eff. 9-6- Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       2000
                 App. A, 5.134,
       9-5-2000; App. A, 5.306,
14331  eff. 9-   App. A, 6.201,
       14-2000   App. A, .9.101
                 §§ 2, 3, 4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
                 § 8 superseded by Ord. 17872-11-2007
14332  9-12-2000 Annexation (2.662 acre tract of land)
14333  9-12-2000 Annexation (40.000 acre tract of land)
14334  9-12-2000 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
       9-12-
14335  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       13-2000
14336  9-12-2000 Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
       9-12-
14337  2000;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 9-   §§ 1—7 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       22-2000
14338  9-12-2000 Rezoning
                 Authorizing the delivery and execution of one or more interest rate swap
14339  9-19-2000 agreements in connection with city water and sewer system subordinate lien
                 revenue bonds series 1999A
       9-19-
14340  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       20-2000
       9-19-
14341  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-
       20-2000
       9-19-
14342  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       20-2000
                 17-1,
                 17-16,
                 17-17,
                 17-18,
                 17-19,
                 17-20,
                 17-21,
                 17-46,
                 17-47,
                 17-48,
                 17-49,
                 17-52 ,
                 17-53 ,
                 17-66,
                 17-67,
                 17-68,
                 17-69,
                 17-71 ,
       9-26-     17-72 ,
14344  2000;     17-86,
       eff. 10-  17-87,
       19-2000   17-88,
                 17-89,
                 17-90,
                 17-91,
                 17-92,
                 17-93,
                 17-94,
                 17-95,
                 17-96,
                 17-97,
                 17-98,
                 17-99,
                 17-100,
                 17-101,
                 17-102,
                 17-103,
                 17-104,
                 17-105,
                 17-106
       9-26-
14345  2000;     Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
14346  9-26-2000 Amending Ord. 11382 to reduce the amount of funding required for the reserve
                 account
       9-26-
14347  2000;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2000
       9-26-
14348  2000;     35-56
       eff. 1-1-
       2001
       9-26-
14349  2000;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2000
14350  9-26-2000 Vacation (portions of Avenue I)
14351  9-26-2000 Vacation (portions of Avenue I in AH Fish Addition)
       9-26-
14352  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
       9-26-
14353  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
       9-26-
14354  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
       9-26-
14355  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
       9-26-
14356  2000;     Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
       eff. 9-
       27-2000
14357  9-26-2000 Zoning; permitted uses
14358  10-3-2000 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
14359  10-3-2000 Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
14360  10-3-2000 Annexation (115.9 acre tract of land)
14361  10-3-2000 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       10-3-
14362  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       4-2000
14363  10-3-2000 Rezoning
       10-10-
14364  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14365  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14366  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14367  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14368  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14369  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
       10-10-
14370  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       11-2000
14371  10-10-    Zoning; permitted uses in specific locations
       2000
14372  10-17-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
       2000      and improvement bonds series 2000B
14373  10-17-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2000      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
14374  10-17-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2000
14375  10-17-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2000      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
14376  10-17-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2000
14377  10-17-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2000      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
14378  10-17-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2000
14379  10-17-    Zoning; permitted uses in specific locations
       2000
       10-17-
14380  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       18-2000
       10-17-
14381  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       18-2000
       10-17-
14382  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       18-2000
       10-17-
14383  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       18-2000
14384  10-17-    Rezoning
       2000
       10-24-
14385  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       25-2000
14386  10-24-    Fund (easements in Hicks Airfield Addition)
       2000
14387  11-14-    Annexation (405.525 acre tract of land)
       2000
       10-24-
14388  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 10-
       25-2000
       10-24-
14389  2000;     Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
       eff. 10-
       25-2000
       10-24-
14390  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 10-
       25-2000
14391  10-24-    Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
       2000
14392  10-24-    Fund (Rental Rehab Program Fund)
       2000
14393  10-24-    Zoning; permitted uses in specific locations
       2000
14394  10- -2000 Dallas-Forth Worth International Airport joint revenue commercial paper notes
                 series A
       10-31-
14395  2000;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       1-2000
       10-31-
14396  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       1-2000
       10-31-
14397  2000;     Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       1-2000
       10-31-
14398  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 11-
       1-2000
       11-7-
14399  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 11-
       8-2000
       11-7-
14400  2000;     Fund (Insurance Fund)
       eff. 11-
       8-2000
14401  11-7-2000 12.5-123
14402  11-7-2000 App. B, 11A-100
       11-7-
14403  2000;     App. A, 8.101
       eff. 12-
       4-2000
14404  11-7-2000 7-125
14405  11-7-2000 Fund (Airports Fund)
       11-7-
14406  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       8-2000
       11-7-
14407  2000;     Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       8-2000
       11-7-
14408  2000;     Fund (Group Health Fund)
       eff. 11-
       8-2000
14409  11-14-    Extending a moratorium on acceptance of applications for permits for erection of
       2000      any attached on-premises sign exceeding 500 square feet in area
       11-14-
14410  2000;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 11-
       15-2000
       11-14-
14411  2000;     Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       eff. 11-
       15-2000
11412  11-14-    Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in C.K. Gleason Survey)
       2000
14413  11-14-    Annexation (51.0 acre tract of land)
       2000
       11-14-
14414  2000;     Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
       eff. 11-
       15-2000
       11-14-
14415  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 11-
       15-2000
       11-14-
14416  2000;     Fund (Aviation Capital Improvement Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       15-2000
       11-21-
14417  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 11-
       22-2000
       11-21-
14418  2000;     Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
       eff. 11-
       22-2000
       11-21-
14419  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 11-
       22-2000
       11-21-
14420  2000;     Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
       eff. 11-
       22-2000
14421  11-28-    Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       2000
       11-28-
14422  200; eff. Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       11-29-
       2000
       12-5-
14423  2000;     Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
       eff. 12-
       6-2000
       12-5-
14424  2000;     Vacation (alley in Grand View Addition)
       eff. 12-
       6-2000
       12-5-
14425  2000;     Vacation (portion of Bryce Avenue right-of-way)
       eff. 12-
       6-2000
       12-5-
14426  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 12-
       6-2000
14427  12-12-    Granting a license to PF. Net Network Service Corp.
       2000
14428  12-12-    Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
       2000
       12-12-
14429  2000;     Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
       eff. 12-
       13-2000
       12-12-
14430  2000;     Fund (Office Services Fund)
       eff. 12-
       13-2000
14431  12-12-    Annexation (403.0 acre tract of land)
       2000
14432            
14433  12-12-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2000
       12-12-
14434  2000;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 12-
       13-2000
       12-12-
14435  2000;     Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
       eff. 12-
       13-2000
       12-12-
14436  2000;     §§ 1—4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 12-  § 5 deleted App. A, App. B, Exhibits B.1 and B.2
       19-2000
       12-12-
14437  2000;     App. A, 2.101
       eff. 2-1-
       2000
14438  12-12-    Establishing maximum rates and charges that TXU Gas Distribution may charge
       2000
14439  12-19-    4-3.1
       2000
       12-19-
14440  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 12-
       20-2000
14441  12-19-    Designating a certain contiguous geographic area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
       2000      Zone No. 5
       12-19-
14442  2000;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 12-
       20-2000
14443  12-19-    Vacation (alley in Goldsmith Subdivision)
       2000
14444  12-19-    Vacation (access easement in Hicks Airfield Addition)
       2000
14445  12-19-    Vacation (ingress/egress and utility, open space and sanitary sewer easements in
       2000      Tarrant Savings Plaza Addition)
14446  12-19-    Vacation (portion of Caylor North Road right-of-way)
       2000
14447  12-19-    Vacation (alleys lying between Hulen Street and Sanguinet Street)
       2000
14448  12-19-    Vacation (alley right-of-way in Polytechnic Heights Addition)
       2000
14449  12-19-    Closing an alley in South Hemphill Heights Addition)
       2000
14450  12-19-    Vacation ( segment of Warren Street right-of-way)
       2000
14451  1-9-2001  Annexation (269.3 acre tract of land)
14452  1-9-2001  Annexation (221.302 acre tract of land)
14453  1-9-2001  Annexation (122.0 acre tract of land)
14454  1-9-2001  Annexation (49.8 acre tract of land)
14455  1-9-2001  Annexation (201.0 acre tract of land)
14456  1-9-2001  Annexation (372.0 acre tract of land)
       12-19-
14457  2000;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 12-
       20-2000
14458  12-19-    Rezoning
       2000
14459  1-2-2001  Fund (various funds)
       1-2-2001;
14460  eff. 1-3- Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Fund)
       2001
14461  1-2-2001  Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
14462  1-2-2001  Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
       1-2-2001;
14463  eff. 1-3- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14464  1-2-2001  Vacation (11 drainage and utility easements in Chapel Hill Addition)
14465  1-2-2001  Vacation (utility easement in Ridgecrest Addition)
14466  1-2-2001  Vacation (public access easement Campus Business Park)
14467  1-2-2001  Vacation (drainage and utility easement in Mercantile Center Addition)
14468  1-2-2001  Vacation (portion of 200 block of Cantey Street)
14469  1-2-2001  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14470  1-2-2001  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
14471  1-2-2001  Fund (General Fund)
14472  1-9-2001  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
                 Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats, unified
14473  1-9-2001  residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits and
                 other development permits for certain properties located south of Interstate 30
                 east
14474  1-9-2001  Vacation (Mercantile Center Drive and a portion of Mercantile Plaza Drive)
14475  1-9-2001  Vacation (drainage easement located within Dynasty Drive)
14476  1-9-2001  Annexation (78.3304 acre tract of land)
14477  1-9-2001  Annexation (27.04 acre tract of land)
       1-9-2001;
14478  eff. 1-   Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14479  eff. 1-   Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14480  eff. 1-   Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14481  eff. 1-   Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14482  eff. 1-   Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14483  eff. 1-   Fund (General Fund)
       10-2004
       1-9-2001;
14484  eff. 1-   Rezoning
       22-2004
14485  1-16-2001 7-47
14486  1-16-2001 7-167
14487  1-16-2001 26-2
14488  1-16-2001 11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       1-16-
14489  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 1-
       17-2001
       1-16-
14490  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       17-2001
                 Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats, unified
14491  1-16-2001 residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits and
                 other development permits for certain properties located on the western shore of
                 Lake Arlington
       1-16-
14492  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 1-
       17-2001
14493  1-23-2001 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2001
14494  1-23-2001 Amending Ord. 8291, 10193, 12105 and 13718, a franchise agreement with Charter
                 Communications
14495  1-23-2001 Extending a moratorium on acceptance of applications for permits for erection of
                 any attached on-premises sign exceeding 500 square feet in area
14496  1-23-2001 Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien and
                 revenue series 2001
       1-23-
14497  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       24-2001
       1-23-
14498  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 1-
       24-2001
       1-30-
14499  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       31-2001
       1-30-
14500  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       31-2001
       1-30-
14501  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 1-
       31-2001
14502  1-30-2001 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with the City of Lake Worth
       1-30-
14503  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 1-
       31-2001
       2-6-2001;
14504  eff. 2-7- Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14505  eff. 2-7- Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14506  eff. 2-7- Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14507  eff. 2-7- Fund (Park Improvement Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14508  eff. 2-7- Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14509  eff. 2-7- Fund (Airport Capital Projects Fund)
       2001
       2-6-2001; Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
14510  eff. 2-7- office of the municipal government of the city
       2001
       2-6-2001;
14511  eff. 2-7- Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14512  2-13-2001 Ordering an election
       2-13-
14513  2001;     Fund (State Revolving Fund Sewer)
       eff. 2-
       14-2001
14514  2-13-2001 Amending Ord. 7323 by revising the boundaries of City Council single member
                 districts
14515  2-13-2001 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
       2-13-
14516  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       14-2001
14517  2-13-2001 Superseded by Ord. 17872-11-2007
       2-13-
14518  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-
       15-2001
       2-20-
14519  2001;     Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14520  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14521  2001;     Fund (Special Trust Fund0
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14522  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
14523  2-20-2001 Vacation (alley in Standford Subdivision)
14524  2-20-2001 Vacation (alley in Southland Subdivision)
       2-20-
14525  2001;     Fund (Capital Project Reserve Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14526  2001;     Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14527  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14528  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14529  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
       2-20-
14530  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 2-
       21-2001
14531  2-27-2001 Providing for the issuance of general purpose improvement and refunding bonds
                 series 2001
14532  2-27-2001 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2001
14533  2-27-2001 Approving Res. 2001-02-49 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       2-27-
14534  2001;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 2-
       28-2001
14535  2-27-2001 Vacation (Keller-Haslet/Haslet Roanoke Road)
14536  2-27-2001 Vacation (utility easement Sylvania Park Addition)
14537  2-27-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14538  2-26-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14539  2-26-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14540  2-27-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14541  2-26-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14542  3-6-2001  Fund (a portion of Norris Street)
14543  3-6-2001  Fund (utility easement in Lawn Terrace Addition)
14544  3-6-2001  Vacation (portion of Arizona Avenue)
14545  3-6-2001  Vacation (utility easement in East Handley Heights Addition)
14546  3-6-2001  Vacation (utility easement in Linkwood Estates Addition)
14547  3-6-2001  Vacation (street right-of-way in Bluff Ridge Addition)
14548  3-6-2001  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
14549  3-6-2001  Fund (General Fund)
       3-6-2001;
14550  eff. 3-7- Fund (General Fund)
       2001
14551  3-20-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
       3-20-
14552  2001;     Establishing unit prices for city participation in community facilities
       eff. 3-   agreements
       21-2001
14553  3-20-2001 Vacation (portion of east-west alley in Polytechnic Heights Addition)
14554  3-20-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
14555  3-20-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
       3-20-     App. A, 6.300,
14556  2001;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 4-3- §§ 2—7 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       2001
14557  3-20-2001 App. A, 6.301
                 § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       3-20-
14558  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 4-5-
       2001
14559  3-27-2001 Appointing substitute municipal judges
       3-27-
14560  2001;     Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
14561  3-27-2001 Fund (General Fund)
       3-27-
14562  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14563  2001;     Fund (Municipal Airport Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14564  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14565  2001;     Fund (Grants Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14566  2001;     Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
14567  3-27-2001 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       3-27-
14568  2001;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14569  2001;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14570  2001;     Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14571  2001;     Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14572  2001;     Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
       3-27-
14573  2001;     Fund (General Fund)
       eff. 3-
       28-2001
14574  3-27-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14575  4-3-2001  Fund (Unreserved Undesignated Insurance Fund)
14576  4-4-2001  Appointing Robb Catalano as municipal judge
                 2-290,
14577  4-4-2001  2-291,
                 2-294,
                 2-296
14578  4-3-2001  Superseded by Ord. 16188
14579  4-4-2001  Readopting and amending the standards of care for youth programs
14580  4-4-2001  Fund (Insurance Fund)
14581  4-3-2001  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14582  4-4-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14583  4-10-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14584  4-10-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14585  4-10-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14586  4-10-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14587  4-10-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14588  4-13-2001 Rezoning
14589  4-17-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14590  4-17-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14591  4-17-2001 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14592  4-17-2001 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14593  4-17-2001 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
14594  4-17-2001 Fund (Special Assessment Fund)
14595  4-17-2001 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
14596  4-24-2001 Allowing the creation of head in parking spaces at 300 West Third Street
14597  4-24-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14598  4-24-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14599  4-24-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14600  4-24-2001 Rezoning
14601  5-1-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14602  5-1-2001  Authorizing promissory note
14603  5-1-2001  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14604  5-1-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14605  5-1-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
                 Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats, unified
14606  5-1-2001  residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits and
                 other development permits for certain properties located south of Interstate 30
                 East
14607  5-1-2001  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
14608  5-8-2001  Repealed by Ord. 22838-08-2017
14609  5-8-2001  Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
14610  5-8-2001  Fund (General Fund)
                 Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats, unified
14611  5-8-2001  residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits and
                 other development permits for certain properties located in the vicinity of the
                 western shore of Lake Arlington
14612  5-8-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14613  5-8-2001  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14614  5-8-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14615  5-8-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
       5-8-2001;
14616  eff. 6-   Rezoning
       13-2001
       5-15-
14617  2001;     23-19
       eff. 6-
       13-2001
14618  5-15-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14619  5-15-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14620  5-15-2001 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
14621  5-15-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14622  5-15-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14623  5-15-2001 Providing for the appoint of Fort Worth Health Authority
                 App. A, 5.128,
                 App. A, 5.134,
                 App. A, 5.305,
14624  5-15-2001 App. A, 5.403,
                 App. A, 6.506
                 §§ 1, 5, 8, 9, 10 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
                 § 2 repealed App. A, 5.105
                 § 3 repealed App. A, 5.119
       5-15-
14625  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-
       13-2001
14626  5-22-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14627  5-22-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14628  5-22-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
                 7-77.1,
                 7-101,
14629  5-22-2001 7-103,
                 7-104,
                 7-105,
                 7-108
14630  5-22-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14631  5-22-2001 Vacation (utility easement in Cityview Addition)
14632  5-14-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14633  5-22-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14634  5-22-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14635  5-29-2001 Fund (Insurance Fund)
14636  5-29-2001 Vacation (alley in Walker’s Addition)
14637  5-29-2001 Vacation (segment of Leslie Street)
14638  5-29-2001 Vacation (portion of Nine Mile Bridge Road)
14639  5-29-2001 Vacation (utility easement in John W. Sandifer’s Subdivision)
14640  5-29-2001 Vacation (utility easement in B. Harris Subdivision)
14641  6-5-2001  Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
14642  6-5-2001  Street Improvements Capital Improvement Project; Parks and Community Service
                 Capital Improvement Project
14643  6-5-2001  Fund (Street Improvements Capital Project Fund)
14644  6-5-2001  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14645  6-5-2001  Fund ((Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       6-5-2001; 7-46,
14646  eff. 7-1- 7-47,
       2001      7-48,
                 7-49
       6-5-2001; 7-166,
14647  eff. 7-1- 7-167,
       2001      7-168,
                 7-169
       6-5-2001; 26-1,
14648  eff. 7-1- 26-2,
       2001      26-3,
                 26-4
       6-5-2001; 7-61,
14649  eff. 7-1- 7-62,
       2002      7-63,
                 7-64
       6-5-2001; 11-1—
14650  eff. 7-1- 11-4; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       2001
       6-5-2001;
14651  eff. 7-1- Repealed by Ord. 15953
       2001
                 13-1,
14652A 6-25-2001 13-2,
                 13-3,
                 13-4
                 13-1,
14652B 6-25-2001 13-2,
                 13-3,
                 13-4
14653  6-5-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14654  6-6-2001  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14655  6-5-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14656  6-5-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-12-
       2001;
14657  eff. 6-   Repealed by Ord. 22650-04-2017
       22-2001
       and 9-1-
       2001
14658  6-12-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14659  6-12-2001 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
14660  6-12-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14661  6-12-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14662  6-12-2001 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
       6-12-
14663  2001;     App. A, 8.101
       eff. 6-
       22-2001
       6-12-
14664  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-
       29-2001
       6-19-
14665  2001;     Amending Ord. 14427 by revising the number and location of linear feet of public
       eff. 7-   right-of-way authorized for use by PF. Network Service Corp.
       19-2001
14666  6-19-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-19-
14667  2001;     Amending Ord. 14458 to correct legal descriptions
       eff. 6-
       28-2001
                 Extending a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats,
14668  6-19-2001 unified residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits
                 and other development permits for certain properties located in the vicinity of
                 the western shore of Lake Arlington
14669  6-19-2001 Annexation (1533.2 acre tract of land)
14670  6-19-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14671  6-19-2001 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
14672  6-19-2001 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
       6-19-
14673  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       12-2001
14674  6-26-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14675  6-26-2001 Approving Res. 97-11-319 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       6-26-     App. B, 11A-7,
14676  2001;     App. B, 11A-27,
       eff. 7-3- App. B, 11A-28
       2001
14677  6-26-2001 Vacation (emergency access easement in Harris Hospital Addition)
14678  6-26-2001 Vacation (alley in Van Zandt Park Addition)
14679  6-26-2001 Vacation (utility easements in Lawn Terrace Addition)
14680  6-26-2001 Fund (Capital Projects reserve Fund)
14681  6-26-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14682  6-26-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14683  6-26-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14684  6-26-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14685  6-26-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14686  7-10-2001 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2001A
14687  7-10-2001 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2001B
14688  7-10-2001 13-1
14689  7-10-2001 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
14690  7-10-2001 Appointing municipal judge
14691  7-10-2001 Vacation (portion of McKenzie Street)
14692  7-10-2001 Vacation (utility easement in Starks Addition)
14693  7-10-2001 Vacation (utility easement in Sprint Communication Addition)
14694  7-10-2001 Vacation (miscellaneous street rights-of-way, drainage and utility easements)
14695  7-10-2001 Changing the name of Bankhead Highway/Weatherford Highway to Camp Bowie West
14696  7-17-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14697  7-17-2001 Repealed by Ord. 21652-02-2015
                 App. B, 11A-1, App. B, 11A-2, App. B, 11A-3, App. B, 11A-4 (Repealed by Ord.
                 24030-02-2020) ,
14698  7-17-2001 App. B, 11A-6,
                 App. B, 11A-7,
                 App. B, 11A-24
                 12.5-100,
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-107,
14699  7-17-2001 12.5-111,
                 12.5-800,
                 12.5-801,
                 12.5-831,
                 12.5-851
14700  7-17-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14701  7-17-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14702  7-17-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14703  7-17-2001 Establishing a moratorium on the acceptance of applications for planned
                 development zoning for drilling and production of oil and gas
14704  7-17-2001 Annexation (226 acre tract of land)
14705  7-17-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14706  7-17-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14707  7-17-2001 Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14708  7-17-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14709  7-17-2001 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
14710  7-17-2001 Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
14711  7-17-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14712  7-17-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       7-17-     App. A, 5.305,
14713  2001;     App. A, 6.300,
       eff. 7-   App. A, 9.101
       26-2001
       7-17-
14714  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-1-
       2001
14715  7-24-2001 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
14716  7-24-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14717  7-24-2001 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
14718  7-24-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14719  7-24-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14720  7-24-2001 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
14721  7-24-2001 Vacation (portion of Thirteenth Street and Houston Street)
14722  7-24-2001 Vacation (alley in Grandview Addition)
14723  7-24-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14724  7-24-2001 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
14725  7-24-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14726  7-24-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14727  7-24-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14728  7-31-2001 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
14729  7-31-2001 Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds series 2001A
14730  7-31-2001 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2001A
14731  7-31-2001 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2001B
14732  7-31-2001 Fund (Office Services Fund)
14733  7-31-2001 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
14734  7-31-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14735  7-31-2001 Vacation (portion of Modlin Avenue)
14736  7-31-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14737  8-9-2001  Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 38
14738  8-9-2001  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
14739  8-9-2001  Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14740  8-9-2001  Fund (Commercial Paper Sewer Fund)
14741  8-9-2001  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
14742  8-9-2001  Fund (Grants Fund)
14743  8-9-2001  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       8-9-2001;
14744  eff. 8-   Rezoning
       28-2001
       8-14-
14745  2001;     Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
       eff. 8-   office of the municipal government of the city
       30-2001
14746  8-14-2001 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
       8-14-
14747  2001;     Repealed by Ord. 15953
       eff. 8-
       22-2001
14748  8-14-2001 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
14749  8-14-2001 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
14750  8-14-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14751  8-14-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       8-14-
14752  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-
       29-2001
14753  8-21-2001 Fund (Grant Fund)
       8-21-
14754  2001;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
       eff. 8-
       28-2001
14755  8-21-2001 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
14756  8-21-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14757  8-21-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14758  8-28-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14759  8-28-2001 35-70.5
14760  8-28-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-28-
14761  2001;     Amending Ord. 12414 increasing number of taxicabs operated by Yellow Checker cab
       eff. 2-   Co.
       20-2002
       8-28-
14762  2001;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2001
14763  8-28-2001 Vacation (portion of Malvey Avenue)
14764  8-28-2001 Vacation (private drive, taxiway and emergency access easement in Hicks
                 Airfield)
14765  8-28-2001 Fund (3 private drives, taxiways and emergency access easements in Hicks
                 Airfield)
14766  9-11-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14767  9-11-2001 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 1
14768  9-11-2001 Extending a moratorium on the acceptance of applications for planned development
                 zoning for drilling and production of oil and gas
14769  9-11-2001 Fund (Public Events Fund)
14770  9-11-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14771  9-11-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14772  9-18-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14773  9-18-2001 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
14774  9-18-2001 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
14775  9-18-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14776  9-18-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14777  9-18-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14778  9-18-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14779  8-9-2001  Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
       9-18-
14780  2001;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 9-   § 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       26-2001
       9-18-
14781  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 10-
       12-2001
14782  9-25-2001 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
14783  9-25-2001 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
14784  9-25-2001 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
14785  9-25-2001 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
14786  9-25-2001 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
14787  9-25-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14788  9-25-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14789  9-25-2001 Fund (Office Services Fund)
14790  9-25-2001 Vacation (emergency access easement in United Services Center Addition)
14791  9-25-2001 Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in L.C. King Survey)
14792  10-2-2001 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
14793  10-2-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
                 2-56,
                 2-57,
14794  10-2-2001 2-58,
                 2-59,
                 2-60,
                 2-61
14795  10-2-2001 Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
       10-2-
14796  2001;     35-56
       eff. 1-1-
       2002
14797  10-2-2001 Vacation (drainage easement in Byers and McCart Addition
14798  10-2-2001 Vacation (utility easement in Vista Hills Addition)
14799  10-2-2001 Vacation (maintenance and utility easement in Summerfields Addition)
14800  10-2-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14801  10-2-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14802  10-2-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14803  10-2-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14804  10-9-2001 Fund (Insurance Fund)
14805  10-9-2001 Amending Ord. 14300 granting a franchise to Wideopenwest Texas LLC
14806  10-9-2001 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
14807  10-9-2001 Vacation (utility easements in Marine Creek Estates Addition)
14808  10-9-2001 Annexation (226 acre tract of land)
14809  10-9-2001 Vacation (alley in Shaw-Clark Addition)
14810  10-9-2001 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
14811  10-9-2001 Fund (Parks and Community Service Improvements Fund)
14812  10-9-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-9-
14813  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 10-
       18-2001
14814  10-16-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2001      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
14815  10-16-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14816  10-16-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2001      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
14817  10-16-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14818  10-16-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2001      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
14819  10-16-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14820  10-16-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2001      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
14821  10-16-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14822  10-16-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14823  10-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2001
14824  10-16-    Vacation (roadway easement along the east side of Clifton Street)
       2001
14825  10-16-    Vacation (private access easements in Hicks Airfield Addition)
       2001
14826  10-16-    Vacation (street right-of-way known as Darcy Avenue)
       2001
14827  10-16-    Vacation (portion of Sunset Drive)
       2001
14828  10-16-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14829  10-16-    Rezoning
       2001
14830  10-23-    Fund (Airport Fund)
       2001
14831  10-23-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
                 17-1,
       10-23-    17-46,
       2001;     17-47,
14832  eff. 10-  17-48,
       29-2003   17-49,
                 17-52,
                 17-53
14833  10-23-    Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in BBB & C R.R. Company Survey)
       2001
14834  10-23-    Changing the name of West Arlington Street to Kensington Court
       2001
14835  10-30-    Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       2001
14836  10-30-    Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
       2001      and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 10
14837  10-30-    Fund (General Fund)
       2001
14838  10-30-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2001
14839  10-30-    Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
       2001
14840  10-30-    Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Keller
       2001
14841  10-30-    13-27
       2001
14842  10-30-    Fund (Parks and Recreation Improvements Fund)
       2001
14843  11-6-2001 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14844  11-6-2001 Granting a franchise to Cantera Gas Gathering Inc.
14845  11-6-2001 Fund (General Fund)
14846  11-6-2001 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
14847  11-6-2001 Fund (Grants Fund)
14848  11-6-2001 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
14849  11-13-    2-83
       2001
14850  11-13-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14851  11-13-    Fund (General Fund)
       2001
14852  11-13-    Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
       2001
14853  11-13-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14854  11-13-    Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       2001
14855  11-13-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14856  11-13-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14857  11-13-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14858  11-13-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       2001
       11-13-
14859  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       5-2001
14860  11-20-    10-18
       2001
14861  11-20-    Annexation (42.04 acre tract of land)
       2001
14862  11-20-    Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Lake Worth
       2001
14863  11-20-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14864  11-20-    Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       2001
14865  11-20-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14866  11-20-    Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       2001
       11-20-
14867  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       7-2001
       11-20-    Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats and
14868  2001      applications for building permits and other development permits for certain
                 properties located on the western shore of Lake Arlington
14869  11-27-    Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       2001
14870  11-27-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
       11-27-
14871  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       7-2001
       11-27-    App. A, 9.101
14872  2001;     § 2 superseded by Ord. 20510-12-2012
       eff. 12-  §§ 3, 4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       7-2001
14873  12-4-2001 Fund (Special Marketing Fund)
       12-4-
14874  2001;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
       eff. 1-1-
       2002
       12-4-     22-284,
14875  2001;     30-2,
       eff. 12-  30-7
       7-2001
14876  12-4-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14877  12-4-2001 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14878  12-4-2001 Rezoning
14879  12-11-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds series
       2001      2001
       12-11-
14880  2001;     Superseded by Ord. 16986-06-2006
       eff. 1-1-
       2002
14881  12-11-    Amending Ord. 13701 authorizing the issuance of equipment tax notes
       2001
14882  12-11-    Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 39
       2001
       12-11-    7-41,
14883  2001;     7-42,
       eff. 1-1- 7-43,
       2002      7-44
14884  12-11-    Establishing a moratorium on the acceptance of applications for planned
       2001      development zoning for drilling and production of oil and gas
14885  12-11-    Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
       2001
       12-12-
14886  2001; eff Repealed by Ord. 15655
       12-17-
       2001
14887  12-11-    Fund (General Fund)
       2001
14888  12-11-    Annexation (2089.587 acre tract of land)
       2001
14889  12-11-    Annexation (2.6012 acre tract of land)
       2001
14890  12-11-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14891  12-11-    Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
       2001
14892  12-11-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
       12-11-
14893  2001; eff Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       1-7-2002
       12-11-    App. A, 2.104,
14894  2001; eff App. A, 6.301
       2-11-2002 §§ 1, 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       12-11-
14895  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 1-8-
       2002
       12-18-
14896  2001;     22-179
       eff. 1-1-
       2002
14897  12-18-    Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14898  12-18-    Vacation (utility easement in Harris Hospital Addition)
       2001
14899  12-18-    Vacation (utility easement in Lake Worth Leases)
       2001
14900  12-18-    Vacation (sanitary sewer easements Rockwood Center Addition)
       2001
14901  12-18-    Vacation (utility easement in Kennedy Addition)
       2001
14902  12-18-    Vacation (water line easement in WW Wheat Survey)
       2001
14903  12-18-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14904  12-18-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14905  12-18-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14906  12-18-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2001
14907  12-18-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14908  12-18-    Fund (General Fund)
       2001
14909  12-18-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2001
14910  12-18-    Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
       2001
       12-18-    App. A, 5.104,
14911  2001;     App. A, 5.305
       eff. 12-  § 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       28-2001
       12-18-
14912  2001;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       24-2001
14913  1-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
14914  1-3-2002  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14915  1-3-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14916  1-3-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14917  1-8-2002  Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2002
14918  1-8-2002  Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
14919  1-8-2002  Vacation (public access easement located in South Meadow Addition)
14920  1-8-2002  Vacation (drainage easement Westview Addition)
14921  1-8-2002  Vacation (portion of Texan Drive)
14922  1-8-2002  Changing the name of Leadawn Court to Kay Lea Dawn Court
14923  1-8-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14924  1-8-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14925  1-8-2002  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
14926  1-8-2002  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
14927  1-8-2002  Fund (General Fund)
       1-8-2002;
14928  eff. 1-   Rezoning
       16-2002
                 7-394,
       1-15-     7-396,
14929  2002;     7-401,
       eff. 1-   7-402,
       22-2003   7-403,
                 7-404
14930  1-15-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14931  1-15-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14932  1-15-2002 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       1-22-
14933  2002;     7-47
       eff. 1-
       28-2002
                 2-286,
                 2-292,
                 12.5-139,
                 12.5-146,
14934  1-22-2002 12.5-157,
                 20-354
                 § 1 repealed §§ 2-164—2-166
                 § 7 repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
                 § 9 was superseded by Ord. 20020-12-2011
                 § 10 was repealed by Ord. 15655
14935  1-22-2002 Superceded
14936  1-22-2002 Repealed by Ord. 18320-09-2008
14937  1-22-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14938  1-22-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14939  1-22-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14940  1-22-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14941  1-22-2002 Fund (Capital Project Fund)
14942  1-22-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14943  1-22-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14944  1-29-2002 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2002
14945  1-29-2002 Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds series 2002
14946  1-29-2002 Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
14947  1-29-2002 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
14948  1-29-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14949  1-29-2002 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
14950  1-29-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14951  1-29-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14952  1-29-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14953  1-29-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14954  2-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
14955  2-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
14956  2-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
14957  2-5-2002  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
14958  2-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
14959  2-12-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14960  2-12-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14961  2-12-2002 Appointing municipal judges
14962  2-12-2002 Appointing substitute municipal judges
       2-12-
14963  2002;     Amending Ord. 14234 by decreasing the number of taxicabs which Cowboy Cab Co. is
       eff. 2-   authorized to operate
       19-2002
       2-12-
14964  2002;     Amending Ord. 14233 by decreasing the number of taxicabs which Darya Cab Co. is
       eff. 2-   authorized to operate
       26-2002
14965  2-12-2002 Vacation (sanitary sewer easement located in Marine Creek Estates Addition)
14966  2-12-2002 Vacation (utility easement at the Vineyards at Heritage Addition)
14967  2-12-2002 Vacation (utility easement at the Coventry Hills Addition)
14968  2-12-2002 Vacation (utility easement at the Coventry Hills Addition)
14969  2-12-2002 Annexation (224.681 acre tract of land)
14970  2-12-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14971  2-12-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14972  2-12-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
       2-12-
14973  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-1-
       2002
14974  2-19-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14975  2-19-2002 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 40
                 Providing for a moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats,
14976  2-19-2002 unified residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits
                 and other development permits for certain properties located on the western
                 shore of Lake Arlington
14977  2-19-2002 Fund (Parks Improvement Fund)
14978  2-19-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Cook’s Meadow Addition)
14979  2-19-2002 Fund (Capital Project Reserve Fund)
14980  2-19-2002 Fund (Fire Services Fund)
14981  2-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
14982  2-19-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14983  2-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
14984  2-19-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
14985  2-19-2002 Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
14986  2-19-2002 App. A, 2.104
14987  2-19-2002 App. A, 6.301
                 § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       2-19-
14988  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-8-
       2002
14989  2-26-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14990  2-26-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14991  2-26-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
14992  2-26-2002 Fund (various funds)
14993  2-26-2002 Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
14994  2-26-2002 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
14995  2-26-2002 Fund (Public Events FF&E Fund)
14996  2-26-2002 Adopting 2002 Comprehensive Plan
14997  2-26-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
14998  2-26-2002 Vacation (3 utility easements in B.B.B & C R.R. Survey)
                 Vacation (the 1100 and 1200 Block of Crawford Street; the 300 Block of Magnolia
14999  2-26-2002 Avenue, the 1100 Block of Bryan Street, and the 200-300 Block of Oleander
                 Street, Rosedale Addition and Max K. Mayers Addition
15000  2-26-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15001  3-5-2002  13-2
15002  3-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15003  3-5-2002  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15004  3-5-2002  Fund (Public Events Fund)
15005  3-5-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15006  3-5-2002  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15007  3-5-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15008  3-5-2002  Fund (Hotel Development Fund)
15009  3-19-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15010  3-19-2002 Amending an ordinance authorizing issuance of equipment tax notes
15011  3-19-2002 Fund (Capital Project Fund)
15012  3-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15013  3-19-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15014  3-19-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15015  3-19-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15016  3-19-2002 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
15017  3-19-2002 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
15018  3-19-2002 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
15019  3-19-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15020  3-19-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Remington Point Addition)
15021  3-19-2002 Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Parkside East Addition)
15022  3-19-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15023  3-19-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15024  3-19-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15025  3-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15026  3-19-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15027  3-19-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15028  3-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15029  3-19-2002 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15030  3-19-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15031  3-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15032  3-19-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       3-19-
15033  2002;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 3-
       29-2002
       3-19-
15034  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-
       29-2002
15035  3-19-2002 Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in the Economic and Community
                 Development Department
15036  3-26-2002 Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in the City Manager’s office
15037  3-26-2002 Suspending until the earlier of 7-4-2002 or the effectiveness of a rate schedule
                 adopted by Council the rate schedule proposed TXU Gas Co.
15038  3-26-2002 Appointing substitute municipal judges
15039  3-26-2002 Appointing substitute municipal judges
15040  3-26-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15041  3-26-2002 Vacation (utility easement located in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
15042  3-26-2002 Vacation (a segment of 34th Street)
15043  3-26-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Sun Valley Addition)
15044  3-26-2002 Vacation (Alley located in Forest Park Place Addition)
15045  3-26-2002 Vacation (segment of Hilldale Road)
15046  3-26-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15047  3-26-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15048  3-26-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15049  3-26-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15050  3-26-2002 Fund (State Awards Asset Fund)
15051  3-26-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15052  3-26-2002 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
15053  4-2-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15054  4-2-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
                 Extending the moratorium on acceptance of concept plans, preliminary plats,
15055  4-2-2002  unified residential developmental site plans, applications for building permits
                 and other development permits for property located at 5736 Wilbarger Road
15056  4-2-2002  Allowing the creation of angle parking spaces at the property located at 1300
                 and 1400 Jones Street
15057  4-2-2002  Allowing the creation of 10 head in parking spaces located at 800 Travis Avenue
15058  4-2-2002  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15059  4-2-2002  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15060  4-2-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15061  4-2-2002  Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 2
15062  4-2-2002  Fund (General Fund)
15063  4-2-2002  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15064  4-2-2002  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
15065  4-2-2002  Repealing Ord. 14542 and vacating utility easements located in Edgewood Terrace
                 Addition
15066  4-9-2002  Amending in part the 32nd supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
15067  4-9-2002  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15068  4-9-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15069  4-9-2002  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15070  4-9-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15071  4-9-2002  Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
       4-9-2002;
15072  eff. 4-   Rezoning
       25-2002
15073  4-16-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15074  4-16-2002 Readopting standards of care for youth programs
15075  4-16-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15076  4-16-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       4-16-
15077  2002;     Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       eff. 4-
       23-2002
15078  4-16-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15079  4-16-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15080  4-16-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15081  4-16-2002 Rezoning
15082  4-23-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15083  4-23-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15084  4-23-2002 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15085  4-23-2002 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
15086  4-23-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15087  4-23-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15088  4-30-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15089  4-30-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15090  4-30-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15091  4-30-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
                 30-89,
                 30-90,
                 30-91,
                 30-92,
                 30-93,
       5-7-2002; 30-94,
15092  eff. 5-   30-95,
       15-2002   30-96,
                 30-97,
                 30-98,
                 30-99,
                 30-100,
                 30-101
15093  5-7-2002  Vacation (floodway easement located in Westview Addition)
15094  5-7-2002  Vacation (utility easement located in Harvest Ridge Addition)
                 35-81,
                 35-82,
15095  5-14-2002 35-83,
                 35-84,
                 35-85,
                 35-86
15096  5-14-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15097  5-14-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15098  5-14-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       5-14-
15099  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-
       30-2002
15100  5-21-2002 Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
                 revenue bonds series 2002
       4-30-
15101  2002;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
       eff. 5-
       30-2002
15102  5-21-2002 Vacation (drainage easement in Cityview Addition)
15103  5-21-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Summerfield Addition)
15104  5-21-2002 Vacation (alley in Aetna Land Company Subdivision)
15105  5-21-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Trentman City Addition)
15106  5-21-2002 Vacation (alley located in Anderson Subdivision)
15107  5-21-2002 Vacation (alley in Highland Park Addition)
15108  5-21-2002 Vacation (alley in MG Ellis Addition)
15109  5-21-2002 Vacation (portion of Harwen Terrace)
15110  5-21-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15111  5-21-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       5-21-
15112  2002;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 5-   §§ 1—3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       30-2002
15113  5-28-2002 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
15114  5-28-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
       5-28-
15115  2002;     Vacation (portion of Bryce Avenue)
       eff. 12-
       31-2002
15116  5-28-2002 Vacation (utility easements in Weisenberger Addition)
15117  5-28-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Stonegate Addition)
15118  5-28-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Trinity Place Addition)
15119  5-28-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Lot 1, Block 85R)
       6-4-2002;
15120  eff. 6-7- 23-20
       2002
15121  6-4-2002  Correcting Ord. 13684 to reflect Council’s decision in Z-98-143
15122  6-4-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15123  6-4-2002  Vacation (alley in Ryan’s Southeast Addition)
15124  6-4-2002  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15125  6-11-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       6-11-
15126  2002;     Granting a license and franchise to Citynet Telecommunications, Inc.
       eff. 7-
       10-2002
15127  6-11-2002 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
15128  6-11-2002 Vacation (fire lane, emergency access and utility easement in Cityview Addition)
15129  6-11-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
15130  6-11-2002 Vacation (portion of Eagle Mountain Dam Road)
15131  6-11-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15132  6-17-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       6-11-
15133  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-
       20-2002
       6-18-
15134  2002;     Granting a franchise to Citgo Products Pipeline Company
       eff. 7-
       16-2002
15135  6-18-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15136  6-18-2002 35-23
15137  6-20-2002 Vacation (alley near Vickery Place Addition)
15138  6-18-2002 Vacation (utility easement in River Hills Phase I)
15139  6-18-2002 Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
15140  - -       Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
15141  6-25-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-25-
15142  2002;     Superseded by Ord. 16188
       eff. 7-1-
       2002
15143  6-25-2002 Fund (Solid Waste Management Fund)
       6-25-
15144  2002;     10-9.1
       eff. 7-1-
       2002
15145  7-2-2002  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15146  7-9-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15147  7-9-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15148  7-9-2002  Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Isabel Flores Survey)
15949  7-9-2002  Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Isabel Flores Survey)
15150  7-9-2002  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
15151  7-9-2002  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       7-9-2002;
15152  eff. 7-   Rezoning
       23-2002
15153  7-16-2002 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
15154  7-16-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15155  7-16-2002 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
15156  7-16-2002 Vacation (alley in Ryan and Pruitt Addition)
15157  7-16-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15158  7-16-2002 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       7-16-
15159  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       29-2002
15160  7-23-2002 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 2
15161  7-23-2002 Changing the name of a portion of Judd Street to Talton Avenue
15162  7-23-2002 Vacation (sanitary sewer easement in Vickers East Lancaster Site)
15163  7-23-2002 Vacation (utility easement in original Town of Handley)
15164  7-25-2002 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Saginaw
       7-23-
15165  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       30-2002
       7-23-     App. A, 5.104,
15166  2002;     App. A, 5.305,
       eff. 7-   App. A, 9.101
       30-2002
15167  7-30-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15168  7-30-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15169  7-30-2002 Fund (State Revolving Fund)
15170  7-30-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15171  7-30-2002 Annexation (3.26 acre tract of land)
15172  7-30-2002 Vacation (4000 block of Halloran Street)
15173  7-30-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15174  7-30-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       7-30-
15175  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-5-
       2002
15176  8-8-2002  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15177  8-8-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-8-2002;
15178  eff. 8-   Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
       14-2002
15179  8-8-2002  Vacation (800 lock of West Leuda Avenue)
15180  8-8-2002  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15181  8-8-2002  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15182  - -       Fund (Grants Fund)
15183  - -       Fund (Grants Fund)
       9-17-
15184  2002;     Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
       eff. 9-   office of the municipal government of the city
       25-2002
                 Supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing Dallas/Fort Worth
15185  8- -2002  International Airport joint revenue improvement and refunding bonds, series
                 2002A
       8-13-
15186  2002;     Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport joint revenue auction rate bonds, series
       eff. 8-   2002B
       14-2002
       8-13-
15187  2002;     Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport joint revenue auction rate bonds, series
       eff. 8-   2002C
       14-2002
15188  8-13-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15189  8-13-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15190  8-13-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15191  8-13-2002 Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
15192  8-13-2002 Vacation (2.13 acre portion of Penn Street)
15193  8-13-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15194  8-13-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15195  8-13-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15196  8-13-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-13-
15197  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-
       22-2002
15198  8-20-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15199  8-20-2002 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
15200  8-27-2002 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       8-27-
15201  2002;     30-99
       eff. 9-4-
       2002
       8-27-
15202  2002;     Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       eff. 8-
       28-2002
       8-27-
15203  2002;     Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       eff. 8-
       28-2002
       8-27-
15204  2002;     Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       eff. 8-
       28-2002
       8-27-
15205  2002;     Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
       eff. 8-
       28-2002
15206  8-27-2002 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
15207  8-27-2002 Vacation (4 utility easements in the Villages of Woodland Springs Addition)
15208  8-27-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Stonegate Addition)
15209  8-27-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Mcanaulty’s and Nye’s Subdivision)
15210  8-27-2002 Vacation (drainage and utility easement in WR Howard Addition)
15211  8-27-2002 Vacation (utility easement in Rosen Northwest Subdivision)
       8-27-
15212  2002;     Vacation (3200 block of Hedrick Street)
       eff. 8-8-
       2003
15213  8-27-2002 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
15214  8-27-2002 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15215  8-27-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15216  8-27-2002 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
15217  8-27-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15218  9-3-2002  Creating head in parking spaces at 3500 and 3600 Westridge Avenue and 6000
                 Milburn Street
15219  9-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15220  9-3-2002  Adopting a per acre charge for the 1,393 acres served by approach sewer main 591
15221  9-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15222  9-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15223  9-3-2002  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15224  9-3-2002  Annexation (171.805 acre tract of land)
15225  9-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
15226  9-3-2002  Fund (Grants Fund)
       9-3-2002;
15227  eff. 9-   Rezoning
       11-2002
15228  9-10-2002 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
15229  9-10-2002 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15230  9-10-2002 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 10
15231  9-10-2002 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15232  9-10-2002 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
15233  9-10-2002 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15234  9-10-2002 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
15235  9-10-2002 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15236  9-10-2002 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
15237  9-10-2002 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15238  9-10-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15239  9-10-2002 Fund (Public Events Improvement Fund)
       9-10-
15240  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-
       18-2002
       9-17-
15241  2002;     16-101,
       eff. 9-   16-131
       23-2002
15242  9-17-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15243  9-17-2002 Fund (Park Improvement Fund)
15244  9-17-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       9-17-     20-141,
15245  2002;     20-142,
       eff. 9-   20-143,
       23-2002   20-144
15246  9-17-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15247  9-17-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15248  9-17-2002 Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
       9-17-     App. A, 9.101
15249  2002;     § 2 superseded by Ord. 20510-12-2012
       eff. 9-   §§ 3—6 repealed by Ord. Ord. 20159-04-2012
       23-2002
       9-17-
15250  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-
       23-2002
15251  9-17-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15252  9-17-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
       9-24-
15253  2002;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2002
       9-10-
       2002;
       approved
15254  9-24-     35-56
       2002;
       eff. 1-1-
       2003
15255  9-24-2002 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
15256  9-24-2002 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15257  9-24-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15258  9-24-2002 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15259  9-24-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15260  9-24-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15261  9-24-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15262  9-24-2002 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
15263  9-24-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15264  10-1-2002 Changing the name of Galaxy Way to Aviator Way
15265  10-1-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15266  10-1-2002 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15267  10-1-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15268  10-1-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15269  10-1-2002 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
15270  10-1-2002 Annexation (339.5 acre tract of land)
15271  10-1-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15272  10-1-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15273  10-1-2002 Fund (Grants Fund)
15274  10-8-2002 Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Program Fund)
       10-8-
15275  2002;     Amending Ord. 10692, grant of a franchise to TXU Gas Co.
       eff. 11-
       1-2002
       10-8-
15276  2002;     Amending Ord. 11364, the grant of a franchise to Oncor Electric Delivery Co.
       eff. 11-
       1-2002
15277  10-8-2002 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
15278  10-8-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15279  10-8-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15280  10-8-2002 Fund (General Fund)
       10-8-     22-241,
       2002;     22-242,
15281  eff. 10-  22-243,
       15-2002   22-244,
                 22-245
15282  10-8-2002 Fund (General Fund)
       10-8-     App. A, 5.136,
15283  2002;     App. A, 5.137,
       eff. 10-  App. A, 9.101
       18-2002   §§ 2—10, 12, 13 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
15284  10-8-2002 App. A, 2.102
       10-8-
15285  2002;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 10-
       18-2002
       10-8-
15286  2002;     App. A, 5.107A
       eff. 10-  §§ 3, 4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       18-2002
       10-8-
15287  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 10-
       18-2002
       10-15-
15288  2002;     Granting a franchise to Renovar Energy Corp.
       eff. 11-
       12-2002
15289  10-15-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15290  10-15-    Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
       2002
15291  10-15-    Vacation (emergency access easement in Settlement Plaza Addition)
       2002
15292  10-15-    Vacation (Morenci Drive)
       2002
15293  10-15-    Vacation (drainage and utility easement in Ridglea Apartments)
       2002
15294  10-15-    Vacation (2 alleys and a utility easement in Van Zandt Hillside Addition)
       2002
15295  10-15-    Vacation (excess right-of-way easements in the 1600 block of W. Fifth Street and
       2002      the 0-500 block of Forest Park Boulevard
15296  10-15-    Changing the name of Maryland Avenue
       2002
15297  10-15-    Vacation (portion of the 2700 block of Pollard Avenue)
       2002
15298  10-15-    Vacation (alley in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Fourth Filing Addition)
       2002
15299  10-15-    Vacation (alley in MG Ellis Addition)
       2002
15300  10-15-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15301  10-15-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15302  10-22-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15303  10-22-    Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
       2002
15304  10-29-    Approving amend and restated project financing plans for Tax Increment
       2002      Reinvestment Zone No. 2
15305  10-29-    Fund (Insurance Fund)
       2002
15306  10-29-    Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
       2002
15307  10-29-    Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       2002
15308  10-29-    Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       2002
15309  10-29-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15310  10-29-    Fund (Fire Services Fund)
       2002
15311  10-29-    Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
       2002
15312  10-29-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15313  10-29-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15314  10-29-    Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
       2002
15315  10-29-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15316  11-5-2002 Amending Ord. 14827 vacating Winthrop Avenue
15317  11-5-2002 Reducing the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
15318  11-5-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15319  11-5-2002 Amending Ord. 7323 by redefining boundaries of City Council single member
                 districts
15320  11-5-2002 Vacation (400 block of East Fourth Street)
15321  11-5-2002 Vacation (portion of the 500 block of Terry Street)
15322  11-5-2002 Fund (Park and Community Services Improvements Fund)
15323  11-5-2002 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15324  11-5-2002 Fund (General Fund)
15325  11-12-    Designating a certain contiguous geographic area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
       2002      Zone No. 6
15326  11-12-    Fund (Park and Community Services Improvements Fund)
       2002
15327  11-12-    Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
       2002
15328  11-12-    Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
       2002
15329  11-12-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15330  11-12-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
       11-12-
15331  2002;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 11-  §§ 1—4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       26-2002
       11-12-
15332  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       21-2002
15333  11-19-    Publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and revenue
       2002      certificates of obligation
15334  12-3-2002 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
15335  11-19-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
                 2-278,
                 2-279,
15336  11-19-    2-281,
       2002      2-285,
                 2-286,
                 2-289.1
15337  11-19-    Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
       2002      Zone No. 4
15338  11-19-    Fund (General Fund)
       2002
       11-19-
15339  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       9-2002
15340  11-26-    Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
       2002
15341  11-26-    Fund (S.H. 121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
       2002
15342  11-26-    Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
       2002      Zone No. 7
15343  11-26-    Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
       2002      Zone No. 5
15344  11-26-    Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
       2002      Zone No. 6
15345  11-26-    Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
       2002
15346  11-26-    Vacation (utility easement in Cahoba Business Addition)
       2002
15347  11-26-    Vacation (8 alleys in the 4500 and 4600 block of Locke, Lovell, Curzon and
       2002      Donnelly Avenues)
15348  11-26-    Vacation (800 block of Thirty-Second Street)
       2002
15349  11-26-    Fund (Critical Projects Fund)
       2002
15350  11-26-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
       11-26-
15351  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       9-2002
15352  12-3-2002 Allowing creation of head in parking spaces at 6000 Sunset Drive
15353  12-3-2002 13-27
15354  12-3-2002 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15355  12-3-2002 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15356  12-3-2002 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
15357  12-10-    Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds series 2002A
       2002
15358  12-10-    Annexation (1.238 acre tract of land)
       2002
       12-10-
15359  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       31-2002
15360  12-17-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2002
15361  12-17-    Adopting a per acre charge for the 3,276 acres served by approach sewer main M-
       2002      452
15362  12-17-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15363  12-17-    Adopting a per acre charge for the 857 acres served by city initiated sewer main
       2002      M-321
15364  12-17-    Adopting a per acre charge for the 2,419 acres served by city initiated sewer
       2002      main M-423
15365  12-17-    Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15366  12-17-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2002
15367  12-17-    Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 41
       2002
15368  12-17-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2002
15369  12-17-    Fund (Park Improvement Fund)
       2002
15370  12-17-    Vacation (portion of the 1600 block of Thirty-Sixth Street)
       2002
       12-17-
15371  2002;     Vacation (Portions of Peach Street, Bluff Street, Cherry Street and Franklin
       eff. 3-1- Street)
       2003
15372  12-17-    Changing the name of Oak Grove Road West to Oak Grove Road North
       2002
15373  12-17-    Vacation (portions of 3 streets and 2 alleys between South Henderson Street and
       2002      College Avenue)
15374  12-17-    Vacation (portion of 2800 block Avenue B)
       2002
15375  12-17-    Vacation (utility easement located in Field Welch Addition)
       2002
15376  12-17-    Vacation (5100 block of Stanley Avenue and 1700 block of Covert Street)
       2002
15377  12-17-    Vacation (2700 block of Thirty-Second Street)
       2002
15378  12-17-    Vacation (utility easement located in Calvary Cathedral Addition)
       2002
15379  12-17-    Vacation (alley in Prospect Heights Addition)
       2002
15380  12-17-    Vacation (portion of 2900 block of Townsend Drive)
       2002
15381  12-17-    Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Burleson
       2002
15382  12-17-    Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       2002
15383  12-17-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2002
15384  12-17-    Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
       2002
       12-17-
15385  2002;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       31-2002
15386  1-7-2003  Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
                 and improvement bonds series 2003
15387  1-7-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15388  1-7-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15389  1-7-2003  Annexation (7,744 acre tract of land)
15390  1-7-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       1-7-2003;
15391  eff. 1-   Rezoning
       28-2003
15392  1-14-2003 Fund (federal Awarded Assets Fund)
15393  1-14-2003 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
15394  1-14-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15395  1-14-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15396  1-14-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15397  1-14-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15398  1-14-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15399  1-14-2003 Fund (Airport Capital Grant Fund)
15400  1-14-2003 Annexation (.656 acre tract of land)
15401  1-14-2003 Vacation (portions of Capulin Avenue, Talon Avenue, Morningside Drive, Colvin
                 Avenue, Yuma Avenue and alleys in Ryan Southeast Addition)
15402  1-14-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15403  1-14-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15404  1-14-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
                 App. A, 9.101,
15405  1-14-2003 App. A, App. C
                 §§ 2, 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
                 App. A, 5.301,
                 App. A, 5.302,
       1-14-     App. A, 5.303,
15406  2003;     App. A, 5.304,
       eff. 1-   App. A, 5.305,
       30-2003   App. A, 5.306,
                 App. A, 9.101
                 §§ 4—12 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       1-14-
15407  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 1-
       28-2003
15408  1-21-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15409  1-21-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15410  1-21-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15411  1-21-2003 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 8
15412  1-21-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15413  1-21-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15414  1-21-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15415  1-28-2003 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15416  1-28-2003 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
15417  1-28-2003 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15418  1-28-2003 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15419  1-28-2003 Superseded by Ord. 16188
15420  1-28-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15421  1-28-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15422  1-28-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15423  1-28-2003 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
15424  1-28-2003 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       1-28-
15425  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 2-4-
       2003
15426  2-4-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15427  2-4-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15428  2-4-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15429  2-4-2003  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15430  2-4-2003  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15431  2-4-2003  Annexation (47.562 acre tract of land)
15432  2-4-2003  Vacation (40 ft. wide portion of 100 block of West Terrell Avenue)
15433  2-4-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15434  2-4-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       2-4-2003;
15435  eff. 2-   Rezoning
       18-2003
15436  2-11-2003 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 42
15437  2-11-2003 Vacation (utility easement located in Ridglea County Club Estates
15438  2-11-2003 Vacation (Satain Drive and Medical Drive and 6 related open space easements)
       2-11-
15439  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 2-
       21-2003
15440  2-18-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15441  2-18-2003 Amending Ord. 7323 by revising the exterior boundaries of single-member
                 districts 6 and 7
15442  2-18-2003 Reducing the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
15443  2-18-2003 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15444  2-18-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15445  2-18-2003 Vacation (utility easement within Nancy Ann Roberts Survey)
15446  2-18-2003 Vacation (portion of Old Denton Road)
15447  2-18-2003 Vacation (utility and sanitary sewer easements in Stonegate Addition)
15448  2-18-2003 Vacation (utility easement located in Pebble Creek Subdivision)
15449  2-18-2003 Vacation (utility easement located in Mallard Cove Addition)
15450  2-18-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15451  2-18-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15452  2-18-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15453  2-18-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15454  2-18-2003 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
       2-18-
15455  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-3-
       2003
15456  2-25-2003 Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
                 revenue certificates of obligation series 2003
15457  2-25-2003 Ordering an election
15458  2-25-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15459  2-25-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15460  2-25-2003 Adopting 2003 Comprehensive Plan
15461  2-25-2003 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
15462  2-25-2003 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-802,
                 12.5-803,
                 12.5-804,
                 12.5-805,
       2-25-     12.5-821,
15463  2003;     12.5-822,
       eff. 3-   12.5-823,
       31-2003   12.5-824,
                 12.5-825,
                 12.5-826,
                 12.5-827,
                 12.5-828,
                 12.5-830
15464  2-25-2003 Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 3
15465  2-25-2003 Changing the name of Packsaddle Drive to Pack Saddle Trail
15466  2-25-2003 Changing the name of Vanderzyl Road to Scoma Road
15467  2-25-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15468  2-25-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15469  2-25-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15470  3-4-2003  Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 6
15471  3-4-2003  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15472  3-4-2003  Vacation (utility easement located in Harris Addition)
15473  3-4-2003  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15474  3-4-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15475  3-4-2003  Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
15476  3-18-2003 Fund (various funds)
15477  3-18-2003 Amending Ord. 8911 concerning commission on the status of women; amended by Ord.
                 21675-03-2015
15478  3-18-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15479  3-18-2003 Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
                 obligation series 2003
15480  3-18-2003 Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds series 2003
15481  3-18-2003 Vacation (portion of County Road 1081)
15482  3-18-2003 Vacation (drainage easement located within Lasater Addition)
15483  3-18-2003 Changing the name of Summit Avenue to Pier 1 Place
15484  3-18-2003 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15485  3-13-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15486  3-18-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       3-18-
15487  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-
       26-2003
15488  3-25-2003 Amending Ord. 15457 ordering an election
15489  3-25-2003 Street Improvement Capital Improvement Project; Fire Services Capital
                 Improvement Project
15490  3-25-2003 Fund (Street Improvement Capital Improvement Fund)
15491  3-25-2003 Approving Res. 2002-11-328 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
15492  3-25-2003 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
15493  3-25-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15494  3-25-2003 Appointing substitute municipal judges
15495  3-25-2003 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project Fund)
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-104,
                 12.5-600,
                 12.5-604,
                 12.5-610,
                 12.5-610.1,
15496  3-25-2003 12.5-610.2,
                 12.5-620,
                 12.5-630,
                 12.5-631,
                 12.5-644,
                 12.5-659,
                 12.5-660,
                 12.5-677
15497  3-25-2003 Vacation (alley located in Zihlman’s Addition)
15498  3-25-2003 Vacation (alley located in Cooke’s Meadow Addition)
15499  3-25-2003 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 43
15500  4-1-2003  Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions in the Fire
                 Department
15501  4-1-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15502  4-1-2003  Fund (General Fund)
                 7-78,
15503  4-1-2003  7-107,
                 7-108
15504  4-1-2003  Vacation (portion of clear zone access road in John Childress Survey)
15505  4-1-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15506  - -2003   Amending inn part the 1968 regional airport concurrent bond ordinance
15507  4-8-2003  37th supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
15508  4-8-2003  38th supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
15509  4-8-2003  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15510  4-8-2003  Vacation (drainage easement located in Calvary Academy Addition
15511  4-8-2003  Vacation (sanitary sewer easement located in Eagle Mountain Two)
15512  4-8-2003  Fund (Worker’s Compensation Fund)
15513  4-8-2003  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15514  4-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15515  4-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15516  4-8-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15517  4-8-2003  Fund (General Fund)
       4-8-2003;
15518  eff. 4-   Rezoning
       25-2003
15519  4-15-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15520  4-15-2003 Fund (Unreserved Designated Fund)
       4-15-
15521  2003;     Approving Res. 2003-03-86 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       eff. 4-
       22-2003
15522  4-15-2003 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
15523  4-15-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15524  4-24-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       4-15-
15525  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 4-
       24-2003
15526  4-22-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15527  4-22-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15528  4-22-2003 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
15529  4-22-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       4-22-
15530  2003;     Repealed by Ord. 20020-12-2011
       eff. 5-1-
       2003
15531  4-22-2003 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
15532  4-22-2003 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
       4-29-     7-47,
15533  2003;     7-62,
       eff. 5-5- 7-167
       2003      §§ 5, 6 superseded
       4-29-
15534  2003;     Superseded by Ord. 16986-06-2006
       eff. 5-5-
       2003
15535  4-29-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15536  4-29-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15537  4-29-2003 Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
15538  4-29-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       4-29-
15539  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-
       15-2003
15540  5-6-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15541  5-6-2003  Readopting and amending the standards of care for youth programs
       5-6-2003;
15542  eff. 5-   Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
       15-2003
       5-6-2003;
15543  eff. 5-   Superseded by Ord. 17154
       15-2003
15544  5-6-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15545  5-6-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15546  5-6-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15547  5-6-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15548  5-6-2003  Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
15549  5-6-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15550  5-6-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15551  5-13-2003 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15552  5-13-2003 Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
15553  5-13-2003 Vacation (alley John Baugh survey)
15554  5-13-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15555  5-13-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15556  5-13-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15557  5-13-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15558  5-13-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       5-13-
15559  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-
       22-2003
15560  5-20-2003 Fund (Insurance Fund)
15561  5-20-2003 Vacation (portion of Lipscomb Street; Stone’s Subdivision; and 2 alleys in
                 Glendale Subdivision)
15562  5-20-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15563  5-20-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       5-20-
15564  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-
       30-2003
15565  5-27-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15566  5-27-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15567  5-27-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15568  5-27-2003 Amending boundaries of North Enterprise Zone (EZ222-052797FWN)
15569  5-27-2003 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 9
15570  5-27-2003 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 10
15571  5-27-2003 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15572  5-27-2003 Annexation (801 acre tract of land)
15573  5-27-2003 §§ 4, 5 were repealed by Ord. 16011; §§ 1, 2 were repealed by Ord. 23222-05-2018
15574  5-27-2003 Fund (General Fund)
       5-27-
15575  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-5-
       2003
15576  6-3-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15577  6-3-2003  Vacation (portion of Pruitt Street)
15578  6-3-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15579  6-3-2003  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15580  6-3-2003  Vacation (portions of Seminary Street; Broadus Avenue; Washington Avenue;
                 Hubbard Avenue; and 2 alleys in Hubbard Highlands)
15581  6-3-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15582  6-3-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15583  6-3-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15584  6-3-2003  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15585  6-10-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15586  6-10-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-10-
15587  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-
       26-2003
15588  6-17-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15589  6-17-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15590  6-17-2003 Suspending until the earlier of 9-25-2003 or the effectiveness of a rate
                 schedule adopted by Council the rate schedule proposed TXU Gas Co.
15591  6-17-2003 Vacation (a portion of East Northside Drive)
15592  6-17-2003 Vacation (Cummings Alley)
       6-17-
15593  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-
       26-2003
15594  6-17-2003 Annexation (31.897 acres more or less)
15595  6-24-2003 Adopting a per acre charge for the 615 acres served by city initiated sewer main
                 M -609
15596  6-24-2003 Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund; Commercial Sewer Water Fund)
15597  6-24-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15598  6-24-2003 Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
                 24-1,
                 24-2,
                 24-3,
       6-24-     24-4,
       2003;     24-8,
15599  eff. 7-3- 24-9,
       2003      24-10,
                 24-14,
                 24-15,
                 24-17,
                 24-18
15600  6-24-2003 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of White
15601  6-24-2003 Changing the name of Doc Mitchell Street to Petty Place
15602  6-24-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15603  6-24-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       6-24-
15604  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-7-
       2003
15605  7-1-2003  Vacation (alley in Jennings West Addition)
15606  7-1-2003  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       7-1-2003;
15607  eff. 7-   Rezoning
       10-2003
       7-8-2003;
15608  eff. 7-   23-8
       16-2003
15609  7-8-2003  Vacation (open yard easement in Chapel Creek Addition)
15610  7-8-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15611  7-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15612  7-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15613  7-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15614  7-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15615  7-8-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15616  7-8-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15617  7-8-2003  Annexation (110.244 acre tract of land)
       7-8-2003;
15618  eff. 7-   Rezoning
       21-2003
15619  7-15-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15620  7-15-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15621  7-15-2003 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       7-15-
15622  2003;     App. A, 5.116
       eff. 7-   § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2003
       7-15-
15623  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       30-2003
15624  7-22-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       7-22-
15625  2003;     Repealed by Ord. 15655
       eff. 9-1-
       2003
15626  7-22-2003 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15627  7-29-2003 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
15628  7-29-2003 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
15629  7-29-2003 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
15630  7-29-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       7-29-
15631  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-
       24-2003
15632  8-7-2003  12.5-842
15633  8-7-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15634  8-7-2003  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15635  8-7-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15636  8-12-2003 Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
                 office of the municipal government of the city
15637  8-12-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15638  8-12-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15639  8-12-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15640  8-12-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15641  8-12-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15642  8-12-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-12-
15643  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-2-
       2003
15644  8-19-2003 Denying the rates and charges requested by TXU Gas Co.
15645  8-19-2003 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 11
15646  8-19-2003 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 44
15647  8-19-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15648  8-19-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15649  8-19-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15650  8-19-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15651  8-19-2003 Annexation (52 acre tract of land)
       8-19-
15652  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-5-
       2003
15653  8-26-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15654  8-26-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-26-
15655  2003;     § 1 repealed 34-111—34-175
       eff. 9-5- § 2 superseded by Ord. 17412
       2003
15656  8-26-2003 Approving Res. 2003-08-257 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
15657  8-26-2003 Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding and improvement bonds,
                 series 2003
15658  8-26-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15659  8-26-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15660  8-26-2003 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15661  8-26-2003 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15662  8-26-2003 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15663  8-26-2003 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
15664  8-26-2003 Vacation (Penticost Street; Collinwood Avenue; and Camp Bowie Boulevard)
15665  8-26-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15666  8-26-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15667  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
15668  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15669  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 10
15670  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15671  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
15672  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15673  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
15674  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15675  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
15676  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15677  9-9-2003  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
15678  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
15679  9-9-2003  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
15680  9-9-2003  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15681  9-9-2003  Fund (General Fund)
15682  9-9-2003  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15683  9-9-2003  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15684  9-9-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15685  9-9-2003  Fund (Grants Fund)
15686  9-9-2003  Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
15687  9-9-2003  Annexation (156.879 acre tract of land)
       9-9-2003;
15688  eff. 9-   Rezoning
       25-2003
       9-16-
15689  2003;     Repealed by Ord. 21197-04-2014
       eff. 9-
       25-2003
15690  9-16-2003 Vacation (portion of Wingate Street)
15691  9-23-2003 Adopting a per acre charge for the 6368 acres served by city initiated sewer
                 main M-618
15692  9-23-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       9-23-
15693  2003;     35-56
       eff.1-1-
       2004
       9-23-
15694  2003;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2003
15695  9-23-2003 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
15696  9-23-2003 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
15697  9-23-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15698  9-23-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15699  9-30-2003 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 45
15700  9-30-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15701  9-30-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15702  9-30-2003 Repealed by Ord. 17522
15703  9-30-2003 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
       9-30-
15704  2003;     13-2
       eff. 10-
       1-2003
15705  9-30-2003 Fund (Public Events Fund)
15706  9-30-2003 Vacation (alley in South Grove Estates)
15707  9-30-2003 Vacation (portions of Lawnwood Street and South Retta Street)
15708  9-30-2003 § 2 repealed by Ord. 16011; § 1 repealed by Ord. 23222-05- 2018
15709  9-30-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15710  9-30-2003 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
15711  10-7-2003 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
                 22-1,
                 22-158,
                 22-158.1,
                 22-158.2,
                 22-172,
                 22-191,
                 22-192,
15712  10-7-2003 22-193,
                 22-194,
                 22-195,
                 22-196,
                 22-205,
                 22-205.1,
                 22-221
                 Repealed 22-202—22-204
15713  10-7-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15714  10-14-    Annexation (7.257 acre tract of land)
       2003
15715  10-14-    Annexation (59.047 acre tract of land)
       2003
15716  10-14-    Rezoning
       2003
15717  10-21-    Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
       2003
15718  10-21-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2003
15719  10-21-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2003
15720  10-21-    Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
       2003
15721  10-21-    Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
       2003
       10-21-
15722  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       7-2003
15723  10-28-    Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds series 2003A
       2003
15724  10-28-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
       2003      bonds series 2003A
15725  10-28-    Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
       2003
15726  10-28-    Annexation (109.07 acre tract of land)
       2003
15727  10-28-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2003
15728  10-28-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2003
15729  10-28-    Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
       2003
15730  10-28-    Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
       2003
15731  10-28-    Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
       2003
       10-28-
15732  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       7-2003
15733  11-4-2003 Texas Enterprise Zone Program; amended by Ord. 21743-05-2015
15734  11-4-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15735  11-4-2003 30-52
15736  11-4-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15737  11-4-2003 Funds (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15738  11-4-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
       11-11-
15739  2003;     Amending Ord. 15385 to accurately reflect the city’s decision in ZC-02-277
       eff. 11-
       17-2003
15740  11-11-    Fund (Insurance Fund)
       2003
       11-11-
15741  2003;     Amending Ord. 15518 to correct the descriptions of certain property in ZC-03-080
       eff. 11-
       17-2003
15742  11-11-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2003
15743  11-11-    Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       2003
15744  11-11-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2003
                 35-70.2;
       11-11-    35-70.3;
15745  2003;     35-71;
       eff. 6-5- 35-72;
       2004      35-76;
                 35-77
15746  11-11-    Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
       2003      Zone No. 12
15747  11-11-    Annexation (52 acre tract of land)
       2003
       11-11-
15748  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       11-2003
15749  11-18-    Ordering an election
       2003
                 12-1,
                 12-2,
                 12-3,
                 12-4,
                 12-5,
                 12-6,
                 12-7,
15750  11-18-    12-8,
       2003      12-9,
                 12-10,
                 12-11,
                 12-12,
                 12-13,
                 12-14,
                 12-16,
                 12-17
15751  11-18-    Fund (General Fund)
       2003
15752  11-18-    Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
       2003
15753  11-18-    Operating authority (All About Town Pedicabs LLC)
       2003
15754  11-18-    Operating authority (Alamo Limousine Limited Partnership)
       2003
15755  11-18-    Operating authority (Classic Carriages)
       2003
15756  11-18-    Operating authority (West Fork Carriage Service)
       2003
15757  11-18-    Operating authority (Zia’s Limos)
       2003
15758  11-18-    Vacation (portion of South Access Road to Camp Bowie Boulevard)
       2003
15759  11-18-    Fund (General Fund)
       2003
15760  12-2-2003 Granting a franchise to Strategic Cable Technologies, Inc.
15761  12-2-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15762  12-2-2003 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
15763  12-2-2003 Fund (Tree Planting and Maintenance Guide Fund)
15764  12-2-2003 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15765  12-2-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15766  12-2-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15767  12-2-2003 Fund (Commercial Paper Water Fund)
15768  12-2-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15769  12-2-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15770  12-2-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15771  12-2-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15772  12-2-2003 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15773  12-2-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15774  12-9-2003 Amending Ord. 14441 by terminating Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 5
15775  12-9-2003 Designating a certain contiguous geographic area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 8
15776  12-9-2003 Amending sections 2, 3 and 5 of Ord. 7323 by revising the exterior boundaries of
                 City Council single member districts
15777  12-9-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15778  12-9-2003 Operating authority (Pete’s Limousine)
15779  12-9-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15780  12-9-2003 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15781  12-9-2003 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
15782  12-9-2003 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       12-9-
15783  2003;     7-47
       eff. 12-
       19-2003
       12-9-
15784  2003;     7-167
       eff. 12-
       18-2003
       12-9-
15785  2003;     26-2
       eff. 12-
       18-2003
       12-9-
15786  2003;     11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       eff. 12-
       18-2003
       12-9-
15787  2003;     Repealed by Ord. 15953
       eff. 12-
       18-2003
       12-9-
15788  2003;     Repealed by Ord. 17522
       eff. 12-
       15-2003
                 12.5-864,
                 12.5-865,
                 12.5-866,
       12-9-     12.5-867,
15789  2003;     12.5-868,
       eff. 12-  12.5-869,
       15-2003   12.5-870,
                 12.5-871,
                 12.5-872,
                 12.5-873
15790  12-9-2003 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15791  12-9-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15792  12-9-2003 Annexation (3.9 acre tract of land)
15793  12-9-2003 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
15794  12-9-2003 Fund (Grants Fund)
15795  12-9-2003 Fund (General Fund)
15796  12-16-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system auction rate revenue
       2003      bonds series 2004
15797  12-16-    Designating a certain contiguous geographic area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
       2003      Zone No. 9
15798  12-16-    Approving Res. 2003-12-396 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       2003
15799  12-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2003
15800  12-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2003
15801  12-16-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2003
15802  12-16-    Fund (Information Systems Fund)
       2003
15803  12-16-    Fund (Information Systems Project Fund)
       2003
15804  12-16-    Vacation (Maurice Street right-of-way)
       2003
15805  12-16-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2003
15806  12-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2003
15807  12-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2003
       12-16-
15808  2003;     Rezoning
       eff. 2-6-
       2004
15809  1-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15810  1-6-2004  Vacation (alley north of West Berry Street)
15811  1-6-2004  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15812  1-6-2004  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15813  1-6-2004  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15814  1-6-2004  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15815  1-6-2004  Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 13
       1-6-2004; App. A, 6.101
15816  eff. 1-   §§ 1, 2, 4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       14-2004
       1-6-2004;
15817  eff. 2-   Rezoning
       27-2004
15818  1-13-2004 Approving Res. 2003-12-386 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
15819  1-13-2004 Operating authority (Supershuttle DFW Corp.)
15820  1-13-2004 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15821  1-13-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15822  1-13-2004 Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
15823  1-13-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       1-13-
15824  2004;     App. A, 3.400
       eff. 1-
       21-2004
       1-13-
15825  2004;     App. A, 5.403,
       eff. 1-   App. A, 5.405
       21-2004
       1-13-
15826  2004;     App. A, 6.101
       eff. 1-   § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2004
       1-13-
15827  2004;     App. A, 5.305,
       eff. 1-   App. A, 6.202
       21-2004
       1-13-
15828  2004;     App. A, 6.300
       eff. 1-
       21-2004
       1-13-
15829  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 1-
       21-2004
       1-13-     App. A, 5.301,
15830  2004;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 1-   §§ 3—5 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2004
       1-13-
15831  2004;     App. A, 5.116.B
       eff. 1-   § 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2004
       1-13-
15832  2004;     App. A, 2.104
       eff. 1-   §§ 2, 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2004
       1-13-
15833  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 4-1-
       2004
15834  1-20-2004 Fund (Planting and Maintenance Guide Fund)
15835  1-20-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15836  1-20-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
15837  1-20-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15838  1-20-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       1-20-
15839  2004;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 1-   §§ 1—4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       23-2004
15840  1-27-2004 Ordering a special election
15841  1-27-2004 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 15
                 Changing name of the Neighborhood Resources Council to the Community Action
15842  1-27-2004 Partners and the Neighborhood Resources Development Program to the Community
                 Action Partners
15843  1-27-2004 Changing name of Swallowtail Lane to Blue Bell Drive
15844  1-27-2004 Approving project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 8
15845  1-27-2004 Fund (General Fund)
15846  1-27-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       1-27-
15847  2004;     App. A, 6.506
       eff. 1-
       30-2004
       1-27-
15848  2004;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 1-   § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       30-2004
       1-27-
15849  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 1-
       30-2004
       1-27-
15850  2004;     App. A, 6.301
       eff. 1-
       30-2004
       1-27-
15851  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 1-
       30-2004
       1-27-
15852  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 2-6-
       2004
15853  2-3-2004  Adopting a per acre charge for the 1,523 acres served by Sewer main M-624
15854  2-3-2004  Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 16
15855  2-3-2004  Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 46
15856  2-3-2004  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15857  2-3-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15858  2-3-2004  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15859  2-3-2004  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15860  2-3-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15861  2-10-2004 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 14
15862  2-10-2004 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
15863  2-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15864  2-10-2004 Operating authority (Classic Acquisition Corp.)
15865  2-10-2004 Vacation (triangular portion of West Terrell Avenue right-of-way)
15866  2-10-2004 Vacation (portion of Pruitt Street)
15867  2-10-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15868  2-10-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15869  2-10-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15870  2-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15871  2-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       2-10-
15872  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 2-
       18-2004
       2-10-
15873  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 2-
       17-2004
       2-10-
15874  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 3-
       11-2004
15875  2-17-2004 Canvassing the returns and declaring the results of the bond election conducted
                 on February 7, 2004
15876  2-17-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       2-17-
15877  2004;     Superseded by Ord. 17412
       eff. 2-
       27-2004
15878  2-17-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15879  2-17-2004 Fund (various funds)
15880  2-17-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
       2-17-
15881  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-
       28-2004
15882  2-24-2004 Operating authority (Continental Limousine, Inc.)
15883  2-24-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15884  2-24-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
15885  2-24-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
15886  2-24-2004 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 17
15887  2-24-2004 Finding that conditions have materially changed in the reconstruction of Amanda
                 Avenue
15888  2-24-2004 Finding that conditions have materially changed in the reconstruction of
                 Sylvania Avenue
15889  2-24-2004 Adopting 2004 Comprehensive Plan
15890  2-24-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15891  2-24-2004 Annexation (105 acre tract of land)
15892  2-24-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15893  2-24-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2-24-
15894  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 4-1-
       2004
15895  3-2-2004  Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
15896  3-2-2004  Fund (General Fund)
15897  3-2-2004  Providing for a moratorium on acceptance of applications for specialized
                 certificates of occupancy and other permits for sexually oriented businesses
15898  3-2-2004  Amending Ord. 15840 ordering a special election
15899  3-2-2004  Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
15900  3-2-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15901  3-2-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15902  3-2-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15903  3-11-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15904  3-11-2004 Fund (General Fund)
15905  3-11-2004 Operating authority (Shooting Star Limousine, LLC)
15906  3-11-2004 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
15907  3-11-2004 Vacation (portion of West View Avenue right-of-way)
15908  3-11-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15909  3-11-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
15910  3-11-2004 Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
       3-11-
15911  2004;     App. A, 6.201
       eff. 3-   § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       26-2004
       3-11-
15912  2004;     Superseded by Ord. 20510-12-2012
       eff. 3-
       18-2004
       3-11-
15913  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 4-
       23-2004
15914  3-11-2004 Amending Ord. 15748 to reflect waiver of planned development site plan for ZC
                 03-259
15915  3-23-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15916  3-23-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15917  3-23-2004 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
15918  3-23-2004 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
15919  3-23-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15920  3-23-2004 Fund (General Fund)
15921  3-23-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
15922  3-23-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15923  3-23-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       3-23-
15924  2004;     App. A, 6.202
       eff. 3-
       30-2004
       3-23-
15925  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 3-
       30-2004
       3-23-
15926  2004;     App. A, 6.101
       eff. 3-   §§ 2—5 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       30-2004
       3-23-     App. A, 5.300,
15927  2004;     App. A, 5.301
       eff. 3-   § 2, 4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       30-2004
15928  3-23-2004 Appointing municipal judges
15929  3-23-2004 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
15930  3-30-2004 Providing for the issuance of general refunding bonds series 2004
15931  3-30-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15932  3-30-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15933  3-30-2004 Amending ordinance authorizing issuance of equipment tax notes
15934  3-30-2004 Approving and authorizing the issuance of commercial paper notes
15935  3-30-2004 Fund (Commercial Paper-General Obligation Construction Fund)
15936  3-30-2004 Amending and restating approval and authorization for issuance of water and
                 sewer system commercial paper notes, series A
15937  3-30-2004 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper Fund)
15938  3-30-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15939  3-30-2004 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
15940  3-30-2004 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
       4-6-2004;
15941  eff. 4-   23-19
       15-2004
15942  4-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15943  4-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15944  4-13-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15945  4-13-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       4-13-
15946  2004;     22-175
       eff. 4-
       20-2004
       4-13-
15947  2004;     Superseded by Ord. 17154
       eff. 4-
       20-2004
       4-13-     7-46,
15948  2004;     7-47,
       eff. 4-   7-48,
       20-2004   7-49
       4-13-     7-61,
15949  2004;     7-62,
       eff. 4-   7-63,
       20-2004   7-64
       4-13-     7-166,
15950  2004;     7-167,
       eff. 4-   7-168,
       20-2004   7-169
       4-13-     26-1,
15951  2004;     26-2,
       eff. 4-   26-3,
       20-2004   26-4
       4-13-     7-41,
15952  2004;     7-42,
       eff. 4-   7-43,
       20-2004   7-44
       4-13-     29-1,
15953  2004;     29-2,
       eff. 4-   29-3
       20-2004
15954  4-15-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
15955  4-13-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       4-13-
15956  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 4-
       23-2004
       4-13-
15957  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-4-
       2004
15958  4-20-2004 Repealed by Ord. 17522
15959  4-20-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
       4-20-
15960  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-4-
       2004
       4-27-
15961  2004;     Supplemental concurrent bond ordinance; joint revenue auction rate refunding
       eff. 4-   bonds series 2004A
       28-2004
       4-27-
15962  2004;     Supplemental concurrent bond ordinance; joint revenue improvement bonds series
       eff. 4-   2004B
       28-2004
15963  4-27-2004 Operating authority (Bohemian Limousine)
15964  4-27-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
15965  4-27-2004 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Edgecliff
       4-27-
15966  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 5-4-
       2004
15967  5-4-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15968  5-4-2004  Fund (General Fund)
       5-4-2004;
15969  eff. 5-   Repealed by Ord. 17522
       13-2004
15970  5-4-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
       5-4-2004;
15971  eff. 5-   Rezoning
       28-2004
15972  5-11-2004 Operating authority (Silver West Inc.)
15973  5-11-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
                 Changing the name of 1300—1499 blocks of East 18th Street to I.M. Terrell Circle
15974  5-11-2004 South and 1300—1499 blocks of Cypress Street and 1700—1899 blocks of Chambers
                 Street to I.M. Terrell Circle South and 1800—1999 blocks of Cypress Street and
                 the 2000—2299 blocks of Pine Street to I.M. Terrell Way
15975  5-11-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
15976  5-11-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
15977  5-11-2004 Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 17
       5-11-
15978  2004;     App. A, 5.305
       eff. 5-   §§ 2, 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       19-2004
       5-11-
15979  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       29-2004
15980  5-18-2004 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
15981  5-18-2004 Fund (New Development Fund)
                 35-70.2,
       5-18-     35-70.3,
15982  2004;     35-71,
       eff. 6-6- 35-72,
       2004      35-76,
                 35-77
15983  5-18-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15984  5-18-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       5-18-
15985  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 6-9-
       2004
15986  5-25-2004 Ordering a runoff election to be held
15987  5-25-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15988  5-25-2004 Providing for a moratorium on acceptance of applications for specialized
                 certificates of occupancy and other permits for sexually oriented businesses
15989  5-25-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15990  6-8-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
15991  6-10-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
15992  6-8-2004  Operating authority (All About Town Pedicabs, LLC)
15993  6-8-2004  Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 18
       6-8-2004; 11-1,
15994  eff. 6-   11-2,
       18-2004   11-3,
                 11-4; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
15995  6-10-2004 Fund (General Fund)
       6-8-2004;
15996  eff. 6-   Amending Ord. 15810 vacating an alley north of West Berry Street
       10-2004
15997  6-10-2004 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
15998  6-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
15999  6-8-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
16000  6-8-2004  App. A, 7.107
       6-8-2004;
16001  eff. 6-   Rezoning
       30-2004
16002  6-15-2004 Designating a certain geographic contiguous area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 10
16003  6-15-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16004  6-15-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16005  6-15-2004 Amending Ord. 15797 by increasing the number of directors on the Board of
                 Directors of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 9
16006  6-15-2004 Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
                 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
16007  6-15-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
                 Providing for a moratorium on acceptance of preliminary plats, universal
16008  6-15-2004 developmental site plans, applications for building permits, certificates of
                 occupancy and other development permits for certain properties located south of
                 Vickery Boulevard
16009  6-22-2004 Repealed by Ord. 24709-02-2021
16010  6-22-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16011  6-29-2004 Repealed by Ord. 23222-05-2018
16012  6-29-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16013  6-29-2004 Amending Ord. 15841 by reducing the boundaries of Neighborhood Empowerment
                 Reinvestment Zone No. 15
16014  6-29-2004 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 47
16015  6-29-2004 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 48
16016  6-29-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
16017  6-29-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16018  6-29-2004 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
16019  6-29-2004 Annexation (67.237 acre tract of land)
16020  6-29-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
16021  6-29-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
16022  7-6-2004  Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
16023  7-6-2004  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16024  7-6-2004  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
16025  7-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
16026  7-6-2004  Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
       7-6-2004; 13-1,
16027  eff. 7-   13-2,
       19-2004   13-3,
                 13-4
       7-6-2004;
16028  eff. 7-   11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       20-2004
16029  7-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
16030  7-6-2004  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16031  7-6-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
                 17-20,
                 17-21,
                 17-49,
16032  7-13-2004 17-66,
                 17-69,
                 17-87,
                 17-90,
                 17-96
16033  7-13-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16034  7-13-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16035  7-13-2004 Operating authority (Hot Wheels Pedicab)
                 Adopting a moratorium on acceptance of preliminary plats, universal
16036  7-13-2004 developmental site plans, applications for building permits, certificates of
                 occupancy and other development permits for certain properties located south
                 Camp Bowie Boulevard
16037  7-13-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16038  7-13-2004 Annexation (277.33 acre tract of land)
       7-13-
16039  2004;     App. A, 2.102
       eff. 7-
       22-2004
       7-13-
16040  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       29-2004
16041  7-20-2004 Extending a moratorium on acceptance of applications for specialized
                 certificates of occupancy and other permits for sexually oriented businesses
16042  7-20-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16043  7-20-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16044  7-20-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16045  7-20-2004 Vacation (portion of Beckham Place)
       7-20-
16046  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       30-2004
16047  7-27-2004 Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
                 Department
16048  7-27-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16049  7-27-2004 Vacation (all of Avenue A between Wesleyan Street and South Collard Street)
16050  7-27-2004 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
16051  7-27-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
16052  7-27-2004 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
16053  7-27-2004 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       7-27-
16054  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 7-
       30-2004
16055  7-27-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16056  8-5-2004  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16057  8-5-2004  Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
16058  8-5-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
16059  8-5-2004  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund; Sewer Capital Project Fund)
16060  8-5-2004  Fund (Grants Fund)
       9-14-
16061  2004;     Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
       eff. 9-   office of the municipal government of the city
       23-2004
16062  8-10-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16063  8-10-2004 Amending Ord. 16001 to reflect correct zoning case number
16064  8-10-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16065  8-10-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16066  8-10-2004 Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
16067  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16068  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16069  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16070  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16071  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16072  8-10-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-10-
16073  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 8-
       19-2004
16074  8-17-2004 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 49
16075  8-17-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16076  8-17-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16077  8-17-2004 Vacation (emergency access easement at south end of Daren Drive)
16078  8-17-2004 Vacation (portion of Old Denton Road)
16079  8-17-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16080  8-17-2004 Vacation (portions of alleys)
16081  8-17-2004 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
16082  8-17-2004 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
16083  8-17-2004 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
16084  8-17-2004 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       8-17-
16085  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 8-
       23-2004
       8-17-
16086  2004;     App. A, 6.201
       eff. 8-
       23-2004
16087  8-24-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16088  8-24-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-24-
16089  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
       eff. 9-8-
       2004
16090  8-24-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16091  8-24-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16092  8-24-2004 Readopting and amending the standards of care for youth programs
16093  8-24-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16094  8-24-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
16095  8-24-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
16096  8-31-2004 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
16097  8-31-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16098  8-31-2004 Adopting 2004 Master Thoroughfare Plan update
16099  8-31-2004 Fund (Federal Awarded Grants Fund)
16100  8-31-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16101  8-31-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16102  8-31-2004 Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
16103  8-31-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16104  8-31-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16105  8-31-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       8-31-
16106  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-7-
       2004
16107  8-31-2004 Fund (Local Development Corporation Fund)
16108  9-7-2004  Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
16109  9-7-2004  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16110  9-7-2004  Amending Ord. 15833 to reflect correct addresses
16111  9-7-2004  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16112  9-7-2004  Fund (Information System Capital Projects Fund)
16113  9-8-2004  Vacation (Parkdale Avenue right-of-way)
16114  9-14-2004 Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
       9-14-
16115  2004;     Approving Res. 2004-03-68 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       eff. 9-
       24-2004
16116  9-14-2004 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
       9-14-
16117  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       eff. 10-
       8-2004
                 App. A, 5.200,
                 App. A, 5.201,
                 App. A, 5.202,
                 App. A, 5.203,
                 App. A, 5.204,
                 App. A, 5.205,
                 App. A, 5.206,
                 App. A, 5.207,
                 App. A, 5.208,
                 App. A, 5.209,
       9-14-     App. A, 5.210,
       2004;     App. A, 5.211,
16118  eff. 9-   App. A, 5.212,
       21-2004   App. A, 5.213,
                 App. A, 5.214,
                 App. A, 5.215,
                 App. A, 5.216,
                 App. A, 5.217,
                 App. A, 5.218,
                 App. A, 5.219,
                 App. A, 5.220,
                 App. A, 5.221,
                 App. A, 7.107,
                 App. A, 9.101
                 § 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       9-14-
16119  2004;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 9-   §§ 1, 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       21-2004
       9-14-
16120  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 9-
       24-2004
16121  9-21-2004 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
16122  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16123  9-21-2004 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
16124  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16125  9-21-2004 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
16126  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16127  9-21-2004 Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
16128  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
16129  9-21-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16130  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16131  9-21-2004 Approving the project and financing plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone
                 No. 10
16132  9-21-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16133  9-21-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16134  9-21-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16135  9-21-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16136  9-21-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16137  9-21-2004 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
16138  9-21-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
16139  9-21-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
16140  9-28-2004 Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds series 2004
       9-28-
16141  2004;     35-56
       eff. 10-
       1-2004
16142  9-28-2004 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
16143  9-28-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16144  9-28-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16145  9-28-2004 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
16146  9-28-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-5-
16147  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 18318-09-2008
       eff. 10-
       15-2004
16148  105-2004  Repealed 23-18
16149  10-5-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16150  10-5-2004 Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
16151  10-5-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16152  10-5-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       10-5-
16153  2004;     15-51
       eff. 10-  § 2 superseded by Ord. 18449-02-2009
       15-2004
       10-5-
16154  2004;     35-56
       eff. 1-1-
       2005
16155  10-5-2004 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 50
16156  10-5-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16157  10-5-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16158  10-5-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
       10-5-
16159  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 10-
       18-2004
16160  10-12-    Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
       2004
       10-12-
16161  2004;     Repealed by Ord. 17522
       eff. 10-
       18-2004
       10-12-
16162  2004;     7-47
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
       10-12-
16163  2004;     7-167
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
       10-12-
16164  2004;     26-2
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
       10-12-
16165  2004;     11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
       10-12-
16166  2004;     29-1
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
16167  10-12-    Fund (General Fund)
       2004
16168  10-12-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
       10-12-
16169  2004;     Repealing Ord. 15810 and 15996; vacation of alley north of West Berry Street
       eff. 12-
       30-2004
       10-12-
16170  2004;     Vacation (portion of North Elm Street)
       eff. 12-
       31-2005
16171  10-12-    Annexation (2.69 acre tract of land)
       2004
16172  10-12-    Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvement Fund)
       2004
16173  10-12-    Annexation (68.32 acre tract of land)
       2004
16174  10-12-    Annexation (113.19 acre tract of land)
       2004
       10-12-
16175  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 10-
       25-2004
16176  10-19-    Amending Ord. 15979 to reflect waiver of planned development site plan
       2004
16177  10-19-    Fund (General Fund)
       2004
       10-19-
16178  2004;     Approving Res. 2004-02-28 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
       eff. 11-
       18-2004
16179  10-19-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
16180  10-19-    Vacation (alley in Boaz Summit Addition)
       2004
16181  10-19-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
16182  10-19-    Amending Ord. 15815 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
       2004      Reinvestment Zone No. 13
       10-19-    App. A, 5.116.A,
16183  2004;     App. A, 9.101
       eff. 10-  § 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       28-2004
       10-19-
16184  2004;     App. A, 6.300,
       eff. 10-  App. A, 6.301
       28-2004
                 Approving the resolution of service center relocation, incorporated authorizing
                 the issuance of bonds by the service center relocation, incorporated and the
16185  10-26-    execution of a lease with an option to purchase agreement the execution of a
       2004      bond purchase agreement relating to the sale of the bonds, and appropriating
                 available funds for the purpose of funding lease payments during the 2004-2005
                 fiscal year
16186  10-26-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
16187  10-26-    Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
       2004      Department
       10-26-    12.5-841,
16188  2004      12.5-841.1,
                 12.5-841.2
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-801,
                 12.5-803,
                 12.5-806,
                 12.5-822,
                 12.5-823,
       10-26-    12.5-823.5,
       2004;     12.5-824,
16189  eff. 11-  12.5-825,
       1-2004    12.5-826,
                 12.5-827,
                 12.5-828,
                 12.5-842.1,
                 12.5-842.2,
                 12.5-842.3,
                 12.5-842.4
                 Repealed 12.5-822.1
16190  10-26-    Fund (General Fund)
       2004
16191  11-2-2004 27-33
16192  11-2-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16193  11-2-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
16194  11-2-2004 Vacation (Randol Mill Road right-of-way)
       11-2-
16195  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       19-2004
       11-2-
16196  2004;     Superseded by Ord. 17872-11-2007
       eff. 11-
       10-2004
16197  11-9-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16198  11-9-2004 Fund (General Fund)
16199  11-9-2004 Vacation (portions of miscellaneous streets and alleys)
16200  11-9-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16201  11-9-2004 Amending paragraph 2 of Ord. 15853
16202  11-9-2004 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
16203  11-9-2004 Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
       11-9-
16204  2004'     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       19-2004
16205  11-16-    26-2
       2004
16206  11-16-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2004
16207  11-16-    Fund (Public Events, Furniture, Fixtures and Equipment Fund)
       2004
       11-16-
16208  2004;     Moratorium on removal of protected trees equal to or greater than 6 inches in
       eff. 11-  diameter on an acre or larger
       18-2004
16209  11-16-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
16210  11-16-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
       11-16-
16211  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 11-
       22-2004
16212  11-30-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
16213  11-30-    Fund (Special Trust Fund)
       2004
16214  11-30-    Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
       2004
16215  11-30-    Fund (Grants Fund)
       2004
       11-30-
16216  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       9-2004
16217  12-7-2004 Granting a franchise to Coserv Gas, Ltd.
16218  12-7-2004 Fund (Grants Fund)
16219  12-7-2004 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
16220  12-7-2004 Designating a certain geographic contiguous area as Tax Increment Reinvestment
                 Zone No. 11
16221  12-7-2004 Vacation (portion of West Cantey Street)
16222  12-7-2004 Changing the name of 2 private fire lanes of the River Park Villas Addition to
                 Camellia Rose Drive and Camellia Rose Court
16223  12-7-2004 Changing the name of a portion of the old alignment of Crowley Road to Nikki
                 Lane
16224  12-7-2004 Changing the name of a portion of Pancho Villa Trail to Nathaniel Drive and a
                 portion of Theodore Street to Pinion Parkway
16225  12-7-2004 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
16226  12-7-2004 Fund (Fire Improvements Fund)
16227  12-7-2004 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
16228  12-14-    Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
       2004      Department
16229  12-14-    Fund (General Fund)
       2004
16230  12-14-    Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
       2004
16231  12-14-    Amending Ord. 7323 by revising the boundary of City Council single-member
       2004      district 7
16232  12-14-    Extending the moratorium on removal of protected trees equal to or greater than
       2004      6 inches in diameter on an acre or larger
16233  12-14-    Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
       2004
16234  12-14-    Vacation (portion of Ferris Street)
       2004
16235  12-14-    Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
       2004
16236  12-14-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2004
16237  12-14-    Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
       2004
16238  12-14-    Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
       2004
16239  12-14-    Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
       2004
16240  12-14-    Annexation (10.98 acre tract of land)
       2004
       12-14-
16241  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       30-2004
16242  12-21-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
       2004      and improvement bonds series 2004
16243  12-21-    Reducing the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
       2004
       12-21-
16244  2004;     App. A, 7.107
       eff. 12-  Amended Ord. 16118
       30-2004
16245  12-21-    Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
       2004
16246  12-21-    Vacation (alley in Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
       2004
16247  12-21-    Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
       2004
16248  12-21-    Fund (Special Revenue Library Automation Systems Sharing Fund)
       2004
16249  12-21-    Amending Ord. 15061 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
       2004      Reinvestment Zone No. 2
       12-21-
16250  2004;     Rezoning
       eff. 12-
       30-2004
16251-
01-    1-4-2005  Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 51
2005
16252- 1-4-2005;
01-    eff. 1-   13-2
2005   13-2005
16253-           Repealing Ord. 15295; and adopting an ordinance vacating the excess right-of-way
01-    1-4-2005  in the William Bussell Survey
2005
16254-
01-    1-4-2005  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16255-
01-    1-4-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16256-
01-    1-4-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16257- 1-4-2005;
01-    eff. 1-   Rezoning
2005   13-2005
16258- 1-4-2005;
01-    eff. 1-   Repealed by Ord. 17522
2005   20-2005
                 12.5-400,
                 12.5-401,
                 12.5-402,
                 12.5-403,
                 12.5-404,
                 12.5-411,
16259- 1-11-     12.5-412,
01-    2005;     12.5-413,
2005   eff. 1-   12.5-414,
       20-2005   12.5-415,
                 12.5-416,
                 12.5-417,
                 12.5-418,
                 12.5-419,
                 12.5-420,
                 12.5-421
16260-
01-    1-11-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16261- 1-11-
01-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 1-
       27-2005
                 5-5,
       1-18-     5-40,
16262- 2005;     5-41,
01-    eff. 1-   5-42,
2005   24-2005   5-43,
                 5-44,
                 5-45
16263-
01-    1-18-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16264-
01-    1-19-2005 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16265-
01-    1-18-2005 2-262
2005
16266-
01-    1-18-2005 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2005
16267-
01-    1-18-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16268-
01-    1-18-2005 Fund (Environmental Project Fund)
2005
16269- 1-18-
01-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 2-2-
       2005
16270- 1-18-
01-    2005;     App. A, 6.301,
2005   eff. 2-2- App. A, 9.101
       2005
16271-
01-    1-25-2005 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2005
16272-
01-    1-25-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16273-
01-    1-25-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16274-
01-    1-25-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16275- 1-25-
01-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 2-2-
       2005
16276-
01-    2-1-2005  Suspending implementing of rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2005
16277-
02-    2-1-2005  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2005
16278-
02-    2-1-2005  Fund (General Fund)
2005
16279-
02-    2-1-2005  Vacation (portion of an alley located in Rosen Heights)
2005
16280-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16281- 2-15-
02-    2005;     Establishing a fee for application for approval of a municipal setting
2005   eff. 2-   designation
       23-2005
16282-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2005
16283-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2005
16284-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2005
16285-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2005
16286-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2005
16287-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16288-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16289-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2005
16290-
02-    2-8-2005  Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2005
16291- 2-8-2005;
02-    eff. 2-   Rezoning
2005   24-2005
16292-
02-    2-17-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16293-
02-    2-17-2005 Fund (various funds)
2005
16294-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
02-    2-17-2005 revenue bonds, series 2005
2005
16295-
02-    2-17-2005 Vacation (alley located in Chamberlain Arlington Heights Addition)
2005
16296-
02-    2-17-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16297- 2-17-
02-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 3-
       10-2005
16298-
02-    2-22-2005 Ordering a general election
2005
16299-
02-    2-22-2005 Operating authority (Jet Taxi, Inc.)
2005
16300-
02-    2-22-2005 Operating authority (Jet Taxi, Inc.)
2005
16301-
02-    2-22-2005 Operating authority (Threejays Carriage, Inc.)
2005
16302-
02-    2-22-2005 Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2005
16303-
02-    2-22-2005 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16304-
02-    2-22-2005 Adopting 2005 Comprehensive Plan
2005
16305-
02-    2-22-2005 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2005
16306-           Repealing Ord. 15192, 15195 and 16253 and adopting an ordinance vacating right-
02-    2-22-2005 of-way in the William Bussell Survey
2005
16307-
02-    2-22-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16308-
02-    2-22-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16309-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
2005
16310-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16311-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16312-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16313- 3-1-2005;
03-    eff. 3-   Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025
2005   10-2005
16314-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Property and Casualty Insurance Fund)
2005
16315-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Information System Capital Project Fund)
2005
16316-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16317-
03-    3-1-2005  Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2005
16318-
03-    3-1-2005  Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Westworth
2005
16319- 3-1-2005;
03-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2005   11-2005
16320-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
03-    3-8-2005  bonds, series 2005A
2005
16321-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
03-    3-8-2005  revenue certificates of obligation, series 2005
2005
16322-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (federal Awarded Assets Fund)
2005
16323-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16324-
03-    3-8-2005  Approving Res. 2005-01-019 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2005
16325-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2005
16326-
03-    3-8-2005  Vacation (portion of West Dashwood Street)
2005
16327-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16328-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16329-
03-    3-8-2005  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16330- 3-8-2005; App. A, 5.305,
03-    eff. 3-   App. A, 6.100,
2005   21-2005   App. A, 9.101
                 §§ 1—10 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
16331- 3-8-2005;
03-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2005   21-2005
16332-           Declaring elected to office the unopposed candidates for Mayor and Council
03-    3-24-2005 member in council districts 3, 5 and 9
2005
16333-
03-    3-24-2005 Adopting a per acre charge for 1,935 acres served by approach service main
2005
16334-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16335-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16336-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16337-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16338-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16339-
03-    3-24-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16340- 3-24-
03-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 4-6-
       2005
16341-           Amending city Ord. 16298-02-2005 by deleting from Section V 5 early voting
03-    3-29-2005 polling place locations and by adding 3 additional polling locations
2005
16342-
03-    3-29-2005 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 52
2005
16343-           Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
03-    3-29-2005 Zone No. 8
2005
16344- 3-29-
03-    2005;     Approving Res. 2005-02-049 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2005   eff. 4-1-
       2005
16345-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16346-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16347-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16348-
03-    3-29-2005 Operating authority (To Yo Taxi Pedicabs)
2005
16349-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16350-
03-    3-29-2005 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
2005
16351-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16352-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Special Project Fund)
2005
16353-
03-    3-29-2005 Vacation (portion of East Bluff Street)
2005
16354-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16355-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16356-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Special Project Fund)
2005
16357-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16358-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2005
16359-
03-    3-29-2005 Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2005
16360-           Amending Ord. 16298-02-2005, as amended by Ord. 16341-03-2005 by adding 2 early
04-    4-5-2005  voting polling place
2005
16361- 4-5-2005;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2005   12-2005
16362-
04-    4-5-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16363-
04-    4-5-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16364-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
04-    4-5-2005  obligation taxable series 2005
2005
16365-
04-    4-5-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16366-
04-    4-5-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16367-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16368-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Sewer Rate Revolving Loan Fund)
2005
16369- 3-15-
04-    2005;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2005   eff. 4-
       19-2005
16370-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16371-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16372-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16373-
04-    4-12-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16374- 4-12-
04-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 4-
       22-2005
16375-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16376-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Local Development Corporation Fund)
2005
16377-
04-    4-19-2005 35-82
2005
16378-           Adopting a per acre charge for the 66.31 acres served by city initiated sewer
04-    4-19-2005 mains
2005
16379- 4-19-
04-    2005;     35-23
2005   eff. 5-
       27-2005
16380- 4-19-
04-    2005;     Repealed by Ord. 23222-05-2018
2005   eff. 5-
       11-2005
16381-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16382-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16383-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment reinvestment
04-    4-19-2005 Zone No. 24
2005
16384-
04-    4-19-2005 Vacation (portion of Bryce Avenue)
2005
16385-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16386-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16387-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16388-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16389-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16390-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2005
16391-
04-    4-19-2005 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2005
16392- 4-19-
04-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 5-4-
       2005
16393- 4-19-
04-    2005;     App. A, 6.101
2005   eff. 4-
       28-2005
16394-
04-    4-26-2005 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16395-           Amending Ord. 15819 by decreasing the number of shuttles that Supershuttle DFW
04-    4-26-2005 Corp. is authorized to operate
2005
16396-
04-    4-26-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16397-
04-    4-26-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16398-
04-    4-26-2005 Vacation (part of a 7 ft. wide alley in Field’s Addition)
2005
16399-
04-    4-26-2005 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2005
16400-
04-    4-26-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16401-
04-    4-26-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16402-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
04-    4-26-2005 Zone No. 10
2005
16403- 4-26-
04-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 5-4-
       2005
16404-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16405-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16406-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2005
16407-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16408-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2005
16409-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16410-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16411-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16412-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16413-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16414-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16415-
05-    5-3-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16416-
05-    7-19-2005 Numbered 16516-07-2005; Street Improvements Fund
2005
16417-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16418-
05-    5-10-2005 Annexation (213.34 acre tract of land)
2005
16419-
05-    5-10-2005 Annexation (11.8 acre tract of land)
2005
16420-
05-    5-10-2005 Annexation (200.194 acre tract of land)
2005
16421-
05-    5-10-2005 Annexation (6.9 acre tract of land)
2005
16422-
05-    5-10-2005 Annexation (1.9 acre tract of land)
2005
16423-
05-    5-10-2005 Vacation (an alley in Smith-Jones and Daggett Addition)
2005
16424-
05-    5-10-2005 Vacation (portion of Woodside Drive)
2005
16425-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16426-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16427-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Park and Recreation Improvements Projects Fund)
2005
16428-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2005
16429-
05-    5-10-2005 Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2005
16430- 5-10-
05-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 5-
       23-2005
16431-
05-    5-17-2005 Ordering a run-off election
2005
16432-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16433-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Culture and tourism Fund)
2005
16434-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Hotel Development Corporation Fund)
2005
16435-
05-    5-17-2005 Vacation (a portion of North Cummings Street)
2005
16436-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Critical Capital Project Fund)
2005
16437-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Critical Capital Project Fund)
2005
16438-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16439-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16440-
05-    5-17-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16441- 5-17-
05-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 5-
       31-2005
16442-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16443-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16444-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16445-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16446-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16447-
05-    5-24-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16448-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16449-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Grant Fund)
2005
16450-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16451-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16452-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16453-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16454-
05-    5-31-2005 Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
2005
16455-
05-    5-31-2005 Superseded by Ord. 20678-03-2013
2005
16456-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16457-
05-    5-31-2005 Vacation (portion of an alley located in Factory Place Addition)
2005
16458-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16459-
05-    6-1-2005  Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with the City of Forest Hill
2005
16460-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16461-
05-    5-31-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16462-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16463-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16464-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2005
16465-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (General Fund)
2005
16466-
06-    6-7-2005  Vacation (10 ft. wide portion of Locke Street)
2005
16467-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (Retail Water Impact Fee Fund)
2005
16468-
06-    6-7-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16469-
06-    6-14-2005 Annexation (6.48 acre tract of land)
2005
16470-
06-    6-14-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16471-
06-    6-14-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16472-
06-    6-14-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16473-           Amending Ord. 15570 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
06-    6-14-2005 Reinvestment Zone No. 10
2005
16474-           Amending Ord. 15815 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
06-    6-14-2005 Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2005
16475-
06-    6-14-2005 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2005
16476- 6-14-
06-    2005;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2005   eff. 6-
       22-2005
16477- 6-14-
06-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 6-
       30-2005
16478-
06-    6-21-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16479-
06-    6-21-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16480-
06-    6-21-2005 Fund (Park Improvement Fund)
2005
16481- 6-21-
06-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 6-
       30-2005
16482-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16483-
06-    6-28-2005 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2005
16484-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2005
16485-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16486-
06-    6-28-2005 Vacation (portion of Malvey Avenue)
2005
16487-
06-    6-28-2005 Vacation (emergency access easement of Stoneglen at Fossil Creek Addition)
2005
16488-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16489-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16490-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16491-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16492-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16493-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16494-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16495-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16496-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16497-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16498-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16499-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2005
16500-
06-    6-28-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16501-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
07-    7-5-2005  revenue certificates of obligation
2005
16502- 7-5-2005;
07-    eff. 7-   Approving Res. 2005-02-187 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2005   21-2005
16503-
07-    7-5-2005  Fund (General Fund)
2005
16504-
07-    7-5-2005  Fund (General Fund)
2005
16505-           Repealing Ord. 16306-02-2005 and adopting an ordinance vacating and excess
07-    7-19-2005 right-of-way in the William Bussell survey
2005
16506-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16507-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16508-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16509-           Amending Ord. 15819 increasing the number of shuttles which Supershuttle DFW
07-    7-19-2005 Corp. is authorized to operate
2005
16510-           Adopting a per acre charge served by city initiated sewer mains (Golden Triangle
07-    7-19-2005 Blvd./Old Denton Road sewer mains)
2005
16511-           Adopting a per acre charge served by city initiated sewer mains (Town of Tarrant
07-    7-19-2005 Addition)
2005
16512-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2005
16513-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16514-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16515-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16516-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2005
16517-
07-    7-19-2005 Operating authority (Moore’s Airport Transportation Service)
2005
16518-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2005
16519-
07-    7-19-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16520- 7-19-
07-    2005;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2005   eff. 7-
       28-2005
16521- 7-19-     App. A, 5.305,
07-    2005;     App. A, 6.300
2005   eff. 7-   §§ 1—5 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       28-2005
16522- 7-19-
07-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 7-
       28-2005
16523-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
07-    7-26-2005 obligation series 2005A
2005
16524-
07-    7-26-2005 Denying the rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2005
16525-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16526-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2005
16527-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16528-           Finding that conditions have materially changed in the city’s required
07-    7-26-2005 participation in the bridge replacement project at precinct line-walkers branch
2005
16529-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16530-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16531-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16532-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16533-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16534-
07-    7-26-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16535-
08-    8-4-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16536-
08-    8-4-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16537-
08-    8-4-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16538-
08-    8-4-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
                 22-1,
                 22-303,
16539- 8-9-2005; 22-303.1,
08-    eff. 8-   22-304.1,
2005   16-2005   22-305,
                 22-311,
                 22-312
16540-
08-    8-9-2005  Vacation (3 sections of right-of-way located on Hickman Road and Sweet Pea Road)
2005
16541-
08-    8-9-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16542-
08-    8-9-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16543-
08-    8-9-2005  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16544- 8-9-2005;
08-    eff. 8-   Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2005   29-2005
16545- 8-9-2005;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2005   29-2005
16546-
08-    8-16-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16547-
08-    8-23-2005 Vacation (alley near Photo Street and Spring Park Addition)
2005
16548-
08-    8-23-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16549-
08-    8-23-2005 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2005
16550-
08-    8-23-2005 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2005
16551-
08-    8-23-2005 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2005
16552-
08-    8-23-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16553-           Amending Ord. 15861 removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
08-    8-23-2005 Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2005
16554- 8-23-
08-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 9-8-
       2005
16555-
08-    8-30-2005 10-2
2005
16556-
08-    8-30-2005 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16557-
08-    8-30-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16558-
08-    8-30-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16559-
08-    8-30-2005 Fund (CO Special Project Fund)
2005
16560-
08-    8-30-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16561-           Amending Ord. 15861 removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
08-    8-30-2005 Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2005
16562-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16563-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2005
16564-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2005
16565-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16566-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16567-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16568-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2005
16569-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2005
16570-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2005
16571-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2005
16572-
09-    9-6-2005  Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16573- 9-6-2005;
09-    eff. 9-   Rezoning
2005   14-2005
16574-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16575-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16576-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16577-
09-    9-13-2005 Adopting National Incident Management System (NIMS)
2005
16578-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16579-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16580-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16581-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16582-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
09-    9-13-2005 office of the municipal government of the city
2005
16583-
09-    9-13-2005 Providing for a levy and collection of an ad valorem tax
2005
16584-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-13-2005 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
2005
16585-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16586-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16587-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-13-2005 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
2005
16588-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16589-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-13-2005 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
2005
16590-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16591-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-13-2005 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
2005
16592-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16593-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-13-2005 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
2005
16594-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2005
16595-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16596-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2005
16597-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2005
16598-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16599-           Finding that conditions have materially altered for construction of North
09-    9-13-2005 Tarrant Parkway
2005
16600-
09-    9-13-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16601-           Amending Ord. 15841 by removing property Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
09-    9-13-2005 Zone No. 15
2005
16602-
09-    9-13-2005 Annexation (137.3 acre tract of land)
2005
16603- 9-13-
09-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 9-
       28-2005
16604-
09-    9-20-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16605-
09-    9-20-2005 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2005
16606-
09-    9-20-2005 Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2005
16607-
09-    9-20-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16608-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16609-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Insurance Fund)
2005
16610-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
2005
16611-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16612-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16613-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16614-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16615-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16616-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16617-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16618-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16619-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16620-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16621-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16622- 9-27-     12-1,
09-    2005;     12-3,
2005   eff. 11-  12-16
       1-2005
16623- 9-27-
09-    2005;     35-56
2005   eff. 10-
       1-2005
16624- 9-27-
09-    2005;     35-56
2005   eff. 1-1-
       2006
16625-
09-    9-27-2005 Vacation (portion of 13th Street)
2005
16626-
09-    9-27-2005 Changing the name of Scoma Road to Sunny Hill Road
2005
16627-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16628-
09-    9-27-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16629- 9-27-
09-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 10-
       6-2005
16630-
10-    10-4-2005 Creating the Mayor’s Commission on Homelessness
2005
16631-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16632-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16633-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16634-           Amending Ord. 15815 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
10-    10-4-2005 Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2005
16635-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (General Fund)
2005
16636-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2005
16637-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16638-
10-    10-4-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16639- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16640- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16641- 10-11-
10-    2005;     23-6
2005   eff. 10-
       21-2005
16642- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2005
16643- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2005
16644- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16645- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16646- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16647- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16648- 10-11-
10-    2005;     35-70.3
2005   eff. 1-
       10-2006
16649- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16650- 10-11-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16651- 10-11-
10-    2005;     App. A, 5.305,
2005   eff. 10-  App. A, 6.101
       18-2005
16652- 10-11-
10-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 10-
       21-2005
16653- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16654- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2005
16655- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2005
16656- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2005
16657- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2005
16658- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2005
16659- 10-18-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16660- 10-18-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
10-    2005      revenue bonds series 2005A
2005
16661- 10-18-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
10-    2005      revenue bonds series 2005B
2005
16662- 10-18-
10-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 11-
       18-2005
16663- 10-25-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16664- 10-25-
10-    2005      Repealed by Ord. 23222-05-2018
2005
16665- 10-25-
10-    2005      Fund (General Fund)
2005
16666- 10-25-
10-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16667- 10-25-
10-    2005      Approving project and financing plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 7
2005
16668- 10-25-
10-    2005      Annexation (1.71 acre tract of land)
2005
16669- 10-25-
10-    2005      Annexation (350.4 acre tract of land)
2005
16670- 10-25-
10-    2005      Vacation (alley located in Riverside Addition)
2005
16671- 10-25-
10-    2005      Fund (Water State Revolving Loan Fund)
2005
16672- 10-25-
10-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 11-
       9-2005
16673-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16674-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16675-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16676-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16677-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16678-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2005
16679-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16680-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16681-
11-    11-1-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16682-           Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
11-    11-1-2005 classification (rank) in the Fire Department
2005
16683-
11-    11-1-2005 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 53
2005
16684- 11-1-
11-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 11-
       16-2005
16685-           Amending Ord. 15864 increasing the number of shuttles which Classic Acquisition
11-    11-8-2005 Corp. is authorized to operate
2005
16686-
11-    11-8-2005 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2005
16687-
11-    11-8-2005 Vacation (strip of right-of-way in Draughon Heights Addition)
2005
16688-
11-    11-8-2005 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2005
16689-
11-    11-8-2005 Vacation (portion of North Cummings Street right-of-way)
2005
16690-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (323.98 acre tract of land)
2005
16691-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (4.2 acre tract of land)
2005
16692-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (6 acre tract of land)
2005
16693-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (29 acre tract of land)
2005
16694-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (5.7 acre tract of land)
2005
16695-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (1.2 acre tract of land)
2005
16696-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (.5 acre tract of land)
2005
16697-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (41 acre tract of land)
2005
16698-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (5.6 acre tract of land)
2005
16699-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (39 acre tract of land)
2005
16700-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (14.8 acre tract of land)
2005
16701-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (1.9 acre tract of land)
2005
16702-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (5.7 acre tract of land)
2005
16703-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (80 acre tract of land)
2005
16704-
11-    11-8-2005 Annexation (6,698 acre tract of land)
2005
16705- 11-8-
11-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 11-
       23-2005
16706- 11-15-
11-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16707- 11-15-
11-    2005      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16708- 11-15-
11-    2005      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2005
16709- 11-15-
11-    2005      Operating authority (Executive Services of Texas)
2005
16710- 11-15-
11-    2005      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16711- 11-15-
11-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16712- 11-15-
11-    2005      Denying the rate adjustment proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2005
16713- 11-15-
11-    2005      Initiating a ratemaking procedure against Atmos Energy Corp.
2005
16714- 11-29-
11-    2005      Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16715- 11-29-    Amending Ord. 16220 by increasing the number of directors on the Board of
11-    2005      Directors of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 11
2005
16716- 11-29-
11-    2005;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2005   eff. 12-
       16-2005
16717- 11-29-
11-    2005      Vacation (5 ft. strip of Lowden Street)
2005
16718- 11-29-
11-    2005      Vacation (portion of Faron Street)
2005
16719-
12-    12-6-2005 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2005
16720-
12-    12-6-2005 Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16721- 12-6-
12-    2005;     Repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
2005   eff. 12-
       16-2006
16722-
12-    12-6-2005 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2005
16723-
12-    12-6-2005 Annexation (326.56 acre tract of land)
2005
16724-
12-    12-6-2005 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2005
16725-
12-    12-6-2005 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16726- 12-13-
12-    2005      Amending Ord. 14233 to extend the privilege of Darya Corp.
2005
16727- 12-13-
12-    2005      Operating authority (Irvine Holdings, Inc.)
2005
16728- 12-13-
12-    2005      Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2005
16729- 12-13-
12-    2005      Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2005
16730- 12-13-
12-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16731- 12-13-
12-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 1-6-
       2006
16732- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Rental Rehab Fund)
2005
16733- 12-20-
12-    2005      Operating authority (Cowboy Cab Company, Inc.)
2005
16734- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16735- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2005
16736- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (CO Special Projects Fund)
2005
16737- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16738- 12-20-
12-    2005      Appointing municipal judge
2005
16739- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2005
16740- 12-20-
12-    2005      Annexation (1.268 acre tract of land)
2005
16741- 12-20-
12-    2005      Annexation (14.985 acre tract of land)
2005
16742- 12-20-
12-    2005      Annexation (4 acre tract of land)
2005
16743- 12-20-
12-    2005      Annexation (21.9 acre tract of land)
2005
16744- 12-20-
12-    2005      Annexation (20 acre tract of land)
2005
16745- 12-20-
12-    2005      Vacation (portion of Woolery Street)
2005
16746- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16747- 12-20-
12-    2005      Fund (Grants Fund)
2005
16748- 12-20-
12-    2005;     Rezoning
2005   eff. 1-6-
       2006
16749-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16750-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2006
16751-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16752-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2006
16753-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16754-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16755-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
16756-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2006
16757-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16758-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16759-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16760-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16761-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
16762-
01-    1-10-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16763- 1-10-
01-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 1-
       26-2006
16764-
01-    1-19-2006 11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
2006
16765-
01-    1-19-2006 29-1
2006
16766-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2006
16767-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16768-
01-    1-19-2006 Approving project and financing plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 9
2006
16769-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16770-
01-    1-19-2006 Annexation (16.504 acre tract of land)
2006
16771-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16772-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16773-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16774-
01-    1-19-2006 Fund (Park and Recreation Improvements Fund)
2006
16775-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16776-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16777-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16778-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16779-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16780-
01-    1-24-2006 Ordering special election
2006
16781-
01-    1-24-2006 Establishing a municipal drainage utility system
2006
                 12.5-336,
                 12.5-337,
                 12.5-338,
                 12.5-339,
16782-           12.5-340,
01-    1-24-2006 12.5-341,
2006             12.5-342,
                 12.5-343,
                 12.5-344,
                 12.5-345,
                 12.5-346,
                 12.5-347
16783- 1-24-
01-    2006;     22-191
2006   eff. 2-6-
       2006
16784-           27-41,
01-    1-24-2006 27-43,
2006             27-44
16785-
01-    1-24-2006 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with the City of Sansom Park
2006
16786-
01-    1-24-2006 Vacation (portion of West Magnolia Avenue)
2006
16787-
01-    1-24-2006 Vacation (portion of Harrison Avenue)
2006
16788-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16789-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16790-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16791-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16792-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16793-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16794-
01-    1-24-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16795-           Amending Ord. 15775 by reducing the city’s contributions of tax increment to the
01-    1-24-2006 Tax Increment Fund)
2006
16796- 1-24-
01-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 2-3-
       2009
16797-
01-    1-24-2006 Ordering a special election (Charter)
2006
16798-
01-    1-31-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16799- 1-31-
01-    2006;     Approving Res. 2005-12-480 of the International Airport Board
2006   eff. 2-
       10-2006
16800-
01-    1-31-2006 Vacation (25 ft. strip of unnamed right-of-way in Home Acres Addition
2006
16801-
01-    1-31-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16802-
01-    1-31-2006 Amending Ord. 16797-01-2006 ordering a special election (Charter)
2006
16803-
01-    1-31-2006 Fund (various funds)
2006
16804-
01-    1-31-2006 35-60
2006
16805-
01-    1-31-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16806-           Supplemental concurrent bond ordinance; International Airport joint revenue
02-    2-7-2006  refunding bonds, series 2006A
2006
16807-
02-              
2006
16808-
02-    2-7-2006  Reducing the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 9
2006
16809-
02-    2-7-2006  Fund (State Revenue Revolving Fund)
2006
16810-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Information System Capital Project Fund)
2006
16811-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16812-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16813-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16814-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
16815-
02-    2-14-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16816- 2-14-
02-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   eff. 2-
       24-2006
16817- 2-14-
02-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   eff. 2-
       24-2006
16818- 2-14-
02-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 2-
       24-2006
16819-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16820-
02-    2-21-2006 Vacation (50 ft. portion of any alley located in Factory Place Addition)
2006
16821-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
16822-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16823-
02-    2-21-2006 Amending Ord. 16780-01-2006 and 16802-01-2006 ordering a special election
2006
16824-
02-    2-21-2006 Amending Ord. 16797-01-2006 ordering a special election
2006
16825-
02-    2-21-2006 Adopting 2006 Comprehensive Plan
2006
16826-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
16827-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16828-
02-    2-21-2006 Revising exterior boundary of single member district of 2, 3 and 7
2006
16829-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16830-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16831-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2006
16832-
02-    2-21-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16833-
02-    2-28-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16834-
02-    2-28-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16835-
02-    2-28-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16836-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16837-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16838-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16839-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16840-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16841-           Amending Ord. 16780-01-2006, 16802-01-2006 and 16823-02-2006 ordering a special
03-    3-7-2006  election
2006
16842-
03-    3-7-2006  Amending Ord. 16797-01-2006 and 16824-02-2006 ordering a special election
2006
16843-
03-    3-7-2006  12.5-340
2006
16844- 3-7-2006;
03-    eff. 3-   Repealed by Ord. 17522
2006   20-2006
16845-           Vacation (right-of-way located at northeast corner of Forest Park Boulevard and
03-    3-7-2006  West Rosedale Street
2006
16846-
03-    3-7-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16847-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16848-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16849-
03-    3-21-2006 Vacation (alley located in University Place Addition)
2006
16850-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16851-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16852-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2006
16853-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16854-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16855-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16856-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2006
16857-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16858-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2006
16859-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16860-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16861-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16862-
03-    3-21-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16863- 3-21-
03-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 4-
       14-2006
16864-           Amending Ord. 16818 to reflect waiver of planned development site plan for ZC
03-    3-28-2006 06-007
2006
16865-
03-    3-28-2006 Amending Ord. 16731 reflecting mete and bounds
2006
16866-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
16867-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
16868-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvements Fund)
2006
16869-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16870-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16871-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16872-           Amending Ord. 16780-01-2006, 16802-01-2006, 16823-02-2006 and 16841-03-2006
03-    3-28-2006 ordering a special election
2006
16873-           Amending Ord. 16797-01-2006, 16824-02-2006 and 16842-03-2006 ordering a special
03-    3-28-2006 election
2006
16874-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2006
16875-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2006
16876-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2006
16877-
03-    3-28-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16878-
04-    4-4-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16879-           Amending Ord. 15754 decreasing number of limos which Alamo Limousine Limited
04-    4-4-2008  Partnership is authorized to operate
2006
16880-
04-    4-4-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16881-
04-    4-4-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16882-
04-    4-4-2008  To revoke the privilege granted to Pete’s Limousine
2006
16883-
04-    4-4-2008  To revoke the privilege granted to Shooting Star Limousine
2006
16884-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2006
16885-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16886-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16887-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16888-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2006
16889-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16890-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16891-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2006
16892-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16893-
04-    4-11-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16894- 4-11-
04-    2008;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 4-
       28-2006
16895-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16896-
04-    4-18-2006 Vacation (portion of East Drew Street)
2006
16897-
04-    4-18-2006 Vacation (portion of an alley in Tuckers Addition)
2006
16898-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16899-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16900-
04-    4-18-2006 Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2006
16901-
04-    4-18-2006 Appointing municipal judges
2006
16902-
04-    4-18-2006 Appointing municipal judge
2006
16903-
04-    4-18-2006 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
2006
16904-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16905-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16906-
04-    4-18-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16907- 4-18-
04-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 4-
       27-2006
                 12-1,
                 12-2,
       4-25-     12-3,
16908- 2006;     12-5,
04-    eff. 5-3- 12-6,
2006   2006      12-8,
                 12-9,
                 12-16
                 Repealed 12-15
16909-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16910-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
16911-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16912-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16913-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (Grants Fund0
2006
16914-
04-    4-25-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16915- 4-25-
04-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 5-8-
       2006
16916-
05-    5-2-2006  Vacation (portion of West Terrell Avenue)
2006
16917-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2006
16918-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16919-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2006
16920-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16921-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (General Fund)
2006
16922-
05-    5-2-2006  Fund (Development Inspections Fund)
2006
16923-
05-    5-2-2006  Appointing municipal judges
2006
16924- 5-2-2006; App. A, 6.101
05-    eff 5-8-  §§ 1—4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   2006
16925- 5-2-2006;
05-    eff. 5-   App. A, 6.507
2006   11-2006
16926- 5-2-2006; App. A, 5.403,
05-    eff. 5-8- App. A, 6.508
2006   2006      § 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
16927-
05-    5-9-2006  Vacation (10-ft. wide alley between Crawford Street and Calhoun Street)
2006
16928-
05-    5-9-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16929-
05-    5-9-2006  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16930-
05-    5-9-2006  Fund (General Fund)
2006
                 3-280,
16931- 5-9-2006; 3-281,
05-    eff. 5-   3-282,
2006   22-2006   3-283,
                 3-284,
                 3-285
16932-
05-    5-9-2006  35-56
2006
16933-
05-    5-9-2006  Superseded by Ord. 17901
2006
16934-
05-    5-9-2006  Vacation (portion of Terrell Avenue)
2006
16935-
05-    5-9-2006  Vacation (portion of Calhoun Street)
2006
16936-
05-    5-9-2006  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16937-
05-    5-9-2006  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16938- 5-9-2006;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2006   24-2006
16939-
05-    5-16-2006 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2006
16940-
05-    5-16-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16941-
05-    5-16-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16942-
05-    5-16-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16943-
05-    5-16-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16944-
05-    5-16-2006 Suspending implementation of rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2006
16945-
05-    5-16-2006 Vacation (portion of Leuda Street)
2006
16946-
05-    5-16-2006 Vacation (right-of-way labeled Orea Way)
2006
16947- 5-16-
05-    2006;     App. A, 2.101
2006   eff. 5-
       22-2006
16948- 5-16-     App. A, 3.504,
05-    2006;     App. A, 3.505,
2006   eff. 5-   App. A, 3.506
       22-2006
16949- 5-16-
05-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 5-
       24-2006
16950-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16951-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16952-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16953-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16954-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16955-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16956-
05-    5-23-2006 Requiring relocation of utility facilities located in city right-of-way
2006
16957-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2006
16958-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16959-
05-    5-23-2006 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 54
2006
16960-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2006
16961-
05-    5-23-2006 Vacation (portion of excess right-of-way located in Sycamore Heights Addition)
2006
16962-
05-    5-23-2006 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16963-
05-    5-30-2006 Amending Ord. 16956-05-2006 to correct Utilities Code citations
2006
16964- 5-30-
05-    2006;     Amending Ord. 16894 to reflect the lot and block information
2006   eff. 6-7-
       2006
16965-
05-    5-30-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16966-
05-    5-30-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16967-
05-    5-30-2006 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2006
16968-
05-    5-30-2006 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2006
16969-
05-    5-30-2006 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2006
16970- 5-30-
05-    2006;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2006   eff. 6-7-
       2006
16971-
05-    5-30-2006 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2006
16972-
05-    5-30-2006 Vacation (portion of Dashwood Street)
2006
16973-
05-    5-30-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16974-
06-    6-6-2006  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16975-
06-    6-6-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16976-
06-    6-6-2006  Fund (General Fund)
2006
16977-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16978-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
16979-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16980-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16981-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16982-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16983-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2006
16984-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16985-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
16986- 6-13-
06-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 18399-02-2009, § 1
2006   eff. 6-
       21-2006
16987-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
16988-
06-    6-13-2006 13-27
2006
16989-           Repealing Ord. 16634 and removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
06-    6-13-2006 Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2006
16990-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16991-
06-    6-13-2006 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Benbrook
2006
16992-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
16993-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2006
16994-
06-    6-13-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
16995- 6-13-
06-    2006;     App. A, 5.140
2006   eff. 6-   § 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       19-2006
16996- 6-13-
06-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 6-
       30-2006
16997-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16998-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
16999-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17000-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17001-
06-    6-20-2006 Revoking the privilege granted to Hot Wheels Pedicab
2006
17002-
06-    6-20-2006 Revoking the privilege granted to Jet Taxi Inc Limousine and Taxi Service)
2006
17003-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17004-           Vacation (portion of an alley adjacent to lots located in Polytechnic Heights
06-    6-20-2006 Addition)
2006
17005-
06-    6-20-2006 Vacation (portion of an alley adjacent to lots located in Linwood Addition)
2006
17006-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
17007-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17008-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17009-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17010-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17011-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17012-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17013-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17014-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17015-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Grant Fund)
2006
17016-
06-    6-20-2006 Revoking the privilege granted to About Town Pedicab
2006
17017-
06-    6-20-2006 Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2006
17018-           Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the police
06-    6-20-2006 department
2006
17019-
06-    6-20-2006 Denying the rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2006
17020-
06-    6-20-2006 Denying Atmos Energy Corp.’s statement of intent to change rates
2006
17021-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17022-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17023-
06-    6-20-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17024- 6-20-
06-    2006;     App. A, 6.201
2006   eff. 6-   § 2 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       26-2006
17025- 6-20-
06-    2006;     App. A, 5.305
2006   eff. 6-
       26-2006
17026- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (Adams Limousine Service)
2006   eff. 9-7-
       2006
17027- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (Agency STS, Inc.)
2006   eff. 10-
       25-2006
17028- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (A Alliance Limousines and Sedans, Inc.)
2006   eff. 9-7-
       2006
17029- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (Boston Coach Texas Corp.)
2006   eff. 9-7-
       2006
17030- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (Premier Transportation Service LLC)
2006   eff. 9-7-
       2006
17031-
07-    7-11-2006 Operating authority (Superior One Transportation and Charters LLC)
2006
17032-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2006
17033-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2006
17034-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17035-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17036-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17037-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17038-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17039-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17040-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17041-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17042-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17043- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Fund (City Shuttle LLP)
2006   eff. 9-8-
       2006
17044-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17045-           Amending Ord. 15861 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
07-    7-11-2006 Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2006
17046-
07-    7-11-2006 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2006
17047-
07-    7-11-2006 Annexation (28.9 tract of land)
2006
17048- 7-11-
07-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 7-
       27-2006
17049- 7-18-
07-    2006;     Approving Res. 2006-03-068 and 2000-06-207 of the Dallas-Fort Worth
2006-1 eff. 7-   International Airport Board
       26-2006
17049-
07-    7-18-2006 Part 2 of approval of Res. 2006-03-068 and 2000-06-207
2006-2
17050- 7-18-
07-    2006;     Operating authority (Gaylord Texan Resort and Convention Center)
2006   eff. 9-
       13-2006
17051- 7-18-
07-    2006;     Amending Ord. 15972 by increasing the number of limousines Silver West Limousine
2006   eff. 9-   Inc. is authorized to operate
       13-2006
17052-
07-    7-18-2006 Revoking the privilege granted to Zio’s Limos
2006
17053-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2006
17054-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
17055-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17056-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17057-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17058-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17059-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17060- 7-18-
07-    2006;     Amending Ord. 16894 ZC 06-017
2006   eff. 7-
       27-2006
17061-           Designating a certain contiguous geographic area in the city Tax Increment
07-    7-18-2006 Reinvestment Zone No. 12
2006
17062-
07-    7-18-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17063-           Amending Ord. 15815 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
07-    7-18-2006 Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2006
17064- 7-18-
07-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 7-
       27-2006
17065- 7-25-
07-    2006;     Retroactively adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions
2006   eff. 6-   in the Police Department
       20-2006
17066-
07-    7-25-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17067-
07-    7-25-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17068-
07-    7-25-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17069-
07-    7-25-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17070-
07-    7-25-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17071- 7-25-
07-    2006;     7-47
2006   eff. 8-7-
       2006
17072- 7-25-
07-    2006;     Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2006   eff. 2-7-
       2006
17073- 7-25-
07-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 21615-02-2015
2006   eff. 8-7-
       2006
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-121,
                 12.5-122,
17074- 7-25-     12.5-601,
07-    2006;     12.5-610,
2006   eff. 6-   12.5-610.1,
       10-2006   12.5-610.2,
                 12.5-640,
                 12.5-648,
                 12.5-670
17075- 7-25-
07-    2006;     12.5-603
2006   eff. 8-
       10-2006
17076- 7-25-
07-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 8-
       10-2006
17077- 8-4-2006;
08-    eff. 10-  Operating authority (R. Brown Investments LP)
2006   25-2006
17078-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2006
17079-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
17080-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17081-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17082-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17083-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17084-
08-    8-4-2006  Vacation (portion of West 13th Street)
2006
17085-
08-    8-4-2006  Fund (General Fund)
2006
17086-
08-    8-8-2006  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17087-
08-    8-8-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17088-
08-    8-8-2006  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17089-
08-    8-8-2006  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17090-
08-    8-8-2006  Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2006
17091-
08-    8-8-2006  Vacation (portion of an alley in Bellaire Addition)
2006
17092-
08-    8-8-2006  Vacation (portion of Odessa Avenue)
2006
                 App. A, 5.104,
                 App. A, 5.133,
                 App. A, 5.134,
                 App. A, 5.135,
                 App. A, 5.136,
17093- 8-8-2006; App. A, 5.137,
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 5.138,
2006   21-2006   App. A, 5.139,
                 App. A, 5.140,
                 App. A, 5.141,
                 App. A, 5.142,
                 App. A, 5.143,
                 App. A, 9.101
                 §§ 1, 4, 6 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
17094- 8-8-2006;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2006   24-2006
17095-
08-    8-15-2006 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17096-
08-    8-15-2006 Ordering a special election
2006
17097- 8-15-
08-    2006;     Operating authority (Accent Johnston Limousine
2006   eff. 10-
       25-2006
17098- 8-15-
08-    2006;     Operating authority (City Transportation LLC)
2006   eff. 9-
       22-2006
17099- 8-15-
08-    2006;     7-78
2006   eff. 8-
       24-2006
17100-           Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
08-    8-15-2006 Zone No. 8
2006
17101-
08-    8-15-2006 Annexation (0.833 acre tract of land)
2006
17102-
08-    8-15-2006 Annexation (7.385 acre tract of land)
2006
17103-
08-    8-15-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17104-
08-    8-15-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17105- 8-15-
08-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 9-8-
       2006
17106-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2006
17107- 8-22-
08-    2006;     Amending Ord. 16481 to incorporate the planned development standards into ZC 05-
2006   eff. 9-5- 101
       2006
17108-
08-    8-22-2006 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 55
2006
17109-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17110-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17111-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17112-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17113-
08-    8-22-2006 Changing the name of a portion of Sunny Hill Road to Scoma Road
2006
17114-
08-    8-22-2006 Changing the name of Parkside Village Drive to Sohi Drive
2006
17115-
08-    8-22-2006 Changing the name of Vista Village Drive to Big View Drive
2006
17116-
08-    8-22-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17117-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2006
17118-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17119-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Public Events Fund)
2006
17120-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17121-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17122-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17123-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17124- 8-29-
08-    2006;     4-4
2006   eff. 9-8-
       2006
17125-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17126-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17127-
08-    8-29-2006 Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 56
2006
17128-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17129-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17130-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17131-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2006
17132-
08-    8-29-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2006
17133-
09-    9-5-2006  Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17134-
09-    9-5-2006  Amending Ord. 17096-08-2006 ordering a special election
2006
17135-
09-    9-5-2006  Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2006
17136- 9-5-2006;
09-    eff. 9-   Rezoning
2006   26-2006
17137-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17138-
09-    9-12-2006 Operating authority (Access Limousine Service)
2006
17139-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2006
17140-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17141-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17142-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
09-    9-12-2006 office of the municipal government of the city
2006
17143-
09-    9-12-2006 Providing for the levy and collection of ad valorem tax
2006
17144-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-12-2006 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
2006
17145-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17146-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-12-2006 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
2006
17147-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17148-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-12-2006 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
2006
17149-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17150-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-12-2006 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
2006
17151-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17152-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-12-2006 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
2006
17153-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2006
17154- 9-12-
09-    2006;     Subdivisions, App. C (part 1); Ord. 17851 subsequently renumbered this material
2006-1 eff. 9-   and moved it to Ch. 31
       26-2006
17154- 9-12-
09-    2006;     Subdivisions, App. C (part 2); Ord. 17851 subsequently renumbered this material
2006-2 eff. 9-   and moved it to Ch. 31
       26-2006
17155-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17156-
09-    9-12-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17157- 9-12-
09-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 11-
       7-2006
17158-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2006
17159-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17160-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Insurance Fund)
2006
17161-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
17162-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17163-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17164-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17165-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17166-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17167-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17168-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17169-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17170-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17171-
09-    9-19-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17172- 9-19-
09-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 10-
       6-2006
17173-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17174-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17175-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17176-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17177-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17178-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
17179-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17180-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
17181-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17182-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17183-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17184-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17185-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17186-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17187-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17188-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17189-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17190-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17191-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17192-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17193-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17194-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17195-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17196-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17197-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17198-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17199-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17200- 9-26-
09-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 17522
2006   eff. 10-
       2-2006
17201- 9-26-
09-    2006;     7-47
2006   eff. 10-
       2-2006
17202- 9-26-
09-    2006;     7-167
2006   eff. 10-
       2-2006
17203- 9-26-
09-    2006;     26-2
2006   eff. 10-
       2-2006
17204- 9-26-
09-    2006;     11-2; superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
2006   eff. 10-
       2-2006
17205-
09-    9-26-2006 29-1
2006
17206-
09-    9-26-2006 15-51
2006
17207-           Amending Ord. 7323; revising exterior boundary of single member district of 2
09-    9-26-2006 and 7 (part 1)
2006-1
17207-           Amending Ord. 7323; revising exterior boundary of single member district of 2
09-    9-26-2006 and 7 (part 2)
2006-2
17208- 9-26-
09-    2006;     35-56
2006   eff. 10-
       1-2006
17209-
09-    9-26-2006 Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment reinvestment Zone No. 3
2006
17210-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2006
17211-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17212-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17213-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17214-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17215-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17216-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17217-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17218-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17219-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17220-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17221-
09-    9-26-2006 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17222- 10-10-
10-    2006      Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17223- 10-10-
10-    2006      Fund (Engineering Fund)
2006
17224-
10-    10-3-2006 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2006
17225-
10-    10-3-2006 12.5-841.1
2006
17226-
10-    10-3-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2006
17227-
10-    10-3-2006 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
17228- 10-3-
10-    2006;     App. A, 6.301,
2006   eff. 10-  App. A, 9.101
       26-2006
17229- 10-3-
10-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 10-
       26-2006
17230- 10-10-
10-    2006      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17231- 10-10-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17232- 10-10-
10-    2006      Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Fund)
2006
17233- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17234- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17235- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17236- 10-17-
10-    2006;     Operating authority (Gorgi Group Limo Service LLC)
2006   eff. 11-
       15-2006
17237- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2006
17238- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17239- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2006
17240- 10-17-
10-    2006      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17241- 10-17-
10-    2006      Appointing substitute municipal judges
2006
17242- 10-17-
10-    2006      Vacation (unnamed street right-of-way in the Jud Rowland Survey)
2006
17243- 10-17-
10-    2006;     App. A, 3.406
2006   eff. 10-
       26-2006
17244- 10-17-
10-    2006;     App. A, 8.102
2006   eff. 10-
       26-2006
17245- 10-24-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17246- 10-24-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17247- 10-24-
10-    2006      Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2006
17248- 10-24-
10-    2006      Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2006
17249- 10-24-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17250- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (General Fund)
2006
17251- 10-31-    2-279,
10-    2006      2-285,
2006             2-286
17252- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2006
17253- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17254- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17255- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17256- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17257- 10-31-
10-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17258- 10-31-
10-    2006;     Approving Res. 2006-09-313 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport
2006   eff. 11-
       7-2006
17259-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2006
17260-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17261-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17262-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17263-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (General Fund)
2006
17264-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Grant Fund)
2006
17265-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
17266-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17267-
11-    11-7-2006 Vacation (portion of West 3rd Street)
2006
17268-
11-    11-7-2006 Vacation (portion of West Weatherford Street)
2006
17269-
11-    11-7-2006 Vacation (portion of Taylor Street)
2006
17270-
11-    11-7-2006 Vacation (portion of Throckmorton Street
2006
17271-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2006
17272-
11-    11-7-2006 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2006
17273- 11-7-
11-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   eff. 12-
       1-2006
17274- 11-7-
11-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   eff. 12-
       1-2006
17275- 11-7-
11-    2006;     31-106
2006   eff. 11-
       22-2006
17276- 11-7-
11-    2006;     App. A, 9.101
2006   eff. 11-
       22-2006
17277- 11-7-
11-    2006;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006   eff. 12-
       1-2006
17278- 11-7-
11-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 12-
       7-2006
17279- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Operating authority (Carey Limousine Dallas Inc.)
2006   eff. 1-5-
       2007
17280- 11-14-
11-    2006      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17281- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2006   eff. 11-
       22-2006
17282- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2006   eff. 11-
       22-2006
17283- 11-14-
11-    2006      Annexation (107.4 acre tract of land)
2006
17284- 11-14-
11-    2006      Annexation (4.7 acre tract of land)
2006
17285- 11-14-
11-    2006      Annexation (44.2 acre tract of land)
2006
17286- 11-14-
11-    2006      Vacation (portion of East Bluff Street)
2006
17287- 11-14-
11-    2006      Fund (General Fund)
2006
17288- 11-14-
11-    2006;     App. A, 2.104
2006   eff. 2-
       28-2007
17289- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Annexation (4.57 acre tract of land)
2006   eff. 12-
       1-2006
17290- 11-14-
11-    2006      Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2006
17291- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Rezoning (part 1)
2006-1 eff. 12-
       20-2006
17291- 11-14-
11-    2006;     Rezoning (part 2)
2006-2 eff. 12-
       20-2006
17292- 11-28-
11-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17293- 11-28-
11-    2006      Vacation (excess portion of right-of-way along Tulsa Way)
2006
17294- 11-28-    Adjusting total number of authorized civil service positions at each
11-    2006      classification (rank) in the Fire Department
2006
17295- 11-28-
11-    2006      Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2006
17296- 11-28-
11-    2006      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17297- 11-28-
11-    2006      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17298- 11-28-
11-    2006      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17299- 11-28-
11-    2006      Annexation (34.75 acre tract of land)
2006
17300- 11-28-
11-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 12-
       18-2006
17301- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17302- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17303- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2006
17304- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (General Fund)
2006
17305- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2006
17306- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2006
17307- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17308- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
2006
17309- 12-12-
12-    2006;     Superseded by Ord. 18399-12-2008
2006   eff. 12-
       27-2006
17310- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2006
17311- 12-12-
12-    2006      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 57
2006
17312- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2006
17313- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2006
17314- 12-12-
12-    2006      Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2006
17315- 12-12-
12-    2006      Amending 2004 Capital Improvements program (Precinct Line Road)
2006
17316- 12-12-
12-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 1-5-
       2007
17317- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2006
17318- 12-19-
12-    2006      Revoking privilege granted to Jet Taxi Inc.
2006
17319- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17320- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2006
17321- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvement Fund)
2006
17322- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17323- 12-19-    Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
12-    2006      limited surplus revenue certificates of obligation, series 2007
2006
17324- 12-19-    Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
12-    2006      parking revenue certificates of obligation, series 2007
2006
17325- 12-19-
12-    2006      Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds, series 2007
2006
17326- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17327- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2006
17328- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17329- 12-19-
12-    2006      Annexation (5.2 acre tract of land)
2006
17330- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2006
17331- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17332- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17333- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17334- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17335- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Grants Fund)
2006
17336- 12-19-
12-    2006      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2006
17337- 12-19-
12-    2006      Adopting a pro rata connection fee against each lot within Willow Springs Ranch
2006
17338- 12-19-
12-    2006      Annexation (184.139 acre tract of land)
2006
17339- 12-19-
12-    2006;     Rezoning
2006   eff. 1-
       18-2007
17340- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 1-   Repealed by Ord. 17522
2007   23-2007
17341-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2007
17342-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17343-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17344-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17345-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17346- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Legacy Transportation, Inc.)
2007   17-2007
17347- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 1-   Repealed by Ord. 17522
2007   23-2007
17348-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17349-
01-    1-9-2007  Vacation (200 foot portion of a 12-ft. wide ally in W.J. Boaz’s Subdivision)
2007
17350-
01-    1-9-2007  Vacation (portion of East Tucker Street)
2007
17351-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17352-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2007
17353-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17354-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17355-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17356-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17357-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17358-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17359-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17360-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17361-
01-    1-9-2007  Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2007
17362-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and limited surplus revenue
01-    1-9-2007  certificates of obligation, series 2007
2007
17363-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and parking revenue certificates
01-    1-9-2007  of obligation, series 2007
2007
17364-
01-    1-9-2007  Annexation (75.987 acre tract of land)
2007
17365-
01-    1-9-2007  Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2007
17366- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 1-   App. A, 2.105; repealed by Ord. 18615-05-2009
2007   18-2007
17367- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 1-   App. A, 6.301
2007   18-2007
17368- 1-9-2007;
01-    eff. 1-   Rezoning
2007   25-2007
17369-
01-    1-18-2007 Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Program Fund)
2007
17370-
01-    1-18-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17371-
01-    1-18-2007 Changing the name of a portion of Coffey Avenue to Jewell Kelly Drive
2007
17372-
01-    1-18-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17373-
01-    1-18-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17374- 1-18-
01-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 1-
       25-2007
17375-
01-    1-23-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17376-
01-    1-23-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17377-
01-    1-23-2007 Vacation (a portion of Burnett Tandy Drive)
2007
17378-
01-    1-23-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17379-
01-    1-23-2007 10-10
2007
17380-
01-    1-23-2007 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2007
17381-
01-    1-23-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund0
2007
17382-           Amending Ord. 15815 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
01-    1-30-2007 Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2007
17383-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17384-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17385-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (Tree Fund)
2007
17386-
01-    1-30-2007 Vacation (portion of Stayton Street)
2007
17387-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2007
17388-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17389-
01-    1-30-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17390- 2-6-2007;
02-    eff. 2-   13-2
2007   12-2007
17391-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17392-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17393-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17394-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17395-
02-    2-6-2007  Ordering a general election
2007
17396-           Changing the name of a portion of 12th Avenue to Bastille Place; changing the
02-    2-6-2007  name of a portion of 13th Avenue to 12th Avenue
2007
17397-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17398-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17399-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17400-
02-    2-6-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17401-           Amending Ord. 16013 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
02-    2-6-2007  Reinvestment Zone No. 15
2007
17402- 2-6-2007;
02-    eff. 2-   Rezoning
2007   22-2007
17403-
02-    2-20-2007 Vacation (alley located between Bailey Street and University Drive)
2007
17404-
02-    2-20-2007 Vacation (a portion of Old Denton Road)
2007
17405-           Vacation (an alley located between West Rosedale Street and West Oleander
02-    2-20-2007 Street)
2007
17406-
02-    2-20-2007 Vacating and extinguishing Karen Circle
2007
17407-
02-    2-20-2007 Vacating and extinguishing a portion of an alley in Forest Park Addition
2007
17408-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17409-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17410-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17411-
02-    2-20-2007 Amending Ord. 17395-02-2007 calling for a general election
2007
17412- 2-20-
02-    2007;     Repealed by Ord. 21389-08-2014
2007   eff. 2-
       28-2007
17413-
02-    2-20-2007 Adopting 2007 Comprehensive Plan
2007
17414-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17415-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17416-
02-    2-20-2007 Annexation (0.7429 acre tract of land)
2007
17417-           Amending Ord. 7323 by revising the exterior boundary of City Council single-
02-    2-20-2007 member district 2, 3 and 7
2007
17418-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17419-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (New Development Fund)
2007
17420-
02-    2-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17421- 2-20-
02-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 3-1-
       2007
17422-
03-    3-6-2007  Amending Ord. 8300 to amend term limits of Community Action Partners
2007
17423-
03-    3-6-2007  Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2007
17424-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17425-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17426-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17427-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17428-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17429-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17430-
03-    3-6-2007  Amending Ord. 17395-02-2007 and 17411-02-2007 ordering a general election
2007
17431-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Parking Garage Fund)
2007
17432-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17433- 3-6-2007;
03-    eff. 4-6- Amending Ord. 17368 correcting metes and bounds
2007   2007
17434-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2007
17435-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2007
17436-
03-    3-6-2007  Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 58
2007
17437-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17438-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17439-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17440-
03-    3-6-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17441- 3-6-2007;
03-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2007   29-2007
17442- 3-20-
03-    2007;     Repealed by Ord. 17522
2007   eff. 3-
       29-2007
17443-
03-    3-20-2007 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2007
17444- 3-20-
03-    2007;     Approving Res. 2007-02-30 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2007   eff. 4-6-
       2007
17445-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17446-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17447- 3-20-
03-    2007;     Operating authority (Occasional Carriages)
2007   eff. 4-6-
       2007
17448-
03-    3-20-2007 Vacation (a portion of NW 28th Street right-of-way)
2007
17449-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17450-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17451-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund
2007
17452-
03-    3-20-2007 Establishing an ad valorem tax limitation
2007
17453-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2007
17454-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17455-
03-    3-20-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17456-
03-    3-27-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17457-
03-    3-27-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17458-
03-    3-27-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17459-           Amending Ord. 17395-02-2007, 17411-02-2007 and 17430-03-2007 ordering a general
03-    3-27-2007 election
2007
17460-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
03-    3-27-2007 Zone No. 34
2007
17461-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
03-    3-27-2007 Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 2
2007
17462-           Approving and authorizing the issuance of water and sewer system commercial
03-    3-27-2007 paper notes, series A
2007
17463-
03-    3-27-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17464-
03-    4-3-2007  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17465-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17466-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2007
17467-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2007
17468-
04-    4-3-2007  Vacation (portion of West Humbolt Street)
2007
17469-
04-    4-3-2007  Vacation (portion of Galveston Avenue)
2007
17470-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17471-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17472-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2007
17473-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17474-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17475-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17476-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17477-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17478-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2007
17479-
04-    4-3-2007  Fund (various funds)
2007
17480-           Amending Ord. 15861 by removing certain property from Neighborhood Empowerment
04-    4-3-2007  Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2007
17481- 4-3-2007;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2007   18-2007
17482-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17483-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17484-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17485-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (portion of Old Denton Road)
2007
17486-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (portion of an alley between Bailey Street and Barden Street)
2007
17487-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (portion of West 7th Street right-of-way)
2007
17488-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (25 ft. wide portion of Kuban Boulevard)
2007
17489-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (portion of Margaret Street)
2007
17490-
04-    4-10-2007 Vacation (portion of Throckmorton Street right-of-way)
2007
17491-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17492-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17493-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17494-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (New Development Fund)
2007
17495-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17496-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17497-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17498-
04-    4-10-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17499-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17500-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17501-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17502-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2007
17503-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Aviation Grants Fund)
2007
17504-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2007
17505-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17506-           Amending Ord. 17395-02-2007, 17411-02-2007, 17430-03-2007 and 17459-03-2007
04-    4-17-2007 ordering a general election
2007
17507-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17508-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17509-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Aviation Grants Fund)
2007
17510-
04-    4-17-2007 Changing the name of Stewart Feltz Road to Sunflower Ridge Road
2007
17511-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17512-
04-    4-17-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17513- 4-17-
04-    2007;     App. A, 6.507,
2007   eff. 4-   App. A, 9.101
       26-2007
17514- 4-17-
04-    2007;     App. A, 9.101
2007   eff. 4-
       26-2007
17515-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17516-
04-    4-24-2007 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
2007
17517- 4-24-
04-    2007;     22-175
2007   eff. 5-3-
       2007
17518-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17519-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17520-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17521-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
                 § 1: repealed
                 Ch. 25 in its entirety
                 §§ 2 and 3: 2-310, 2-311, 2-312, 2-313,
                 2-321  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020)
                 § 4:
                 2-321
                 2-164, 2-165, 2-166 Repealed by Ord. 21650-02-2015
                 § 5:
                 3-261,
                 3-267,
                 7-50,
                 7-403,
                 7-167,
                 7-226,
                 12-1,
                 12.5-107,
                 12.5-146,
                 12.5-415,
                 12.5-865,
                 16-101,
                 16-346,
                 16-436,
                 16-463 (Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025),
                 20-292,
                 20-293,
                 20-295,
                 20-296,
                 20-297,
                 20-359,
                 26-2,
                 29-1,
                 31-22, 32-41 (Repealed by Ord. 23159-04-2018) ,
                 31-62,
                 31-63,
                 31-106,
                 31-171, 32-41,
       4-24-     35-82,
17522- 2007;     App. A, Preface,
04-    eff. 5-3- App. A, 1.101,
2007   2007      App. A, 2.102,
                 App. A, 3.100,
                 App. A, 3.101, App. A, 3.204  repealed by Ord. 21816-08-2015 ,
                 App. A, 3.300,
                 App. A, 3.304,
                 App. A, 3.400,
                 App. A, 3.404,
                 App. A, 3.500,
                 App. A, 5.111,
                 App. A, 5.137,
                 App. A, 5.205,
                 App. A, 5.401,
                 App. A, 6.203,
                 App. A, 6.300,
                 App. A, 6.506,
                 App. A, 7.107,
                 App. A, 9.101,
                 App. B, 11A-28
                 §§ 5 and 6:
                 7-47,
                 16-114,
                 16-350,
                 20-354,
                 App. A, 5.203,
                 App. A, 5.210,
                 App. A, 6.200,
                 App. A, 6.202,
                 App. A, 6.301
                 § 6:
                 16-131,
                 20-352,
                 31-4,
                 App. A, 2.100,
                 App. A, 2.101,
                 App. A, 5.112,
                 App. A, 5.202,
                 App. A, 5.305
                 Repealed Ch. 25
17523-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17524-
04-    4-24-2007 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17525- 4-24-
04-    2007;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007   eff. 5-3-
       2007
17526-
05-    5-1-2007  Vacation (portion of Randal Mill Road right-of-way)
2007
17527-
05-    5-1-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17528-
05-    5-1-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
                 30-102,
                 30-103,
                 30-104,
17529- 5-1-2007; 30-105,
05-    eff. 9-1- 30-106,
2007   2007      30-107,
                 30-108,
                 30-109,
                 30-110
17530- 5-1-2007;
05-    eff. 5-   7-47
2007   10-2007
17531-
05-    5-1-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17532-
05-    5-1-2007  Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2007
17533-
05-    5-1-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17534- 5-1-2007;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2007   22-2007
17535-
05-    5-8-2007  Vacation (alley located between West Berry Street and Bowie Street)
2007
17536-
05-    5-8-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17537-
05-    5-8-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17538-
05-    5-8-2007  Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007
17539-
05-    5-9-2007  Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007
17540-
05-    5-8-2007  Readopting and amending standards of care for youth programs
2007
17541- 5-8-2007;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2007   22-2007
17542-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17543-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17544- 5-15-
05-    2007;     Operating authority (Latko Transportation)
2007   eff. 6-
       12-2007
17545-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17546-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17547-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17548-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17549-
05-    5-15-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17550- 5-15-
05-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 6-
       18-2007
17551-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17552-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17553-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Engineering Fund)
2007
17554-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17555-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17556-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2007
17557-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Water Sewer Fund)
2007
17558-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2007
17559-
05-    5-22-2007 Changing the name of Park Drive to Centerboard Lane
2007
17560-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17561-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17562-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17563-
05-    5-22-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17564-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund0
2007
17565-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2007
17566-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Library Improvements Fund)
2007
17567-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17568-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17569-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17570-
05-    5-29-2007 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 59
2007
17571-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2007
17572-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2007
17573-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17574-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17575-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17576-
05-    5-29-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17577-
05-    5-29-2007 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2007
17578-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17579-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17580-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17581-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17582-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17583-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17584-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17585-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17586-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Revolving Loan Fund)
2007
17587-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17588-
06-    6-5-2007  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17589- 6-5-2007;
06-    eff. 7-3- Rezoning
2007   2007
17590-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17591-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17592-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17593-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvement Fund)
2007
17594-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17595-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17596-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17597-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17598-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17599-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17600-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17601-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17602-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17603-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17604-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17605-
06-    6-12-2007 Fund (Parking Garage Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17606- 6-12-
06-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 6-
       27-2007
17607-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17608-
06-    6-19-2007 Transportation and Public Works Dept. funding
2007
17609-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Airport Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2007
17610-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17611-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17612-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17613-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17614-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17615-           Approving the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board 42nd concurrent
06-    - -       supplemental bond ord.
2007
17616-
06-    6-19-2007 Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007
17617-
06-    6-19-2007 Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007
17618-
06-    6-19-2007 Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007
17619- 6-19-
06-    2007,     35-57,
2007   eff. 10-  35-57.5
       1-2007
17620-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17621-
06-    6-19-2007 Approving financing and project plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 12
2007
17622- 6-19-
06-    2007,     35-58
2007   eff. 10-
       1-2007
                 35-87,
                 35-88,
17623-           35-89,
06-    6-19-2007 35-90,
2007             35-91,
                 35-92,
                 35-93
17624-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for a city initiated 36-inch water main in
06-    6-19-2007 Willow Springs
2007
17625- 6-19-
06-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 7-
       15-2007
17626-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17627-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17628-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17629-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17630-
06-    6-19-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17631-
07-    7-10-2007 Implementation of rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2007
17632-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17633-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17634-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17635-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17636-
07-    7-10-2007 Vacation (portion of Alta Vista Road)
2007
17637-
07-    7-10-2007 Vacation (portion of east 3rd Street)
2007
17638-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17639-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17640-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17641-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17642-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17643-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17644-
07-    7-10-2007 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 60
2007
17645-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17646-
07-    7-10-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17647- 7-10-
07-    2007;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2007   eff. 8-2-
       2007
17648- 7-10-
07-    2007;     App. A, 2.103
2007   eff. 8-2-
       2007
17649- 7-10-
07-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 7-
       29-2007
17650-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17651-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17652-           2-293,
07-    7-17-2007 2-294
2007
17653-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2007
17654-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17655-           12.5-800,
07-    7-17-2007 12.5-821,
2007             12.5-840
17656-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17657-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17658-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17659-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17660-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17661-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17662-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17663- 7-17-
07-    2007;     Operating authority (Go Green Taxi, LLC)
2007   eff. 7-
       26-2007
17664-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2007
17665-
07-    7-17-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17666- 7-17-
07-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 8-
       13-2007
17667-
07-    7-17-2007 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2007
17668-
07-    7-24-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17669-
07-    7-24-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17670-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds,
07-    7-24-2007 series 2007
2007
17671-
07-    7-24-2007 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2007
17672- 7-24-
07-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 8-
       13-2007
17673-
07-    7-31-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17674-
07-    7-31-2007 Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2007
17675-
07-    7-31-2007 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2007
17676-
07-    7-31-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17677- 7-31-
07-    2007;     Repealed by Ord. 23920-11-2019
2007   eff. 8-3-
       2007
17678-
07-    7-31-2007 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17679- 7-31-
08-    2005; eff Rezoning
2007   8-13-2007
17680- 8-9-2007;
08-    eff. 8-   7-47
2007   24-2007
17681- 8-9-2007; 7-61,
08-    eff. 8-   7-62
2007   24-2007
17682-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17683-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17684-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Engineering Fund)
2007
17685-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17686-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects fund)
2007
17687-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17688-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17689- 8-9-2007; 4-5,
08-    eff. 9-1- 4-6
2007   2007
17690-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17691-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17692-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17693-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2007
17694-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17695-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17696-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17697-
08-    8-9-2007  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17698- 8-9-2007;
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 7.107
2007   24-2007
17699- 8-9-2007;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2007   30-2007
17700-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17701- 8-14-
08-    2007;     Operating authority (Godfather Transportation, Inc.)
2007   eff. 8-
       30-2007
17702-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17703-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (Debt Service Fund)
2007
17704-
08-    8-14-2007 Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds, series 2007A
2007
17705-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
2007
17706-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17707-
08-    8-14-2007 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2007
17708- 8-14-
08-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 8-
       30-2007
17709-
08-    8-21-2007 Adjusting number of authorized civil service positions in the Fire Department
2007
17710-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17711-
08-    8-21-2007 Vacation (portion of Jennings Avenue)
2007
17712-
08-    8-21-2007 Vacation (portion of West 11th Street and a portion of West 12th Street)
2007
17713-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17714-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17715-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17716-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17717-
08-    8-21-2007 Ordering a special election
2007
17718- 8-21-
08-    2007;     2-321
2007   eff. 10-
       9-2007
                 29.5-01,
                 29.5-1,
                 29.5-2,
                 29.5-3,
                 29.5-4,
                 29.5-5,
                 29.5-6,
                 29.5-7,
                 29.5-8,
       8-21-     29.5-9,
17719- 2007;     29.5-10,
08-    eff. 1-1- 29.5-11,
2007   2008      29.5-12,
                 29.5-13,
                 29.5-14,
                 29.5-15,
                 29.5-16,
                 29.5-17,
                 29.5-18,
                 29.5-19,
                 29.5-20,
                 29.5-21,
                 29.5-22
17720-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2007
17721-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2007
17722-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2007
17723-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2007
17724-
08-    8-21-2007 Limited purpose annexation
2007
17725-
08-    8-21-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17726- 8-21-
08-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 8-
       30-2007
17727-
08-    8-28-2007 Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2007
17728-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17729-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17730-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17731-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17732-
08-    8-28-2007 Ordering a special election
2007
17733-
08-    8-28-2007 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 61
2007
17734-
08-    8-28-2007 Annexation (15.3 acre tract of land)
2007
17735-
08-    8-28-2007 Limited purpose annexation (108.19 acres)
2007
17736-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17737-
08-    8-28-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17738-
09-    9-4-2007  Fund (General Fund)
2007
17739-
09-    9-4-2007  Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17740-
09-    9-4-2007  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2007
17741-
09-    9-4-2007  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17742- 9-4-2007;
09-    eff. 10-  12.5-340
2007   1-2007
17743- 9-4-2007;
09-    eff. 9-   Rezoning
2007   28-2007
17744-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2007
17745-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2007
17746-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2007
17747-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17748-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17749-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
09-    9-11-2007 office of the municipal government of the city
2007
17750-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2007
17751-
09-    9-11-2007 Providing for the levy and collection of ad valorem tax
2007
17752-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and /or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
2007
17753-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17754-           Closing the hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and /or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 12
2007
17755-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17756-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
2007
17757-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17758-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
2007
17759-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17760-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17761-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
2007
17762-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17763-           Closing hearing and levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements
09-    9-11-2007 and/or services provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
2007
17764-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2007
17765-
09-    9-11-2007 Denying the rate adjustments proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2007
17766-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2007
17767-
09-    9-11-2007 Vacation (a portion of an unnamed street right-of-way)
2007
17768-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17769-
09-    9-11-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17770- 9-11-
09-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 10-
       22-2007
17771-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17772-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17773-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2007
17774-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2007
17775-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17776-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2007
17777-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2007
17778-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17779- 9-18-
09-    2007;     Amending Ord. 15864 changing name to Classic Acquisition Corp.
2007   eff. 9-2-
       2007
17780-
09-    9-18-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17781- 9-18-
09-    2007;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2007   eff. 10-
       8-2007
17782- 9-18-
09-    2007;     App. A, 5.203
2007   eff. 9-
       28-2007
17783- 9-18-
09-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 10-
       9-2007
17784-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17785-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17786-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2007
17787-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Public Events, Furniture, Fixture and Equipment Fund)
2007
17788-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17789-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (CO Special Project Fund)
2007
17790-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17791-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17792-
09-    9-25-2007 Amending Ord. 17717-07-2007 ordering that a special election be held
2007
17793-
09-    9-25-2007 Amending Ord. 17732-08-2007 ordering that a special election be held
2007
                 31-5, 31-41, 31-43 (repealed by Ord. 23932-11-2019) ,
       9-25-     31-61,
17794- 2007;     31-63,
09-    eff. 10-  31-81,
2007   5-2007    31-101,
                 31-106,
                 31-107
17795- 9-25-
09-    2007;     Operating authority (Super Shuttle/Execucar
2007   eff. 10-
       5-2007
17796-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2007
17797-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2007
17798- 9-25-
09-    2007;     35-56
2007   eff. 10-
       1-2007
17799-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17800-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17801- 9-25-
09-    2007;     35-56
2007   eff. 1-1-
       2008
17802-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
09-    9-25-2007 revenue bonds, series 2007A
2007
17803-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system subordinate lien
09-    9-25-2007 revenue bonds, series 2007B
2007
17804-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2007
17805-
09-    9-25-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17806-
10-    10-2-2007 Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2007
17807- 10-2-
10-    2007;     Operating authority (DFW Prestige Limos LLC)
2007   eff. 10-
       15-2007
17808-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2007
17809-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2007
17810-
10-    10-2-2007 Vacation (triangular portion of Mansfield Avenue right-of-way)
2007
17811-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17812-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17813-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2007
17814-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2007
17815-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Special trust Fund)
2007
17816-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17817-
10-    10-2-2007 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 62
2007
17818-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17819-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17820-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17821-
10-    10-2-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17822- 10-2-
10-    2007;     App. A, 7.106
2007   eff. 10-
       23-2007
17823- 10-2-
10-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 10-
       19-2007
17824-
10-    10-9-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17825-
10-    10-9-2007 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17826-
10-    10-9-2007 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2007
                 7-394,
                 7-400,
                 7-401,
                 7-402,
                 7-403,
                 7-404,
                 7-410,
17827- 10-9-     7-416,
10-    2007;     7-417,
2007   eff. 10-  7-418,
       22-2007   7-419,
                 7-420,
                 7-421,
                 7-422,
                 7-423,
                 7-424,
                 7-425,
                 7-426
17828-
10-    10-9-2007 Suspending implementation of the rate schedule proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2007
17829- 10-9-
10-    2007;     23-14,
2007   eff. 10-  23-15
       22-2007
17830- 10-9-
10-    2007;     Operating authority (Christian Carriage Company Authority)
2007   eff. 10-
       22-2009
17831- 10-9-
10-    2007;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2007   eff. 10-
       22-2007
17832-
10-    10-9-2007 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 64
2007
17833-
10-    10-9-2007 Vacation (portion of East Central Avenue)
2007
17834- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17835- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2007
17836- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17837- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2007
17838- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2007
17839- 10-16-
10-    2007      Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2007
17840- 10-16-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of drainage utility system revenue bonds,
10-    2007      series 2007
2007
17841- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17842- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Animal Shelter Fund)
2007
17843- 10-16-
10-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17844- 10-16-
10-    2007;     App. A, 2.102,
2007   eff. 11-  App. A, 5.137
       1-2007
17845- 10-16-
10-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 11-
       1-2007
17846- 10-23-
10-    2007      Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2007
17847- 10-23-
10-    2007      Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2007
17848- 10-23-
10-    2007      Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2007
17849- 10-23-
10-    2007      2-186
2007
17850- 10-23-
10-    2007      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 63
2007
                 31-1,
                 31-2,
                 31-3,
                 31-4,
                 31-5,
                 31-21,
                 31-22,
                 31-23,
                 31-24,
                 31-41,
                 31-42,
                 31-43,
                 31-61,
                 31-62,
17851- 10-30-    31-63,
10-    2007;     31-81,
2007   eff. 10-  31-101,
       22-2007   31-102,
                 31-103,
                 31-104,
                 31-105,
                 31-106,
                 31-107,
                 31-108,
                 31-109,
                 31-131,
                 31-132,
                 31-133,
                 31-134,
                 31-135,
                 31-150,
                 31-171
17852- 10-30-
10-    2007      Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2007
17853- 10-30-    Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
10-    2007      Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 4
2007
17854- 10-30-    Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
10-    2007      Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 7
2007
17855- 10-30-    Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
10-    2007      Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 5
2007
17856- 10-30-
10-    2007      Providing for the continued taxation of goods in transit
2007
17857- 10-30-
10-    2007      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2007
17858- 10-30-
10-    2007      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17859-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17860-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Projects Fund)
2007
17861-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (General Fund)
2007
17862-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17863-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17864-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (CO Special Project Fund)
2007
17865-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2007
17866-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17867- 11-6-     22-1,
11-    2007;     22-162.1,
2007   eff. 11-  22-162.2,
       22-2007   22-222
17868-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17869-
11-    11-6-2007 Changing the name of a portion North Riverside Drive to Mercantile Drive
2007
17870-
11-    11-6-2007 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17871-
11-    11-6-2007 Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2007
                 App. A, 6.400,
                 App. A, 6.401,
                 App. A, 6.402,
                 App. A, 6.403,
                 App. A, 6.404,
                 App. A, 6.405,
17872- 11-6-     App. A, 6.406,
11-    2007;     App. A, 6.407,
2007   eff. 11-  App. A, 6.408,
       19-2007   App. A, 6.409,
                 App. A, 6.410,
                 App. A, 6.411,
                 App. A, 6.412,
                 App. A, 6.413,
                 App. A, 6.414,
                 App. A, 6.415
17873- 11-6-
11-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 11-
       28-2007
17874- 11-19-
11-    2007      Ordering a runoff election
2007
17875- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (General Fund)
2007
17876- 11-27-
11-    2007      Increasing the total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2007
17877- 11-27-    Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions at each
11-    2007      classification in the Fire Department
2007
17878- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17879- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17880- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17881- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17882- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2007
17883- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2007
17884- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17885- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17886- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2007
17887- 11-27-    Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
11-    2007      Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 6
2007
17888- 11-27-
11-    2007      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 65
2007
17889- 11-27-
11-    2007      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2007
17890-
11-    - -       Annexation (19.9 acre tract of land)
2007
17891- 11-27-
11-    2007      Vacation (a portion of West Leuda Street)
2007
17892- 11-27-
11-    2007      Vacation (a portion of Old Hemphill Road)
2007
17893- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17894- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17895- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17896- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17897- 11-27-
11-    2007      Fund (Park Gas lease Project Fund)
2007
17898- 11-27-
11-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 12-
       18-2007
17899-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2007
17900-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
                 35-151,
17901- 12-4-     35-152,
12-    2007;     35-154,
2007   eff. 12-  35-155,
       18-2007   35-156,
                 35-157
17902-
12-    12-4-2007 Annexation (19.9 acre tract of land)
2007
17903-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2007
17904-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2007
17905-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17906-
12-    12-4-2007 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenue Fund)
2007
17907- 12-4-
12-    2007;     App. A, 5.306
2007   eff. 2-
       19-2008
17908- 12-4-
12-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 1-1-
       2008
17909- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17910- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17911- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17912- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17913- 12-11-
12-    2007;     Operating authority (Hot Wheels Limousine and Sedans)
2007   eff. 12-
       21-2007
17914- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Crime Control and prevention District Fund)
2007
17915- 12-11-
12-    2007      Vacation (alley in Fostepco Heights Addition)
2007
17916- 12-11-
12-    2007      Annexation (7.9 acre tract of land)
2007
17917- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17918- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17919- 12-11-
12-    2007      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17920- 12-11-
12-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 12-
       23-2007
17921- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2007
17922- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2007
17923- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17924- 12-18-    31-81,
12-    2007;     31-106
2007   eff. 1-1- Deleted 31-136 and renumbered it as 31-81(e)
       2008
17925- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2007
17926- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Park Improvements Project Fund)
2007
17927- 12-18-
12-    2007      Vacation (a portion of East Bluff Street)
2007
17928- 12-18-
12-    2007      Vacation (a portion of an alley located in Factory Place Addition)
2007
17929- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2007
17930- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (General Fund)
2007
17931- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Grants Fund)
2007
17932- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Operating Fund)
2007
17933- 12-18-
12-    2007      Fund (Stormwater Capital Fund)
2007
17934- 12-18-
12-    2007;     Rezoning
2007   eff. 12-
       24-2007
17935-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2008
17936-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
17937-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2008
17938-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
17939- 1-8-2008;
01-    eff. 1-   Operating authority (American Eagle Limousine Service)
2008   17-2008
17940- 1-8-2008;
01-    eff. 1-   Operating authority (Sedan One, LLC)
2008   28-2008
17941-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17942-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17943-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17944-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17945-
01-    1-8-2008  Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2008
17946-
01-    1-8-2008  Annexation (40.4 acre tract of land)
2008
17947- 1-8-2008;
01-    eff. 1-   Rezoning
2008   28-2008
17948-
01-    1-15-2008 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17949-
01-    1-15-2008 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17950- 1-15-
01-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 1-
       28-2008
17951-
01-    1-22-2008 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2008
17952-
01-    1-22-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
17953-
01-    1-22-2008 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2008
17954-
01-    1-22-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
17955- 1-22-
01-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2008   eff. 1-
       28-2008
17956-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
01-    1-22-2008 Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 8
2008
17957-
01-    1-22-2008 Vacation (portion of East Daggett Avenue)
2008
17958-
01-    1-22-2008 Annexation (23.0 acre tract of land)
2008
17959-
01-    1-22-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
17960- 1-29-
01-    2008;     29-1
2008   eff. 2-5-
       2008
17961-
01-    1-29-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17962-
01-    1-29-2008 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
17963-
01-    1-29-2008 Automated Red Light Enforcement Program
2008
17964-           Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
01-    1-29-2008 Zone No. 8
2008
17965-
01-    1-29-2008 Closing portions of Loney Street
2008
17966- 1-29-
01-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 2-8-
       2008
17967- 2-5-2008; Establishing unit prices for city participation in certain community facilities
02-    eff. 2-   agreements
2008   12-2008
17968-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17969-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
17970-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
17971-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17972-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17973-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
17974-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2008
17975-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2008
17976-
02-    2-5-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17977- 2-5-2008;
02-    eff. 2-   Rezoning
2008   22-2008
17978-
02-    2-12-2008 Fund (Park Improvement Fund)
2008
17979-
02-    2-12-2008 Ordering an election
2008
17980-
02-    2-12-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
17981-
02-    2-12-2008 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2008
17982-
02-    2-12-2008 Increasing the total number of civil service positions in the police department
2008
17983-
02-    2-12-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
17984-
02-    2-12-2008 Vacation (a portion of Lisbon Street right-of-way)
2008
17985-
02-    2-12-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
17986-           Conditions have materially changed so that the reconstruction of Grant Avenue is
02-    2-19-2008 no longer necessary and unwise
2008
17987-
02-    2-19-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
17988- 2-19-
02-    2008;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2008   eff. 3-4-
       2008
17989-           Establishing minimum rates and charges that Atmos Energy Corp. may assess
02-    2-19-2008 customers
2008
17990-
02-    2-19-2008 Adopting 2008 Comprehensive Plan
2008
17991-
02-    2-19-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
17992-
02-    2-19-2008 Fund (Water ans Sewer Fund)
2008
17993-
02-    2-19-2008 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects 2007 Rev Bonds Fund)
2008
17994-
02-    2-19-2008 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 67
2008
17995-
02-    2-19-2008 Annexation (2.1 acre tract of land)
2008
17996- 2-19-
02-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 3-4-
       2008
17997-
02-    2-26-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17998-
02-    2-26-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
17999-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18000- 3-4-2008;
03-    eff. 3-   23-19
2008   30-2008
18001-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18002-
03-    3-4-2008  Vacation (portion of Carlock Avenue)
2008
18003-
03-    3-4-2008  Vacation (two portions of Gounah Street)
2008
18004-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
18005-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18006-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
18007-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Parking Garage Capital Project Fund)
2008
18008-
03-    3-4-2008  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18009- 3-4-2008; App. A, 5.307,
03-    eff. 3-   App. A, 9.101
2008   16-2008   §§ 2, 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
18010- 3-4-2008;
03-    eff. 4-5- Rezoning
2008   2008
18011- 3-18-
03-    2008;     Operating authority (Ohemeng Transportation Services)
2008   eff. 3-
       23-2008
18012-
03-    3-18-2008 Vacation (portion of Mercantile Drive right-of-way)
2008
18013-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenue Fund)
2008
18014-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2008
18015-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2008
18016-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18017-           Conditions have materially changed so that the reconstruction of Northwest
03-    3-18-2008 Branch Library must include the design and construction of road improvements
2008
18018-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18019-
03-    3-18-2008 Ordering an election
2008
18020-
03-    3-18-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18021- 3-25-
03-    2008;     Approving Res. 2007-10-269 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2008   eff. 3-   which amends the Board’s construction and fire prevention standards resolution
       30-2008
18022-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Aviation Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18023-
03-    3-25-2008 Vacation (portion of an alley in Wray’s Subdivision)
2008
18024-
03-    3-25-2008 Vacation (portion of West Maddox Avenue)
2008
18025-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18026-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18027- 3-25-
03-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2008   eff. 3-
       30-2008
18028- 3-25-
03-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2008   eff. 3-
       30-2008
18029- 3-25-
03-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2008   eff. 3-
       30-2008
18030-
03-    3-25-2008 Adopting a per acre charge for 15,808 acres served by city initiated sewer mains
2008
18031- 3-25-
03-    2008;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2008   eff. 3-
       30-2008
18032-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18033-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2008
18034-
03-    3-25-2008 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18035-
04-    4-1-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
18036-
04-    4-1-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18037-
04-    4-1-2008  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18038-
04-    4-1-2008  Ordering an election
2008
18039-
04-    4-1-2008  Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2008
18040-
04-    4-1-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18041- 4-1-2008;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2008   11-2008
18042-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Airport Grant Fund)
2008
18043-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18044-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18045-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
2008
18046-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (various funds)
2008
18047-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2008
18048-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18049-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2008
18050-
04-    4-8-2008  Fund (Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18051-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18052-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund R101)
2008
18053-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund R103)
2008
18054-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18055-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
04-    4-15-2008 office of the municipal government of the city
2008
18056- 4-15-
04-    2008;     Franchise (amending Ord. 15276, grant of franchise to Oncor Electric Delivery
2008   eff. 5-9- Co., LLC)
       2008
18057-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18058-
04-    4-15-2008 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2008
18059-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18060-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18061-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18062-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18063-
04-    4-22-2008 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2008
18064-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2008
18065-
04-    4-22-2008 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2008
18066-
04-    4-22-2008 Vacation (portion of Bryan Avenue)
2008
18067- 4-29-
04-    2008;     Operating authority (M&M’s Limousine Service)
2008   eff. 5-3-
       2008
18068-
04-    4-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18069-
04-    4-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18070-
04-    4-29-2008 Fund (Grant Fund)
2008
18071-
04-    4-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18072-
04-    4-29-2008 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2008
18073-
05-    5-6-2008  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2008
18074-
05-    5-6-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18075-
05-    5-6-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18076-
05-    5-6-2008  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
18077-
05-    5-6-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18078- 5-6-2008;
05-    eff. 5-   App. A, 6.404
2008   17-2008
18079- 5-6-2008;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2008   17-2008
18080-
05-    5-13-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18081- 5-13-
05-    2008;     Operating authority (Brazos Carriage Co.)
2008   eff. 5-
       17-2008
18082-
05-    5-13-2008 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
                 30-151,
                 30-152,
                 30-153,
                 30-154,
                 30-155,
                 30-156,
                 30-157,
                 30-158,
                 30-159,
                 30-160,
       5-13-     30-161,
18083- 2008;     30-171,
05-    eff. 7-1- 30-172,
2008   2008      30-173,
                 30-181,
                 30-182,
                 30-191,
                 30-192,
                 30-193,
                 30-194,
                 30-195,
                 30-196,
                 30-201,
                 30-202,
                 30-203
18084-
05-    5-13-2008 Fund (various funds)
2008
18085-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue
05-    5-13-2008 refunding bonds, series 2008
2008
18086-
05-    5-13-2008 Appointing municipal judges
2008
18087-
05-    5-13-2008 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
2008
18088- 5-13-
05-    2008;     35-23
2008   eff. 5-
       30-2008
18089-
05-    5-13-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
18090-
05-    5-13-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18091- 5-20-
05-    2008;     Operating authority (A.I.N. Limo)
2008   eff. 5-
       24-2008
18092-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital projects Fund)
2008
18093-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18094-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund R103)
2008
18095-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund R101)
2008
18096-
05-    5-20-2008 Declaring the results of the special bond election
2008
18097-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
2008
18098-
05-    5-20-2008 Requiring Oncor Electric Delivery to relocate its utility facilities
2008
18099- 5-20-
05-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2008   eff. 5-
       24-2008
18100-
05-    5-20-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
18101-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
05-    5-20-2008 Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 9
2008
18102-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
05-    5-20-2008 Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 10
2008
18103- 5-20-
05-    2008;     3-265
2008   eff. 5-
       28-2008
18104- 5-20-
05-    2008;     App. A, 7.108
2008   eff. 5-
       23-2008
18105- 5-22-
05-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2008   eff. 5-
       28-2008
18106- 5-20-
05-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 6-
       12-2008
18107- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending franchise granted to Atmos Energy Corp.
2008   eff. 6-
       19-2008
18108-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18109-           Amending Ord. 17939-01-2008; increasing the number of limousines which American
05-    5-27-2008 Eagle Limousine Service is authorized to operate
2008
18110-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
18111-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Fund R103)
2008
18112-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund R101)
2008
18113- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending Ord. 16441 giving correct metes and bounds
2008   eff. 6-7-
       2008
18114- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending Ord. 17048 giving correct zoning and lot and block information
2008   eff. 6-7-
       2008
18115- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending Ord. 17589 to reflect correct address information
2008   eff. 6-7-
       2008
18116- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending Ord. 17783 to reflect correct metes and bounds
2008   eff. 6-7-
       2008
18117- 5-27-
05-    2008;     Amending Ord. 17873 giving correct zoning and lot and block information
2008   eff. 6-7-
       2008
18118-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Crime Control and District Prevention Fund)
2008
18119-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18120-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2008
18121-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (New Development Fund)
2008
18122-
05-    5-27-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18123-
06-    6-3-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18124- 6-3-2008;
06-    eff. 6-   Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2008   12-2008
18125-
06-    6-3-2008  Adopting standards of care for 2008 youth programs
2008
18126-
06-    6-3-2008  Annexation (68.1 acre tract of land)
2008
18127-
06-    6-3-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18128-
06-    6-3-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18129- 6-3-2008;
06-    eff. 6-   App. A, 6.201
2008   12-2008
18130- 6-3-2008;
06-    eff 6-12- App. A, 5.202
2008   2008
18131- 6-3-2008;
06-    eff 6-27- Rezoning
2008   2008
18132-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18133-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18134-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18135-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18136-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18137-
06-    6-10-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18138- 6-10-
06-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 6-
       27-2008
18139-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18140-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18141-
06-    6-17-2008 Vacation (portions of 2 alleys located in Geo. F. Alford and Veal’s Addition)
2008
18142-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
18143-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18144-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18145-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18146-           Approving projects and financing plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No.
06-    6-17-2008 13
2008
18147-
06-    6-17-2008 Annexation (3.0 acre tract of land)
2008
18148-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Information System Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18149-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18150-
06-    6-17-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18151- 6-17-
06-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 6-
       27-2008
18152-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2008
18153-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2008
18154-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18155-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18156-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18157-           2-279,
07-    7-8-2008  2-285,
2008             2-286
18158-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
18159-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
18160-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Retirement Fund)
2008
18161-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
                 22-1,
                 22-155,
18162- 7-8-2008; 22-162.2,
07-    eff. 7-   22-162.3,
2008   12-2008   22-162.4,
                 22-162.5,
                 22-222,
                 App. B, 11A-6
18163-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Special Assessment Fund)
2008
18164-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18165-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2008
18166-
07-    7-8-2008  Vacation (portion of South Calhoun Street)
2008
18167-
07-    7-8-2008  Vacation (portion of an alley in Hi-Mount Addition)
2008
18168-
07-    7-8-2008  Vacation (portion of Ferris Street)
2008
18169-
07-    7-8-2008  Changing name of Albertsons Drive to AWG Way
2008
18170-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18171-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Grants Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18172-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18173-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18174-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18175-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18176-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18177-
07-    7-8-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18178- 7-8-2008;
07-    eff. 7-   Rezoning
2008   29-2008
18179-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (State Awarded Assets Fund)
2008
18180-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18181- 7-15-
07-    2008;     Operating authority (Angel’s Airport Transportation)
2008   eff. 7-
       19-2008
18182-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18183-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18184-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
07-    7-15-2008 limited surplus revenue certificates of obligation, series 2008
2008
18185-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18186-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18187-
07-    7-15-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18188- 7-15-
07-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2008   eff. 7-
       25-2008
18189- 7-15-
07-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 8-
       21-2008
18190-
07-    7-22-2008 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2008
18191-
07-    7-22-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
18192-
07-    7-22-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18193- 7-22-
07-    2008;     Amending Ord. 15575 to reflect correct metes and bounds
2008   eff. 8-6-
       2008
18194-           Suspending implementation of rate schedule proposed by Oncor Electric Delivery
07-    7-29-2008 Company
2008
18195-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for a developer initiated 24-inch water
07-    7-29-2008 main for Vista Crossroads
2008
18196-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2008
18197-
07-    7-29-2008 Vacation (portion of alley located in Van Zandt Park Addition)
2008
18198-
07-    7-29-2008 Vacation (portion of alley located in K.M. Van Zandt ‘s 2nd Addition)
2008
18199-
07-    7-29-2008 Vacation (portion of Avenue C)
2008
18200-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18201-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18202-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18203-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18204-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18205-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18206-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18207-
07-    7-29-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18208- 7-29-
07-    2008;     App. A, 6.202
2008A  eff. 8-2-
       2008
18208- 7-29-     App. A, 6.200,
07-    2008;     App. A, 6.202,
2008B  eff. 8-2- App. A, 9.101
       2008
18209-
08-    8-5-2008  Vacation (alley in Seminary Hill Addition)
2008
18210-
08-    8-5-2008  Vacation (Nautical Drive)
2008
18211-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18212-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18213-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Airport Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2008
18214-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2008
18215-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
08-    8-5-2008  Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 11
2008
18216-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18217-
08-    8-5-2008  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18218- 8-5-2008;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2008   29-2008
18219-
08-    8-12-2008 Ordering local option election
2008
18220-
08-    8-12-2008 Ordering local option election
2008
18221-
08-    8-19-2008 Fund (Water and Wastewater Fund)
2008
18222-
08-    8-19-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18223-
08-    8-19-2008 Requiring Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. to relocate its utilities facilities
2008
18224-
08-    8-19-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18225-
08-    8-19-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18226-
08-    8-19-2008 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
18227- 8-19-
08-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 8-
       30-2008
18228-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2008
18229-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
18230-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
18231-
08-    8-26-2008 Authorizing issuance of equipment tax notes
2008
18232-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18233-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (S.H. 121T Southwest parkway Fund)
2008
18234-
08-    8-26-2008 Fund (Wastewater Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18235- 8-26-
08-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 9-9-
       2008
18236- 9-2-2008;
09-    eff. 9-9- Operating authority (Cowtown Limo)
2008   2008
18237- 9-2-2008;
09-    eff. 9-   Operating authority (Wynne Sedan and Limousine Group)
2008   16-2008
18238-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2008
18239-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18240-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and limited surplus revenue
09-    9-2-2008  certificates of obligation, series 2008
2008
18241-
09-    9-2-2008  Amending Ord. 18219-08-2008 ordering a local option election
2008
18242-
09-    9-2-2008  Amending Ord. 18220-08-2008 ordering a local option election
2008
18243-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (2007 Critical Capital Program Fund)
2008
18244-
09-    9-2-2008  Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds, series 2008
2008
18245-           Fund (2004 Bond Program Street Improvements Fund; Southwest Parkway Fund; 2008
09-    9-2-2008  Bond Program Street Improvements Fund)
2008
18246-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18247-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18248-
09-    9-2-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18249- 9-2-2008;
09-    eff. 9-   App. A, 2.104
2008   11-2008
18250- 9-2-2008;
09-    eff. 9-   Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2008   12-2008
18251- 9-2-2008;
09-    eff. 9-   Rezoning
2008   20-2008
18252-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2008
18253-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18254-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2008
18255-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18256-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2008
18257-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18258-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18259-           Levying assessments for cost of improvements and/or services provided in Public
09-    9-9-2008  Improvement District No. 1
2008
18260-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2008
18261-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18262-           Levying assessments for cost of improvements and/or services provided in Public
09-    9-9-2008  Improvement District No. 6
2008
18263-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2008
18264-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18265-           Levying assessments for cost of improvements and/or services provided in Public
09-    9-9-2008  Improvement District No. 7
2008
18266-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2008
18267-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18268-           Levying assessments for cost of improvements and/or services provided in Public
09-    9-9-2008  Improvement District No. 11
2008
18269-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2008
18270-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18271-           Levying assessments for cost of improvements and/or services provided in Public
09-    9-9-2008  Improvement District No. 12
2008
18272-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2008
18273-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18274-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18275-
09-    9-9-2008  Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the police department
2008
18276-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (General Fund)
2008
18277-
09-    9-9-2008  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18278-           Approving Resolution 2008-06-124 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport
09-    9-16-2008 Board
2008
18279-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (ERP Capital Project Fund)
2008
18280-
09-    9-16-2008 Vacation (2 alleys between Dickson Street and Waggoman Street)
2008
18281-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18282-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2008
18283-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
09-    9-16-2008 office of the municipal government of the city
2008
18284-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2008
18285-
09-    9-16-2008 Providing for the levy and collection of ad valorem tax
2008
18286-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Worker’s Compensation Fund)
2008
18287-
09-    9-16-2008 2-190
2008
18288-
09-    9-16-2008 Amending Ord. 18219-08-2008 and 18241-09-2008 ordering a local option election
2008
18289-
09-    9-2-2008  Amending Ord. 18220-08-2008 and 18242-09-2008 ordering a local option election
2008
18290-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Tree Fund)
2008
18291-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
18292-
09-    9-16-2008 Approving Res. 2008-06-122 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2008
18293-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18294-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (ERP Capital Project Fund)
2008
18295-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18296-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18297-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18298-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18299-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2008
18300-
09-    9-16-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18301- 9-16-
09-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 10-
       16-2008
18302-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2008
18303-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
18304-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18305-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18306-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18307-
09-    9-23-2008 Changing name of Pier 1 Place to Energy Way
2008
18308-
09-    9-23-2008 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2008
18309-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
18310-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
18311-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Solid Waste Capital Improvements Fund)
2008
18312-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
2008
18313-
09-    9-30-2008 Vacation (alley located in Women’s Center Addition)
2008
18314-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (ERP Project Fund)
2008
18315-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18316- 9-30-
09-    2008;     35-56
2008   eff. 1-1-
       2009
18317- 9-30-
09-    2008;     35-56
2008   eff. 10-
       1-2008
                 2-111,
                 2-112,
                 2-113,
18318-           2-114,
09-    9-30-2008 2-118  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020) ,
2008             19-20,
                 24-40,
                 24-41,
                 30-99,
                 30-158, 34-220
                 2-146,
                 2-147,
                 2-148,
                 2-149,
                 7-47,
                 7-62,
18319-           7-331,
09-    9-30-2008 7-389,
2008             7-391,
                 12.5-146,
                 12.5-157,
                 12.5-415,
                 31-63,
                 35-4
                 § 1 repealed Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 7, §§ 2-171—2-174
18320-           2-13, Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 1A (note)
09-    9-30-2008 2-164, 2-165, 2-166 Repealed by Ord. 21650-02-2015
2008
18321-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18322-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
18323-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2008
18324-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18325-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2008
18326-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18327-
09-    9-30-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18328-           Publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and Will Rogers
10-    10-7-2008 Memorial Center Complex parking revenue certificates of obligation, series 2008
2008
18329-
10-    10-7-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18330- 10-7-
10-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 10-
       22-2008
18331- 10-14-
10-    2008      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2008
18332- 10-14-
10-    2008      Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2008
18333- 10-14-    Approving a negotiated settlement and resolution between the Atmos Cities
10-    2008      Steering Committee and Atmos Energy Corp.
2008
18334- 10-14-
10-    2008;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2008   eff. 10-
       18-2008
18335- 10-14-
10-    2008      Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2008
18336- 10-14-
10-    2008      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18337- 10-14-
10-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 11-
       7-2008
18338- 10-21-    7-47,
10-    2008;     26-2
2008   eff. 10-  § 1 superseded by Ord. 18358-11-2008
       24-2008
18339- 10-21-
10-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 11-
       7-2008
18340- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (General Fund)
2008
18341- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18342- 10-28-
10-    2008      Vacation (floodplain easement in Tree Tops School Addition)
2008
18343- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (General Fund)
2008
18344- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2008
18345- 10-28-
10-    2008      Denying the rate schedule proposed by Oncor Electric Delivery Co., LLC
2008
18346- 10-28-
10-    2008      Changing the name of a portion of Stayton Street to Museum Way
2008
18347- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (Stormwater Operating Fund)
2008
18348- 10-28-
10-    2008      Fund (Park gas Well Leases Fund)
2008
18349- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (General Fund)
2008
18350- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (2004 Street Improvement Fund)
2008
18351- 11-11-
11-    2008;     Operating authority (Vantage Way, Inc.)
2008   eff. 11-
       15-2008
18352- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Capital Grants Fund)
2008
18353- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18354- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2008
18355- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18356- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Capital Grant Fund)
2008
18357- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18358- 11-11-    11-1,
11-    2008;     11-2,
2008   eff. 12-  11-3,
       28-2008   11-4
18359- 11-11-
11-    2008;     23-15
2008   eff. 11-
       18-2008
18360- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (General Fund)
2008
18361- 11-11-    Providing for the issuance of combination tax and Will Rogers Memorial Center
11-    2008      Complex parking revenue certificates of obligation, series 2008
2008
18362- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18363- 11-11-
11-    2008      Changing the name of a portion of Stonegate Boulevard to Clearfork Main Street)
2008
18364- 11-11-
11-    2008      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18365- 11-11-
11-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 11-
       29-2008
18366-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18367-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18368- 12-2-
12-    2008;     Amending Ord. 17236-10-2006 to change the name and type of company to G&G
2008   eff. 12-  Executive Transportation, Inc.
       9-2008
18369- 12-2-
12-    2008;     Operating authority (Ian’s Limousine Service)
2008   eff. 12-
       9-2008
18370- 12-2-
12-    2008;     Operating authority (West Fork Carriage Service)
2008   eff. 12-
       9-2008
18371-
12-    12-2-2008 Appointing substitute municipal judges
2008
18372-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2008
18373-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2008
18374-
12-    12-2-2008 Vacation (portion of excess right-of-way along East 11th Street)
2008
18375-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18376-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Police Department General Fund)
2008
18377-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (General Fund)
2008
18378-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18379-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2008
18380-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Automated Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2008
18381-
12-    12-2-2008 12.5-340
2008
18382-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Clean Water State Revolving Loan Fund)
2008
18383-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund)
2008
18384-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18385-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18386-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18387-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18388-
12-    12-2-2008 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18389- 12-2-
12-    2008;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2008   eff. 12-
       12-2008
18390- 12-2-
12-    2008;     Rezoning
2008   eff. 12-
       12-2008
18391-
12-    12-9-2008 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18392-
12-    12-9-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18393-
12-    12-9-2008 Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18394-
12-    12-9-2008 Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2008
18395-
12-    12-9-2008 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2008
18396-
12-    12-9-2008 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 66
2008
18397-
12-    12-9-2008 Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 10
2008
18398-
12-    12-9-2008 Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 7
2008
18399- 12-9-
12-    2008;     Superseded by Ord. 18449-02-2009
2008   eff. 1-1-
       2009
18400-
12-    12-9-2008 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18401- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (General Fund)
2008
18402- 12-16-
12-    2008      Approving Res. 2008-09-218 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2008
18403- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18404- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18405- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18406- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18407- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2008
18408- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2008
18409- 12-16-
12-    2008      Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2008
18410- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Grants Fund)
2008
18411- 12-16-    Amending Ord. 12323 by reducing the city’s level of contribution of tax
12-    2008      increment
2008
18412- 12-16-
12-    2008;     Superseded by Ord. 18449-02-2009
2008   eff. 1-1-
       2009
18413- 12-16-
12-    2008      Annexation (177.8 acre tract of land)
2008
18414- 12-16-
12-    2008      Annexation (534.4 acre tract of land)
2008
18415- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18416- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2008
18417- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Grants Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18418- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18419- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2008
18420- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2008
18421- 12-16-
12-    2008      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2008
18422-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvements Fund)
2009
18423-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18424-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18425-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
01-    1-6-2009  Zone no. 36
2009
18426-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18427-           Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions at each
01-    1-6-2009  classification in the Fire Department for the fiscal year 2008-2009
2009
18428- 1-6-2009; 12.5-610,
01-    eff. 1-   12.5-610.1
2009   11-2009
18429-
01-    1-6-2009  Annexation (54.9 acre tract of land)
2009
18430-
01-    1-6-2009  Annexation (25.7 acre tract of land)
2009
18431-
01-    1-6-2009  Annexation (1.5 acre tract of land)
2009
18432-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18433-
01-    1-6-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18434- 1-6-2009; App. A, 9.101
01-    eff. 1-   § 1 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2009   14-2009
18435- 1-6-2009;
01-    eff. 1-   App. A, 5.129
2009   14-2009
18436- 1-6-2009;
01-    eff. 1-   Rezoning
2009   21-2009
18437-
01-    1-13-2009 Operating authority (John Moss dba Chase International)
2009
18438-
01-    1-13-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18439-
01-    1-13-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18440-
01-    1-13-2009 Suspending implementation of rate schedule proposed by Conserv Gas Ltd.
2009
                 22-1,
18441- 1-13-     22-303,
01-    2009;     22-303.1,
2009   eff. 1-   22-304,
       21-2009   22-305,
                 22-306
18442-           Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions at each
01-    1-13-2009 classification in the Police Department
2009
18443- 1-13-
01-    2009;     13-1,
2009   eff. 1-   13-2
       21-2009
                 35-158,
                 35-159,
                 35-160,
                 35-161,
                 35-162,
18444-           35-163,
01-    1-13-2009 35-164,
2009             35-165,
                 35-166,
                 35-167,
                 35-168,
                 35-169,
                 35-170
18445-
01-    1-13-2009 Fund (various funds)
2009
18446-
01-    1-13-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18447-
01-    1-13-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18448-
02-    2-3-2009  Ordering a general election
2009
                 15-30,
                 15-31,
                 15-32,
                 15-33,
                 15-34,
                 15-35,
                 15-36,
                 15-37,
                 15-38,
18449- 2-3-2009; 15-39,
02-    eff. 2-   15-40,
2009   10-2009   15-41,
                 15-42,
                 15-43,
                 15-44,
                 15-45,
                 15-46,
                 15-47,
                 15-48,
                 15-48.1,
                 15-48.2
18450-
02-    2-3-2009  Operating authority (Classic Carriage Service)
2009
18451-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18452-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18453-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
18454-
02-    2-3-2009  Vacation (alleys in Julia Martin Subdivision)
2009
18455-
02-    2-3-2009  Vacation (alleys in L.J. Hawkins Subdivision)
2009
18456-
02-    2-3-2009  Vacation (Sundance Southwest Addition)
2009
18457-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18458-
02-    2-3-2009  Vacation (Hicks Airfield Section 3)
2009
18459- 2-3-2009; 7-47,
02-    eff. 2-   7-62
2009   11-2009
18460- 2-3-2009;
02-    eff. 2-   2-321
2009   11-2009
18461-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (various funds)
2009
18462-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Retirement Fund)
2009
18463-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18464-
02-    2-3-2009  22-191
2009
18465-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
02-    2-3-2009  Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2009
18466-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18467-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18468-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18469-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Western Heritage Parking Garage Fund)
2009
18470-
02-    2-3-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18471-
02-    2-10-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18472-
02-    2-10-2009 Vacation (Intermodal Parkway)
2009
18473- 2-10-
02-    2009; 2-  7-47
2009   17-2009
18474- 2-10-
02-    2009;     15-51
2009   eff. 2-
       20-2009
18475-
02-    2-10-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18476-
02-    2-10-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18477-
02-    2-17-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18478-
02-    2-17-2009 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2009
18479-
02-    2-17-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18480-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for a city-initiated 30-inch water main in
02-    2-17-2009 Westpoint Boulevard
2009
18481-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city Neighborhood Empowerment
02-    2-17-2009 Reinvestment Zone No. 16
2009
18482-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city Neighborhood Empowerment
02-    2-17-2009 Reinvestment Zone No. 17
2009
18483-
02-    2-17-2009 Annexation (6.5 acre tract of land)
2009
18484-           Joint ordinance and boundary agreement between lake Worth and the city releasing
02-    2-17-2009 and accepting corporate limits
2009
18485-
02-    2-17-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18486-
02-    2-17-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18487- 2-17-
02-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 2-
       28-2009
18488-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18489-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18490-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2009
18491-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18492-
02-    2-24-2009 Adopting 2009 Comprehensive Plan
2009
18493-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
18494-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
18495-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18496-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Library Improvements Fund)
2009
18497-           Finding that the Summerglen Branch Library was constructed and delivered to city
02-    2-24-2009 citizens
2009
18498-
02-    2-24-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18499- 2-24-
02-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 3-3-
       2009
18500-
03-    3-3-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18501-
03-    3-3-2009  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18502-
03-    3-3-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18503-
03-    3-3-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18504- 3-3-2009; App. A, 5.140,
03-    eff. 3-   App. A, 5.144,
2009   11-2009   App. A, 9.101
                 §§ 3—8, 10 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
18505- 3-3-2009;
03-    eff. 4-2- Rezoning
2009   2009
18506-
03-    3-10-2009 Vacation (Container Way)
2009
18507-
03-    3-10-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18508-
03-    3-10-2009 Adjusting total number of civil service positions in the Police Department
2009
18509-
03-    3-10-2009 Adopting 2009 Master Thoroughfare Plan
2009
18510-
03-    3-10-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18511-
03-    3-24-2009 Ordering a general election
2009
18512-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (Municipal Court Technology Fund)
2009
18513-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2009
18514-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2009
18515-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18516-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18517-
03-    3-24-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
                 35-70.2,
18518-           35-71,
03-    3-24-2009 35-72,
2009             35-76,
                 35-77
18519- 3-24-
03-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 4-2-
       2009
18520- 3-24-
03-    2009;     Operating authority (Call My Limo)
2009   eff. 4-4-
       2009
18521- 3-31-
03-    2009;     Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025 and Ord. 27903-08-2025
2009   eff. 4-4-
       2009
18522-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18523-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18524-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2009
18525-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2009
18526-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18527-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18528-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18529-
03-    3-31-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18530- 4-7-2009;
04-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (360 Limo Inc.)
2009   14-2009
18531- 4-7-2009;
04-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (Diamond B Limo, Inc.
2009   14-2009
18532- 4-7-2009;
04-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (X-Quizit Transportation, LLC)
2009   14-2009
18533-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2009
18534-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18535-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2009
18536-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (New Development Fund)
2009
18537-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18538-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18539-
04-    4-7-2009  Amending revised fiscal year 2009 budget
2009
18540-
04-    4-7-2009  Amending revised fiscal year 2009 budget
2009
18541-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18542-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18543-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18544-
04-    4-7-2009  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18545- 4-7-2009;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2009   21-2009
18546-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18547-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18548-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18549-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18550-
04-    4-14-2009 Enhanced communities facilities agreements and urban development funds project
2009
18551-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2009
18552-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18553-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18554-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18555-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18556-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18557-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18558-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18559-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18560-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18561-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18562-
04-    4-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18563- 4-14-
04-    2009;     Operating authority (DTR Unlimited, LLC)
2009   eff. 4-
       25-2009
18564-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18565-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18566-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Municipal Court Technology Fund)
2009
18567-
04-    4-21-2009 Vacation (Pruitt Street and portion of Seventh Avenue)
2009
18568-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18569-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18570-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2009
18571-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18572-
04-    4-21-2009 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2009
18573-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2009
18574-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2009
18575- 4-28-
04-    2009;     Operating authority (First Run Limousine)
2009   eff. 5-2-
       2009
18576- 4-28-
04-    2009;     Operating authority (Red Carpet Limousine)
2009   eff. 5-2-
       2009
18577-
04-    4-28-2009 Vacation (alley in Forest Park Addition)
2009
18578-
04-    4-28-2009 Vacation (West Lancaster Avenue)
2009
18579-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18580-
04-              
2009
18581-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18582-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18583-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18584-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18585-
04-    4-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18586- 4-28-
04-    2009;     Operating authority (Continental Transportation System, Inc.)
2009   eff. 5-
       14-2009
18587-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18588-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18589-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18590-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18591-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18592-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
                 35-70.3,
18593-           35-72,
05-    5-5-2009  35-73,
2009             35-77,
                 35-78
18594-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18595-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2009
18596-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (New Development Fund)
2009
18597-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (Automated Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2009
18598-
05-    5-5-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18599- 5-5-2009;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2009   19-2009
18600-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18601-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18602-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18603-
05-    5-12-2009 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2009
18604-
05-    5-12-2009 Street name change (Radioshack Circle to Trinity Campus Circle)
2009
18605-
05-    5-12-2009 Street name change (Arch Adams Street to Van Cliburn Way)
2009
18606-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (SH121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2009
18607-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (SH121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2009
18608-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18609-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18610-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18611-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18612-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18613-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18614-
05-    5-12-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
                 App. A, 6.301,
18615-           App. A, 6.302,
05-    5-12-2009 App. A, 6.507,
2009             App. A, 9.101
                 Repealed App. A, 2.105
18616-
05-    5-19-2009 Runoff election
2009
18617-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18618-
05-    5-19-2009 Vacation (portion of Arch Adams)
2009
18619-
05-    5-19-2009 Vacation (portion of Dooling Street)
2009
18620-
05-    5-19-2009 Reappointing municipal judges
2009
18621-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18622-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18623-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18624-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18625-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18626-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18627-
05-    5-19-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18628-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18629-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18630-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18631-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program Fund
2009
18632-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2009
18633-
05-    5-26-2009 Adopting standards of care for 2009 for youth programs
2009
18634-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18635-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18636-
05-    5-26-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18637- 5-26-
05-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 5-
       30-2009
18638-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18639-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18640-
06-    6-2-2009  Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 68
2009
18641-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18642-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18643-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18644-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18645- 6-2-2009;
06-    eff. 6-6- 10-9.1
2009   2009
18646-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18647-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2009
18648-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18649-
06-    6-2-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18650- 6-2-2009;
06-    eff. 6-   Rezoning
2009   12-2009
18651- 6-9-2009;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Bohemian Limo)
2009   19-2009
18652- 6-9-2009;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Silver West, Inc.)
2009   19-2009
18653-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18654-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18655-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18656-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18657-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18658-
06-    6-9-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18659- 6-9-2009;
06-    eff. 6-   Rezoning
2009   17-2009
18660-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18661-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18662-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18663-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18664-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18665-
06-    6-16-2009 Vacation (Sherril Street)
2009
18666-
06-    6-16-2009 Vacation (public access easement Trinity Bluff Addition)
2009
18667-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18668-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18669-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18670-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (CD Revolving Loan Fund)
2009
18671-
06-    6-16-2009 Annexation (3.58 acres)
2009
18672-
06-    6-16-2009 Street name change (Fitzhugh Avenue to Richard Legacy Lane)
2009
18673-
06-    6-16-2009 Street name change (Oakdale Drive to Good Shepherd Way)
2009
18674-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18675-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18676-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18677-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18678-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18679-
06-    6-16-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18680-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18681-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18682-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18683-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18684-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18685-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18686-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18687-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18688-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Retirement Fund)
2009
18689-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18690-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18691-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18692-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18693-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2009
18694-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18695-
06-    6-23-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18696-
07-    7-14-2009 Street name change (Longleaf Court to Brooklynn Court)
2009
18697- 7-14-
07-    2009;     Operating authority (Allpoints Corporate Express)
2009   eff. 7-
       19-2009
18698- 7-14-
07-    2009;     Operating authority (North Texas Airport Transportation, LLC)
2009   eff. 7-
       19-2009
18699- 7-14-
07-    2009;     Operating authority (Premier Transportation Services LLC)
2009   eff. 7-
       19-2009
18700-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18701-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
2009
18702-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18703-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18704-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18705- 7-14-     31-103,
07-    2009;     31-106,
2009   eff. 7-   31-108,
       21-2009   31-109
18706-
07-    7-14-2009 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2009
18707-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2009
18708-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18709-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18710-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18711-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18712-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18713-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18714-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18715-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18716-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2009
18717-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18718-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18719-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18720- 7-14-
07-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 7-
       28-2009
18721-
07-    7-14-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18722-
07-    7-21-2009 Fund (New Equipment Purchase Fund)
2009
18723-
07-    7-21-2009 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18724-
07-    7-21-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18725-
07-    7-21-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18726-
07-    7-21-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18727-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18728-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18729-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18730-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18731-           Publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and limited surplus
07-    7-28-2009 revenue certificates
2009
18732-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18733-
07-    7-28-2009 Changing the name of a portion of Arch Adams Lane to Arch Adams Street
2009
18734-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18735-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18736-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Grants Fund)
2009
18737-
07-    7-28-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18738-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18739-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18740-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2009
18741-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18742-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2009
18743-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18744-
08-    8-4-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
                 App. A, 6.400,
18745- 8-4-2009; App. A, 6.401,
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 6.403,
2009   11-2009   App. A, 6.404,
                 App. A, 6.411,
                 App. A, 9.101
18746- 8-4-2009; App. A, 6.301,
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 9.101
2009   11-2009
18747- 8-4-2009;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2009   18-2009
18748-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18749-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2009
18750-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Solid Waste Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18751- 8-11-
08-    2009;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2009   eff. 10-
       1-2009
18752-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18753-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2009
18754-
08-    8-11-2009 Annexation (51.3 acre tract of land)
2009
18755-
08-    8-11-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18756-
08-    8-18-2009 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
18757-
08-    8-18-2009 Vacation (Brooks and Bailey Subdivision)
2009
18758-
08-    8-18-2009 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2009
18759-
08-    8-18-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18760-           Establishing maximum permitted rates and charges that Atmos Energy Corp Mid-Tex
08-    8-18-2009 division may assess customers
2009
18761-
08-    8-18-2009 Fund (Grant Fund)
2009
18762-
08-    8-18-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18763- 8-18-
08-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 8-
       25-2009
18764-
08-    - -2009   Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 43rd concurrent bond ordinance
2009
18765-
08-    - -2009   Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 44th concurrent bond ordinance
2009
18766-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18767- 8-25-
08-    2009;     Operating authority (Angmar Entertainment, Inc.)
2009   eff. 8-
       29-2009
18768- 8-25-
08-    2009;     Operating authority (Simon’s Executive Car Service, Inc.)
2009   eff. 8-
       29-2009
18769-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Aviation Improvement Capital Projects Fund0
2009
18770-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
       8-25-     App. B, 11A-91,
18771- 2009;     App. B, 11A-92,
08-    eff. 8-   App. B, 11A-93,
2009   29-2009   App. B, 11A-94,
                 App. B, 11A-95
18772-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18773-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18774-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18775-
08-    8-25-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18776-           Approving resolutions no 2002-11328 and 2009-06-116, of the Dallas-Fort Worth
09-    9-1-2009  International Airport Board
2009
18777-
09-    9-1-2009  Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18778-
09-    9-1-2009  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18779-
09-    9-1-2009  Fund (General Fund)
2009
18780-
09-    9-1-2009  Replaced with Ord. 18958-12-2009
2009
18781-
09-    9-1-2009  Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2009
18782-
09-    9-1-2009  Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds, series 2009
2009
18783-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and limited surplus revenue
09-    9-1-2009  certificates of obligation series 2009
2009
18784-
09-    9-1-2009  Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenue Fund)
2009
18784- 9-1-2009;
09-    eff. 9-8- Rezoning
2009   2009
18786-           Levying assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or services in Public
09-    9-8-2009  Improvement District No. 1
2009
18787-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18788-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18789-           Ordering the levy of assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or
09-    9-8-2009  services in Public Improvement District No. 6
2009
18790-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18791-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18792-           Levying assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or services in Public
09-    9-8-2009  Improvement District No. 7
2009
18793-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18794-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18795-           Ordering the levy of assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or
09-    9-8-2009  services in Public Improvement District No. 8
2009
18796-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18797-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18798-           Ordering the levy of assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or
09-    9-8-2009  services in Public Improvement District No. 11
2009
18799-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18800-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18801-           Ordering the levy of assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or
09-    9-8-2009  services in Public Improvement District No. 12
2009
18802-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18803-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18804-           Ordering the levy of assessments for cost of certain improvements and/or
09-    9-8-2009  services in Public Improvement District No. 14
2009
18805-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2009
18806-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18807-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2009
18808-
09-    9-8-2009  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18809-           Setting forth an itemized estimate of expense of conducting each department
09-    9-15-2009 division and office of the municipal government for the ensuing fiscal year
2009
18810-
09-    9-15-2009 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2009
18811-
09-    9-15-2009 Providing for the levy and the collection of an annual ad valorem tax
2009
18812-           Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
09-    9-15-2009 Department
2009
18813-
09-    9-15-2009 Vacation (Dashwood Street)
2009
18814-
09-    9-15-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2009
18815-
09-    9-15-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Operating Fund)
2009
                 7-304,
                 7-317,
18816-           7-331,
09-    9-15-2009 7-332,
2009             7-334,
                 7-348,
                 7-351
18817- 9-15-
09-    2009;     13-2
2009   eff. 9-
       22-2009
18818-           Establishing maximum permitted rates and charges that Coserv Gas, Ltd may assess
09-    9-15-2009 customers
2009
18819-
09-    9-15-2009 12.5-340
2009
18820-
09-    9-15-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18821-
09-    9-15-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18822- 9-15-
09-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 9-
       20-2009
18823- 9-15-     App. A, 5.116.B,
09-    2009;     App. A, 6.507,
2009   eff. 9-   App. A, 9.101
       20-2009
18824- 9-22-
09-    2009;     Operating authority (Opryland Hotel)
2009   eff. 10-
       27-2009
18825-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18826-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2009
18827-
09-    9-22-2009 Vacation (W.J. Boaz Subdivision)
2009
18828-
09-    9-22-2009 Vacation (portion of Mira Vista Boulevard)
2009
18829-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18830-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18831-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18832-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18833-
09-    9-1-2009  Providing for the issuance of general purpose bonds, series 2009
2009
18834-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18835- 9-22-     35-39,
09-    2009;     35-56,
2009   eff. 1-1- 35-63
       2010
18836-
09-    9-22-2009 35-56
2009
18837- 9-22-
09-    2009;     Fund (Park Gas lease Project Fund)
2009   eff. 10-
       1-2009
18838-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of drainage utility system revenue bonds
09-    9-22-2009 series 2009
2009
18839-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18840-
09-    9-22-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18841-
09-    9-29-2009 Vacation (SO7 Addition)
2009
18842-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18843-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18844-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18845-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18846-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (ITS Improvements Fund)
2009
18847-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18848-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (CIP Parks and Community Service Improvement Fund)
2009
18849-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18850-
09-    9-29-2009 Street name change (Cromwell Street to Sims Legacy Lane)
2009
18851-
09-    9-29-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18852- 10-6-
10-    2009;     Operating authority (Hoque and Mumith Inc.)
2009   eff. 10-
       15-2009
18853-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18854-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18855-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18856-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2009
18857-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18858-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18859-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18860-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18861-
10-    10-6-2009 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2009
18862- 10-13-
10-    2009      2-186
2009
18863- 10-13-
10-    2009;     Operating authority (Accent/Johnston Limousine, Inc.)
2009   eff. 10-
       17-2009
18864- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18865- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18866- 10-13-
10-    2009;     22-191
2009   eff. 10-
       20-2009
18867- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2009
18868- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18869- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18870- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2009
18871- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (General Fund)
2009
18872- 10-13-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18873- 10-13-
10-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 10-
       29-2009
18874- 10-20-
10-    2009      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18875- 10-20-
10-    2009      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18876- 10-20-
10-    2009      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2009
18877- 10-20-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18878- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18879- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18880- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18881- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18882- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18883- 10-27-    Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
10-    2009      Department
2009
18884- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2009
18885- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Park Gas Well Lease Fund)
2009
18886- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18887- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18888- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2009
18889- 10-27-
10-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18890-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18891-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (State Highway 121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2009
18892-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (SH121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2009
18893-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Environmental Management Project Fund)
2009
18894-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18895-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18896-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18897-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18898-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18899-
11-    11-3-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18900- 11-3-
11-    2009;     App. A, 2.102
2009   eff. 11-  §§ 2, 3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       10-2009
18901- 11-3-
11-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 11-
       20-2009
18902- 11-3-
11-    2009;     App. A, 6.101,
2009   eff. 11-  App. A, 9.101
       10-2009
18903- 11-3-
11-    2009;     App. A, 2.103
2009   eff. 11-
       10-2009
18904- 11-3-
11-    2009;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2009   eff. 11-
       10-2009
18905- 11-3-
11-    2009;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2009   eff. 11-
       10-2009
18906- 11-10-
11-    2009;     Operating authority (Perfect Choice Limousine Service)
2009   eff. 11-
       14-2009
18907- 11-10-
11-    2009      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18908- 11-10-
11-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
                 17-1,
                 17-18,
                 17-46,
                 17-48,
18909-           17-66,
11-    11-10-    17-67,
2009   2009      17-71 ,
                 17-86,
                 17-87,
                 17-88,
                 17-89,
                 17-91
18910- 11-10-    15-31,
11-    2009;     15-34,
2009   eff. 11-  15-42
       17-2009
18911- 11-10-
11-    2009      Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18912- 11-11-
11-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 11-
       24-2009
18913- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18914- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18915- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18916- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18917- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2009
18918- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
2009
18919- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18920- 11-17-
11-    2009      Vacation (alley right-of-way in Sarah Gray Jennings Survey)
2009
18921- 11-17-
11-    2009      Vacation (portions of Alabama Street and Broadway Street)
2009
18922- 11-17-
11-    2009      Annexation (225.7 acre tract of land)
2009
18923- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2009
18924- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2009
18925- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18926- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18927- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18928- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18929- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (General Fund)
2009
18930- 11-17-
11-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18931-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18932-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18933-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18934-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18935-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18936-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2009
18937-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18938-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18939-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18940-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18941-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program Fund)
2009
18942-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Street Improvement Fund)
2009
18943-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18944-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18945-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18946-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18947-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18948-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18949-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18950-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2009
18951-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (General Fund)
2009
18952-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2009
18953-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue bonds,
12-    12-8-2009 series 2009
2009
18954-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the stormwater revenue
12-    12-8-2009 bonds, series 2009 fund
2009
18955-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18956-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the American
12-    12-8-2009 Reinvestment Recovery Act 2009 SFR Reclaim Water Fund
2009
18957-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Park Gas lease Project Fund)
2009
18958- 12-8-
12-    2009;     Vacation (alley in J.N. Ellis Survey)
2009   eff. 1-6-
       2010
18959-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Fire Services Fund)
2009
18960-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18961-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18962-
12-    12-8-2009 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18963- 12-8-
12-    2009;     Rezoning
2009   eff. 1-8-
       2010
18964- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2009
18965- 12-15-    Approving Res. 2009-10-211 of the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Board
12-    2009      which amends various traffic provisions
2009
18966- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2009
18967- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2009
18968- 12-15-
12-    2009      Vacation (emergency easement within parts of Hicks Airfield)
2009
18969- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18970- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18971- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18972- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18973- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18974- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2009
18975- 12-15-
12-    2009      Enlarging the boundaries of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 9
2009
18976- 12-15-
12-    2009      Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in various funds
2009
18977- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18978- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2009
18979- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18980- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (General Fund)
2009
18981- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Grants Fund)
2009
18982- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18983- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2009
18984- 12-15-
12-    2009      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2009
18985-
01-    1-12-2010 Vacation (Van Zandt’s park addition)
2010
18986-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (TPW Gas Wells Revenue Fund)
2010
18987-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (Sewer Fund)
2010
18988-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
18989-
01-    1-12-2010 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2010
18990- 1-12-
01-    2010;     35-56
2010   eff. 10-
       1-2010
18991-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (Municipal Parking Fund)
2010
18992-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
18993-
01-    1-12-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
18994- 1-12-
01-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 1-
       26-2010
18995- 1-12-
01-    2010;     App. A, 6.410
2010   eff. 1-
       23-2010
18996- 1-12-
01-    2010;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2010   eff. 1-
       23-2010
18997- 1-26-
01-    2010;     Operating authority (G & G Executive Transportation, Inc.)
2010   eff. 2-4-
       2010
18998- 1-26-
01-    2010;     Operating authority (Classic Shuttle Acquisition Corp.)
2010   eff. 3-2-
       2010
18999- 1-26-
01-    2010;     Operating authority (Super Shuttle DFW, Inc.)
2010   eff. 3-
       10-2010
19000-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19001-
01-    1-26-2010 Vacation (15 ft alley in Southside Addition)
2010
19002-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2010
19003-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2010
19004-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19005-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19006-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19007-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19008-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19009- 1-26-
01-    2010;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2010   eff. 1-
       30-2010
19010-
01-    1-26-2010 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2010
19011-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2010
19012-
01-    1-26-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19013- 1-26-
01-    2010;     App. A, 9.101
2010   eff. 1-   §§ 1—3 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
       30-2010
19014- 2-2-2010;
02-    eff. 3-8- Operating authority (Agency LC Group Inc.)
2010   2010
19015- 2-2-2010;
02-    eff. 3-   Operating authority (Carey Limousine Dallas, Inc.)
2010   19-2010
19016-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19017-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19018-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19019-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19020-
02-    2-2-2010  Vacation (Margaret Street)
2010
19021-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19022- 2-2-2010;
02-    eff. 2-9- 15-42
2010   2010
19023-
02-    2-9-2010  Adjustment of city boundaries with Lake Worth
2010
19024-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19025-
02-    2-2-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19026- 2-2-2010; App. A, 9.101
02-    eff. 2-9- §§ 1—7 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2010   2010
19027- 2-2-2010;
02-    eff. 2-   Rezoning
2010   23-2011
19028-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19029-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19030-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19031-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2010
19032-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19033-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19034-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19035-
02-    2-9-2010  Revised fiscal year 2010 budget
2010
19036-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19037-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2010
19038-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Community Tree Planting Program Fund)
2010
19039-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19040-
02-    2-9-2010  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19041-
02-    2-23-2010 Vacation (Old Seminary Drive)
2010
19042-
02-    2-23-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19043-
02-    2-23-2010 Appropriations
2010
19044-
02-    2-23-2010 Adopting 2010 Comprehensive Plan
2010
19045-
02-    2-23-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19046-
02-    2-23-2010 Vacation (Ramsey Street)
2010
19047-           Street name change (from Jim Wright Freeway from North Main to its terminus to
02-    2-23-2010 Windy Ryon Way)
2010
19048- 2-23-
02-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 3-6-
       2010
19049-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19050- 3-2-2010;
03-    eff. 3-6- Repealing 22-261; 22-262; 22-263; 22-264; 22-265; 22-266
2010   2010
19051- 3-2-2010;
03-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (Texas Stage Line)
2010   22-2010
19052-
03-    3-2-2010  Vacation (Mcanulty and Nesbitt’s Subdivision)
2010
19053-
03-    3-2-2010  Vacation (Jennings West Addition)
2010
19054-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19055-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19056-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19057-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19058-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19059-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19060-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19061-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2010
19062-
03-    3-2-2010  Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19063- 3-2-2010;
03-    eff. 3-9- Rezoning
2010   2010
19064- 3-2-2010;
03-    eff. 3-9- Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2010   2010
19065-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2010
19066-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19067-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19068-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19069-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2010
19070-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2010
19071-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Lake Worth Capital Improvement Fund)
2010
19072-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19073-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19074-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19075-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19076-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19077-
03-    3-9-2010  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19078- 3-23-
03-    2010;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2010   eff. 3-
       30-2010
19079-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19080-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2010
19081-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19082- 3-23-
03-    2010;     15-51
2010   eff. 4-2-
       2010
19083-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19084-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2010
19085-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19086-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19087-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19088-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19089-
03-    3-23-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19090- 3-23-
03-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 4-2-
       2010
19091- 4-6-2010;
04-    eff. 4-   Repealing Ord. 15760 (franchise to Strategic Cable Technologies)
2010   15-2010
19092-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19093- 4-6-2010;
04-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (Fort Worth Stockyards Livery and Arena)
2010   15-2010
19094-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19095-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19096-
04-    4-6-2010  Vacation (alley right-of-way in Wray’s Subdivision)
2010
19097-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19098-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Environmental Management Fund)
2010
19099-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19100-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19101-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19102-
04-    4-6-2010  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19103- 4-6-2010;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2010   15-2010
19104-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19105-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19106-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19107- 4-13-
04-    2010;     Operating authority (VIP Shuttle Service)
2010   eff. 5-
       10-2010
19108-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2010
19109-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2010
19110-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19111-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19112-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19113-           Approving JP Morgan Chase to ast as liquidity provider in support of city water
04-    4-13-2010 and sewer system commercial paper notes
2010
19114-
04-    4-13-2010 Fund (Commercial Paper Debt Service Fund)
2010
19115-
04-              
2010
19116-           Adjusting the total number of authorized civil service positions in the Police
04-    4-20-2010 Department
2010
19117-
04-    4-20-2010 7-47
2010
19118-
04-    4-20-2010 7-167
2010
19119-
04-    4-20-2010 26-2
2010
19120- 4-20-
04-    2010;     11-2
2010   eff. 5-
       10-2010
19121-
04-    4-20-2010 Fund (Water and Sewer Revenue Debt Service Fund)
2010
19122- 4-20-
04-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 4-
       24-2010
19123-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19124-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19125-
04-    4-27-2010 Appointing municipal judges for 2-yr. term
2010
19126-
04-    4-27-2010 Reappointing municipal judges for 1-yr. term
2010
19127-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19128-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19129-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19130-
04-    4-27-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2010
19131-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue
04-    4-27-2010 refunding bonds series 2010
2010
19132-
05-    5-4-2010  Vacation (Forest Avenue)
2010
19133-
05-    5-4-2010  Standards of care for 2010 for youth programs
2010
19134-
05-    5-4-2010  Fund (Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19135-
05-    5-4-2010  Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19136-
05-    5-5-2010  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19137- 5-4-2010;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2010   22-2010
19138-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19139-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19140-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19141-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19142-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19143-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19144-
05-    5-11-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19145-
05-    5-11-2010 Annexation
2010
19146-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19147- 5-18-
05-    2010;     Operating authority (Mckiny Services)
2010   eff. 5-
       27-2012
19148- 5-18-
05-    2010;     Operating authority (Occasional Carriages)
2010   eff. 5-
       27-2012
19149-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19150-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19151-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2010
19152-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (New Development Fund)
2010
19153-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19154-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2010
19155-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19156- 5-18-     31-41,
05-    2010;     31-63,
2010   eff. 5-   31-105,
       22-2010   31-150
19157-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2010
19158-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
05-    5-18-2010 revenue certificates of obligation series 2010
2010
19159-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue bonds
05-    5-18-2010 series 2010A
2010
19160-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19161-
05-    5-18-2010 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 69
2010
19162-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19163-
05-    5-18-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19164-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2010
19165- 6-8-2010;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (About DFW Co.)
2010   16-2010
19166- 6-8-2010;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Embarque Dallas, Inc.)
2010   21-2010
19167- 6-8-2010;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Frankcisco Hummersine, LLC)
2010   14-2010
19168-
06-    6-8-2010  Water main capacity charge
2010
19169-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19170-
06-    6-8-2010  Vacation (Boyce Avenue)
2010
19171-
06-    6-8-2010  Vacation (North Jones Street)
2010
19172-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19173-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19174-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2010
19175-
06-    6-8-2010  13-27
2010
19176-
06-    6-8-2010  Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2010
19177- 6-8-2010;
06-    eff. 6-   Rezoning
2010   18-2010
19178-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19179- 6-15-
06-    2010;     Operating authority (AA Limo, LLC)
2010   eff. 6-
       21-2010
19180-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19181-
06-    6-15-2010 Vacation (alley right-of-way, Riverside Addition)
2010
19182-
06-    6-15-2010 Vacation (Honeysuckle Court)
2010
19183-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19184-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2010
19185-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2010
19186-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2010
19187-
06-    6-15-2010 Annexation
2010
19188-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2010
19189-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19190-
06-    6-15-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19191- 6-15-
06-    2010; eff Rezoning
2010   6-22-2010
19192-           Amending Ord. 17967, establishing unit prices for city participation in certain
06-    6-22-2010 community facilities agreements
2010
19193-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19194-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19195-
06-    6-22-2010 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 70
2010
19196-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Golf Capital Project Fund)
2010
19197-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Golf Debt Service Fund)
2010
19198-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
06-    6-22-2010 obligation series 2010
2010
19199-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19200-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19201-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19202-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2010
19203-
06-    6-22-2010 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19204- 7-13-
07-    2010;     Operating authority (Moore’s Airport Transportation)
2010   eff. 7-
       21-2010
19205-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19206-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19207-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19208-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19209-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19210-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19211-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19212-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19213-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19214-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2010
19215-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19216-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19217-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2010
19218-
07-    7-13-2010 Vacation (Humbolt Street)
2010
19219-
07-    7-13-2010 Vacation (20-ft. right-of-way in M.G. Ellis Addition)
2010
19220-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19221-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19222-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19223-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19224-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2010
19225-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19226-
07-    7-13-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19227- 7-13-     App. A, 6.403,
07-    2010;     App. A, 6.405,
2010   eff. 7-   App. A, 6.406,
       30-2010   App. A, 9.101
19228- 7-13-
07-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 7-
       30-2010
19229- 7-20-
07-    2010; eff Operating authority (Alberton’s Limousine, Inc.)
2010   9-28-2010
19230- 7-20-
07-    2010;     Operating authority (Go Green Taxi, LLC)
2010   eff. 8-4-
       2010
19231- 7-20-
07-    2010;     Operating authority (Panther City Pedicabs, LLC)
2010   eff. 7-
       27-2010
19232-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19233-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19234-
07-    7-20-2010 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2010
19235-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19236-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2010
19237-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19238-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19239-
07-    7-20-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19240- 7-20-
07-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 7-
       30-2010
19241-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2010
19242-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19243-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2010
19244-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19245-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (Water State Revolving Loan Fund)
2010
19246-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19247-
07-    7-27-2010 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19248- 7-27-
07-    2010; eff Rezoning
2010   8-6-2010
19249-
08-    8-3-2010  Vacation (Erie Street)
2010
19250-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19251-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
2010
19252-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2010
19253-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19254-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
                 20-401,
                 20-402,
                 20-403,
                 20-404,
                 20-405,
                 20-406,
                 20-407,
                 20-408,
                 20-409,
                 20-410,
                 20-411,
                 20-412,
                 20-413,
                 20-414,
                 20-415,
                 20-416,
                 20-417,
                 20-418,
                 20-419,
                 20-420,
19255- 8-3-2010; 20-421,
08-    eff. 10-  20-422,
2010   1-2010    20-423,
                 20-424,
                 20-425,
                 20-426,
                 20-427,
                 20-428,
                 20-429,
                 20-430,
                 20-431,
                 20-432,
                 20-433,
                 20-434,
                 20-435,
                 20-436,
                 20-437,
                 20-438,
                 20-439,
                 20-440,
                 20-441,
                 20-442,
                 20-443
19256-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2010
19257-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2010
19258-
08-    8-3-2010  Vacation (16-ft. wide alley right-of-way, Block U, Daggetts Addition)
2010
19259-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2010
19260-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (General Fund)
2010
19261-
08-    8-3-2010  Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19262- 8-3-2010;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2010   13-2010
19263-
08-    8-10-2010 Vacation (Atlanta Street)
2010
19264-
08-    8-10-2010 Vacation (Kent Street and Midcourt)
2010
19265-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination of tax and
08-    8-10-2010 revenue certificates of obligation series 2010A
2010
19266-           Vacation (Southern Street, Thirty Second Street, Webber Street, Lulu Street,
08-    8-10-2010 Schadt Street and various alley rights-of-way)
2010
19267-
08-    8-10-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19268- 8-10-
08-    2010;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2010   eff. 9-4-
       2010
19269- 8-10-
08-    2010;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2010   eff. 9-4-
       2010
19270- 8-10-
08-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 9-4-
       2010
19271-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19272- 8-17-
08-    2010;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2010   eff. 8-
       21-2010
19273-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19274- 8-17-
08-    2010;     10-11
2010   eff. 10-
       1-2010
19275-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19276-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19277-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19278-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19279-
08-    8-17-2010 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2010
19280-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
2010
19281-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2010
19282-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19283-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19284-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19285-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19286-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Airports Grant Fund Project Fund)
2010
19287-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19288-
08-    8-24-2010 Repealed by Ord. 20548-12-2012
2010
19289-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue bonds
08-    8-24-2010 series 2010B
2010
19290-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19291-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2010
19292-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
2010
19293-
08-    8-24-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19294- 9-14-
09-    2010;     Operating authority (Eclipse Limousine Services, LLC)
2010   eff. 9-
       21-2010
19295- 9-14-
09-    2010;     Operating authority (Godfather Trans Inc.)
2010   eff. 9-
       28-2010
19296- 9-14-
09-    2010;     Operating authority (Legacy Transportation, Inc.)
2010   eff. 10-
       15-2010
19297-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2010
19298-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19299-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19300-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19301-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2010
19302-
09-    9-14-2010 Vacation (West Lancaster Avenue)
2010
19303-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19304-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19305-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19306-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19307-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19308-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19309-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19310-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 1
2010
19311-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2010
19312-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19313-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 6
2010
19314-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 6
2010
19315-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19316-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 7
2010
19317-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 7
2010
19318-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19319-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 8
2010
19320-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 8
2010
19321-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19322-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 11
2010
19323-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 11
2010
19324-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19325-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 12
2010
19326-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 12
2010
19327-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19328-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-14-2010 provided in Public Improvement District No. 14
2010
19329-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in Public Improvement District
09-    9-14-2010 No. 14
2010
19330-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19331-           Providing for the issuance of $42,595,000 combination tax and revenue
09-    9-14-2010 certificates of obligation series 2010A
2010
19332-           Providing for the issuance of $20,590,000 of general purpose bond, series 2010,
09-    9-14-2010 bearing interest
2010
19333-           Authorizing the issuance sale of water and sewer system revenue bonds series
09-    9-14-2010 2010C in the aggregate principal amount of $45,870,000
2010
19334-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19335-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19336- 9-14-
09-    2010;     31-105
2010   eff. 9-
       23-2010
19337-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Airport Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19338-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19339-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19340-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19341-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Lake Worth Capital Improvement Fund)
2010
19342-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19343-
09-    9-14-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19344- 9-14-
09-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 10-
       1-2010
19345-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19346-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19347-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19348-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19349-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19350-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19351-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19352-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19353-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19354-           Establishing minimum rates and charges that Atmos Energy Corp. may assess
09-    9-21-2010 customers
2010
19355-           Setting forth an itemized estimate of expense of conducting each department
09-    9-21-2010 division and office of the municipal government for the ensuing fiscal year
2010
19356-
09-    9-21-2010 Setting forth an estimate of the expense of the Debt Service Fund
2010
19357-
09-    9-21-2010 Providing for the levy and the collection of an annual ad valorem tax
2010
19358-           Master bond ordinance amending and restating the controlling ordinances passed
09-    9-21-2010 concurrently by the City Councils of the Cities of Dallas and Fort Worth, and
2010             authorizing the issuance of additional joint revenue bonds
19359-           Forty-fourth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing Dallas/Fort
09-    9-21-2010 Worth International Airport joint revenue improvement bonds, series 2010A
2010
19360-           Forty-fifth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing Dallas/Fort Worth
09-    9-21-2010 International Airport joint revenue refunding bonds, series 2011A
2010
19361-           Forty--sixth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing Dallas/Fort
09-    9-21-2010 Worth International Airport joint revenue improvement and refunding bonds,
2010             series 2011B
19362-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2010
19363-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19364-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19365-
09-    9-21-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19366- 9-21-
09-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 10-
       1-2010
19367-
09-    9-28-2010 Vacation (Verbena Street)
2010
19368-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19369-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19370-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19371-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19372-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Aviation Asset Depletion Fund)
2010
                 20-404,
                 20-406,
19373-           20-410,
09-    9-28-2010 20-415,
2010             20-417,
                 20-424,
                 20-426
                 17-1,
                 17-16,
                 17-17,
                 17-18,
                 17-19,
                 17-20,
                 17-21,
                 17-46,
                 17-47,
                 17-48,
                 17-49,
                 17-52 ,
                 17-53 ,
                 17-66,
                 17-67,
                 17-68,
                 17-69,
       9-28-     17-71 ,
19374- 2010;     17-72 ,
09-    eff. 10-  17-86,
2010   1-2010    17-87,
                 17-88,
                 17-89,
                 17-90,
                 17-91,
                 17-92,
                 17-93,
                 17-94,
                 17-96,
                 17-97,
                 17-98,
                 17-99,
                 17-100,
                 17-101,
                 17-102,
                 17-103,
                 17-104,
                 17-105,
                 17-106
19375-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19376-
09-    9-28-2010 35-56
2010
19377-
09-    9-28-2010 35-56
2010
19378-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19379- 9-28-
09-    2010;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2010   eff. 10-
       5-2010
19380-
09-    9-28-2010 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19381-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19382-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (various funds)
2010
19383-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (various funds)
2010
19384-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2010
19385-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19386-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19387-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19388-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2010
19389-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19390-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19391-
10-    10-5-2010 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19392- 10-5-
10-    2010;     Operating authority (Walsh Integrity Investments, LLC)
2010   eff. 12-
       29-2010
19393- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19394- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19395- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19396- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19397- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19398- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19399- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19400- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19401- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19402- 10-12-    15-31,
10-    2010;     15-36,
2010   eff. 10-  15-39
       16-2010
19403- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (various funds)
2010
19404- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19405- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19406- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19407- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19408- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19409- 10-12-
10-    2010      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19410- 10-12-
10-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 10-
       26-2010
19411- 10-19-
10-    2010      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19412- 10-19-
10-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19413- 10-19-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19414- 10-26-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19415- 10-26-
10-    2010      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2010
                 3-16, 3-17, 3-19  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020) ,
19416- 10-26-    3-20,
10-    2010      3-23,
2010             3-24
                 Repealed 3-18, 3-22. 3-26—3-29
19417- 10-26-
10-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19418- 11-9-
11-    2010;     Operating authority (Royal Limousine)
2010   eff. 11-
       13-2010
19419- 11-9-
11-    2010;     Operating authority (Super Shuttle DFW)
2010   eff. 1-4-
       2011
19420-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19421-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19422-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (various funds)
2010
19423-
11-    11-9-2010 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2010
19424- 11-9-     6-61 (Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018) ,
11-    2010;     App. B, 11A-22,
2010   eff. 11-  App. B, 11A-22.2
       18-2010   Repealed 11A-21
19425-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (Lake Worth Capital Improvement Fund)
2010
19426-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (Lake Worth Trust Fund)
2010
19427-
11-    11-9-2010 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19428- 11-9-
11-    2010;     App. A, 6.204,
2010   eff. 11-  App. A, 9.101
       16-2010
19429- 11-9-
11-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 11-
       23-2010
19430- 11-16-
11-    2010;     Operating authority (1st Choice Limousines and Transportation Services)
2010   eff. 11-
       23-2010
19431- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2010
19432- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19433- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19434- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19435- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2010
19436- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2010
19437- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19438- 11-16-    Amending Ordinance No. 17462-03-2007; approving and authorizing the issuance of
11-    2010      city water and sewer system commercial paper notes, series A
2010
19439- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2010
19440- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19441- 11-16-
11-    2010      Appointing municipal judge; 2-yr. term
2010
19442- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund ((Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19443- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19444- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Community Tree Planting Program Fund)
2010
19445- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19446- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19447- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2010
19448- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19449- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19450- 11-16-
11-    2010      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19451- 11-16-
11-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 12-
       14-2010
19452-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19453-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19454-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19455-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (General Fund)
2010
19456-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19457-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19458-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19459-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19460-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 37
2010
19461-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 9R
2010
19462-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 7R
2010
19463-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 5R
2010
19464-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 39
2010
19465-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 8R
2010
19466-           Designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
12-    12-7-2010 Zone No. 15R
2010
19467-           Renewing and re-designating a certain area in the city as Neighborhood
12-    12-7-2010 Empowerment Reinvestment Zone
2010             No. 24
19468-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2010
19469-
12-    12-7-2010 Annexation (194 .1 acre tract of land)
2010
19470-
12-    12-7-2010 Annexation (336.4 acre tract of land)
2010
19471-
12-    12-7-2010 Annexation (3.2 acre tract of land)
2010
19472-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19473-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2010
19474-
12-    12-7-2010 Fund (Unspecified Park Development Funds)
2010
19475- 12-7-
12-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 12-
       28-2010
19476- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2010
19477- 12-14-
12-    2010;     Operating authority (Allen Limousine, INC.)
2010   eff. 12-
       18-2010
19478- 12-14-
12-    2010;     Operating authority (DFW prestige limos, LLC)
2010   eff. 1-
       24-2010
19479- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19480- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19481- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2010
19482- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19483- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19484- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19485- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19486- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Grants Fund)
2010
19487- 12-14-    Authorizing the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board to act as agent of
12-    2010;     the city for the limited purposes of creating and issuing a temporary North
2010   eff. 12-  Texas Regional Limousine permit/decal for Super Bowl XLV
       18-2010
19488- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19489- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Workers Compensation Insurance Fund)
2010
19490- 12-14-
12-    2010      22-192
2010
19491- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2010
19492- 12-14-
12-    2010;     Prohibiting certain activities within protected areas in connection with
2010   eff. 1-   activities related to Super Bowl XLV in the city
       23-2011
19493- 12-14-    Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement
12-    2010      Reinvestment Zone No. 71
2010
19494- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2010
19495- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (General Fund)
2010
19496- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2010
19497- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2010
19498- 12-14-
12-    2010      Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2010
19499- 12-14-
12-    2010;     Rezoning
2010   eff. 1-
       21-2011
19500-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2011
19501-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2011
19502-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2011
19503-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19504-
01-    1-4-2011  27-34
2011
19505-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19506-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19507-
01-    1-4-2011  Vacation (Saba Drive; Maui Drive; Thunder Bay Drive; Granada Drive)
2011
19508-
01-    1-4-2011  Funds for encumbrance rollovers (various funds)
2011
19509-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19510-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19511-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19512-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (ERP Capital Project Fund)
2011
19513-
01-    1-4-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19514- 1-4-2011;
01-    eff. 2-   Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2011   15-2011
19515- 1-4-2011; App. A, 5.308,
01-    eff. 1-   App. A, 7.107,
2011   18-2011   App. A, 9.101
19516- 1-4-2011;
01-    eff. 1-   Rezoning
2011   21-2011
19517-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (State Revolving Debt Service Fund)
2011
19518- 1-25-
01-    2011;     Operating authority Black Car Transport Services, LLC
2011   eff. 2-2-
       2011
19519- 1-25-
01-    2011;     Operating authority AETS, LLC
2011   eff. 2-2-
       2011
19520-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19521- 1-25-
01-    2011;     Operating authority Lonestar Bikecab
2011   eff. 2-2-
       2011
19522-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Parks Improvement Fund)
2011
19523-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19524-
01-    1-25-2011 Vacation (Gambrell Street)
2011
19525-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19526-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19527-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19528-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19529-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Transportation Utility Fund)
2011
19530- 1-25-
01-    2011;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2011   eff. 2-2-
       2011
19531-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19532-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Clean Water SRF 2007 Series Fund)
2011
19533-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19534-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19535-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19536-
01-    1-25-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19537-
02-    2-8-2011  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19538-
02-    2-8-2011  Fund (Grant Fund)
2011
19539-
02-    2-8-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19540-
02-    2-8-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19541-           Suspending implementation of rate schedule proposed by Oncor Electric Delivery
02-    2-8-2011  Company
2011
19542-
02-    2-8-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
                 35-171,
                 35-172,
                 35-173,
                 35-174,
                 35-175,
                 35-176,
                 35-177,
                 35-178,
                 35-179,
                 35-180,
                 35-181,
                 35-182,
                 35-183,
                 35-184,
                 35-185,
                 35-186,
19543-           35-187,
02-    2-8-2011  35-188,
2011             35-189,
                 35-190,
                 35-191,
                 35-192,
                 35-193,
                 35-194,
                 35-195,
                 35-196,
                 35-197,
                 35-198,
                 35-199,
                 35-200,
                 35-201,
                 35-202,
                 35-203,
                 35-204,
                 35-205,
                 35-206
19544- 2-8-2011;
02-    eff. 2-   Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2011   25-2011
19545- 2-8-2011;
02-    eff. 2-   Rezoning
2011   25-2011
19546- 2-15-
02-    2011;     Approving Resolution 2101500- 07- and Resolution 2201200- 09- of the Dallas-Fort
2011   eff. 2-   Worth International Airport Board
       21-2011
19547- 2-15-
02-    2011;     Approving Resolution No. 2101700- 18-, adopted by the Dallas-Fort Worth
2011   eff. 2-   International Airport Board
       21-2011
19548- 2-15-
02-    2011;     Operating authority; North Star Carriage
2011   eff. 2-
       24-2011
19549-
02-    2-15-2011 Vacation (May Street)
2011
19550-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19551-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19552-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19553-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (Special Assessments District Fund)
2011
19554-
02-    2-15-2011 Ordering general election
2011
19555- 2-15-
02-    2011;     23-19
2011   eff. 2-
       21-2011
19556-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19557-
02-    2-15-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19558-
02-    2-15-2011 Designating an area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 72
2011
19559-
02-    2-15-2011 Disannexation of 138.00 acre tract situated in the Coleman Boyd survey
2011
19560- 2-15-
02-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 2-
       25-2011
19561-
03-    3-1-2011  Vacation (Grace Street)
2011
19562-
03-    3-1-2011  Vacation (Riverfront Drive)
2011
19563-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19564-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19565-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19566-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19567-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19568-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19569-
03-    3-1-2011  Adopting 2011 Comprehensive Plan
2011
19570- 3-1-2011;
03-    eff. 3-6- 22-95
2011   2011
19571-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19572-
03-    3-1-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19573- 3-1-2011;
03-    eff. 3    Rezoning
2011   26-2011
19574-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19575-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19576-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19577-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Lake Worth Gas lease Capital Improvements Fund)
2011
19578-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19579-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19580-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19581-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2011
19582-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19583-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19584-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2011
19585-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19586-
03-    3-8-2011  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19587- 3-8-2011; App. A, 9.101
03-    eff. 4-   §§ 1—4 repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2011   29-2011
19588- 3-8-2011;
03-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2011   18-2011
19589-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19590-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19591-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19592-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19593-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund/Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19594-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19595-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19596-
03-    3-22-2011 Appointing municipal judge
2011
19597-           18-4
03-    3-22-2011 Repealed 18-5
2011
19598-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19599-
03-    3-22-2011 Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2011
19600-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
                 7-46,
19601- 3-22-     7-47,
03-    2011;     7-48,
2011   eff. 4-1- 7-49,
       2011      7-226,
                 20-358
       3-22-     7-61,
19602- 2011;     7-62,
03-    eff. 4-1- 7-63,
2011   2011 and  7-64
       1-1-2012
19603- 3-22-     7-166,
03-    2011;     7-167,
2011   eff. 4-1- 7-168,
       2011      7-169
19604- 3-22-     26-1,
03-    2011;     26-2,
2011   eff. 4-1- 26-3,
       2011      26-4
19605- 3-22-     7-41,
03-    2011;     7-42,
2011   eff. 4-1- 7-43,
       2011      7-44
19606- 3-22-
03-    2011;     7-87,
2011   eff. 4-1- 7-91
       2011
19607- 3-22-
03-    2011;     13-1,
2011   eff. 4-1- 13-2
       2011
19608-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19609-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19610-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19611-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19612-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19613-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19614-
03-    3-22-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19615- 3-22-
03-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 3-
       26-2011
19616-
04-    4-5-2011  Rezoning
2011
19617-           Amending Ord. 16662 to reflect correct metes and bounds for zoning case ZC-04-
04-    4-5-2011  148R
2011
19618-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 16894 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-06-017
2011
19619-           Amending Ord. 17589 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-07-010 and ZC-07-
04-    4-12-2011 086
2011
19620-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 17699 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-07-011
2011
19621-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 18399 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-08-147
2011
19622-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 18365 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-08-167
2011
19623-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 18390 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-08-183
2011
19624-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 18763 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-09-072
2011
19625-
04-    4-5-2011  Amending Ord. 18785 to reflect information for zoning case ZC-09-062
2011
19626-
04-    4-5-2011  10-1
2011
19627-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Airport Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19628-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19629-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19630-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19631-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19632-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19633-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19634-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19635-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19636-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19637-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19638-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19639-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19640-
04-    4-5-2011  General election
2011
19641-
04-    4-5-2011  Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 38
2011
19642-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19643-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Information System Fund)
2011
19644-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19645-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19646-
04-    4-5-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19647- 4-5-2011;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2011   18-2011
19648-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19649-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2011
19650-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19651-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19652-           vacation (Gendy Street; Burnett Tandy Drive; Rip Johnson Drive; W.R. Watt Drive;
04-    4-12-2011 Clyde Street; Seneca Street; Winona Street; and various alley rights-of-way
2011
19653-
04-    4-12-2011 Amending project scope for Avondale Haslet Road
2011
19654-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19655-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19656-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19657-
04-    4-12-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
                 7-317,
       4-12-     7-318,
19658- 2011;     7-386,
04-    eff. 4-   7-387,
2011   18-2011   7-389,
                 7-390,
                 7-391
19659-
04-    4-19-2011 Reappointing substitute municipal judges
2011
19660-
04-    4-19-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19661-
04-    4-19-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19662-
04-    4-19-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19663-
04-    4-19-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19664-
04-    4-19-2011 Ordering a general election
2011
19665-
04-    4-19-2011 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2011
19666-
05-    5-3-2011  Operating authority (Alpha Royal Limo and Car Services)
2011
19667-
05-    5-3-2011  Operating authority (Ohemeng Transportation, LLC)
2011
19668-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19669-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19670-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19671-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19672-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19673-
05-    5-3-2011  Ordering general election
2011
19674-
05-    5-3-2011  Rezoning
2011
19675-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19676-
05-    5-3-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19677-
05-    5-10-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19678-
05-    5-10-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19679-
05-    5-10-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19680-
05-    5-10-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19681-
05-    5-10-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19682-
05-    5-10-2011 Rezoning
2011
19683-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19684-
05-    5-17-2011 Vacation (Chamberlin Arlington Heights)
2011
19685-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19686-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19687-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19688-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19689-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19690-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2011
19691-
05-    5-17-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19692-
05-    5-24-2011 Ordering a run-off election
2011
19693- 5-24-
05-    2011;     Dallas /Fort Worth International Airport forty-fifth supplemental concurrent
2011   eff. 5-   bond ordinance
       25-2011
19694- 5-24-
05-    2011;     Dallas /Fort Worth International Airport forty-sixth supplemental concurrent
2011   eff. 5-   bond ordinance
       25-2011
19695- 5-24-
05-    2011;     Dallas /Fort Worth International Airport forty-seventh supplemental concurrent
2011   eff. 5-   bond ordinance
       25-2011
19696-
05-    5-24-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19697-
05-    5-24-2011 7-402
2011
19698-
05-    5-24-2011 Vacation (Harris Parkway)
2011
19699-
05-    5-24-2011 Vacation ( 2 alleys in E.P. Parris survey)
2011
19700-
05-    5-24–201Adopting standards of care for 2011 youth programs
2011
19701-
05-    5-24-2011 Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
2011
19702-
05-    5-24-2011 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2011
19703-
05-    5-24-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects fund)
2011
19704-
05-    5-24-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19705-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19706-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2011
19707-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (General Fund)
2011
19708-
06-    6-7-2011  13-24
2011
19709-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19710- 6-7-2011;
06-    eff. 6-   Police department; positions
2011   25-2011
19711- 6-7-2011;
06-    eff. 6-   Superseded by Ord. 20678-03-2013
2011   25-2011
19712- 6-7-2011;
06-    eff. 6-   Repealed 27-30
2011   25-2011
19713- 6-7-2011;
06-    eff. 6-   Adopted 27-35 which was repealed by Ord. 20724-05-2013
2011   25-2011
19714-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19715-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2011
19716-
06-    6-7-2011  Vacation (alley in Dunlap’s Subdivision)
2011
19717-
06-    6-7-2011  Amending effective date of Ord. 19699 to be effective immediately
2011
19718-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19719-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19720-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19721-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19722-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
2011
19723-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19724-
06-    6-7-2011  Ordering a run-off election
2011
19725-
06-    6-7-2011  Rezoning
2011
19726-
06-    6-7-2011  Fund (Golf Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19727-
06-    6-7-2011  Establishing maximum rates and charges, Oncor Electric Delivery Co.
2011
19728-
06-    6-7-2011  Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 72
2011
19729-           Road name change (Carswell Access Road from Meandering Road to Military Parkway
06-    6-7-2011  to Ltjg Barnett Road
2011
19730-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19731-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19732-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19733-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19734-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19735-
06-    6-14-2011 Authorizing issuance of tax notes
2011
19736-
06-    6-14-2011 Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 73
2011
19737-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2011
19738-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2011
19739-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19740-
06-    6-14-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19741-
06-    6-14-2011 Rezoning
2011
19742- 7-12-
07-    2011;     Operating authority (A.I.N. Limousine)
2011   eff. 7-
       16-2012
19743- 7-12-
07-    2011;     Operating authority (Brazos Carriage Co.)
2011   eff. 7-
       15-2012
19744- 7-12-
07-    2011;     Operating authority (DFW Corporate Limo)
2011   eff. 7-
       15-2012
19745-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Environmental Protection Operating Fund)
2011
19746-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2011
19747-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19748-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19749-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19750-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19751-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19752-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19753-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19754-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19755-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19756-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19757-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project Fund)
2011
19758-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2011
19759-
07-    7-12-2011 Annexation (21.0 acres)
2011
19760-
07-    7-12-2011 Annexation (0.3 acre tract)
2011
19761-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19762-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19763-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2011
19764-
07-    7-12-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19765-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19766-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2011
19767-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19768- 7-19-
07-    2011;     22-84
2011   eff. 7-
       23-2011
19769-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19770- 7-19-
07-    2011;     Operating authority (Fairmont Bike Taxi, LLC)
2011   eff. 7-
       23-2011
19771-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19772- 19772-07-
07-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19773-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19774-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19775-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2011
19776-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19777-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19778-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19779-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19780-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19781-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2011
19782-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19783-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19784- eff. 7-
07-    24-2011   Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2011
19785-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19786-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Airports lease Projects Fund)
2011
19787-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2011
19788-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19789-
07-    7-19-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19790- 7-19-
07-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 7-
       24-2011
19791-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Program Fund)
2011
19792-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19793-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2011
19794-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (New Development Fund)
2011
19795-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19796-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19797-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19798-
07-    7-26-2011 Extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for salt water disposal wells
2011
19799-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2011
19800-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (State Revolving Debt service Fund)
2011
19801-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of city water and sewer system revenue
07-    7-26-2011 refunding and improvement bonds, Series 2011
2011
19802-
07-    7-26-2011 Providing for the issuance of city general purpose refunding bonds, series 2011
2011
19803-
07-    7-26-2011 Repealed by Ord. 22242-05-2016
2011
19804-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19805-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund P258)
2011
19806-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19807-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19808-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2011
19809-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2011
19810-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19811-
07-    7-26-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19812- 8-2-2011;
08-    eff. 8-6- Operating authority (Global Limo Service, Inc.)
2011   2011
19813-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2011
19814-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2011
19815-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19816-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19817-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19818-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19819- 8-2-2011;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2011   13-2011
19820-
08-    8-2-2011  Annexation (15.4 acre tract)
2011
19821-
08-    8-2-2011  Annexation (0.6 acre tract)
2011
19822-
08-    8-2-2011  Repealed 12-4-2012 by M&C C-25992
2011
19823-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19824-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19825-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Environmental Protection Operating Fund
2011
19826-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2011
(2)
19826-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2011
19827-
08-    8-2-2011  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19828-
08-    8-9-2011  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2011
19829-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19830-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
2011
19831-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2011
19832-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Environmental Protection Fund)
2011
19833-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19834-
08-    8-9-2011  Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19835-           Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
08-    8-9-2011  Zone No. 8
2011
19836- 8-9-2011;
08-    eff. 8-   Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2011   13-2011
19837- 8-9-2011;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2011   24-2011
19838-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19839-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2011
19840-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19841-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2011
19842-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2011
19843-           Changing the name of Green Oaks Road Extension, a loop street Within Ridgemar
08-    8-16-2011 Mall, to Mall Circle
2011
19844-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19845-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19846-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
2011
19847-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Aviation Endowment Gas Lease Fund)
2011
19848-
08-    8-16-2011 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2011
19849- 8-16-
08-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 8-
       24-2011
19850-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19851-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (SH121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2011
19852-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19853-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19854-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19855-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19856-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19857-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19858-
08-    8-23-2011 Establishing maximum permitted rates and charges of Atmos Energy Corp.
2011
19859-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19860-
08-    8-23-2011 Terminating Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 11
2011
19861-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2011
19862-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
2011
19863-
08-    8-23-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19864- 9-13-
09-    2011;     Adding one position in the classification of Captain; adjusting the total number
2011   eff. 10-  of authorized sworn positions in the Police Department by one
       1-2011
19865-           Vacation (16-ft. wide alley right-of-way, located in Block 18, Van Zandt’ s Park
09-    9-13-2011 Addition)
2011
19866-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2011
19867-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19868-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19869-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19870-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19871-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19872-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19873-
09-    9-13-2011 Rezoning
2011
19874-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19875-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19876-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 1 during fiscal year
2011             2011-12
19877-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19878-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19879-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 6 during fiscal year
2011             2011-12;
19880-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19881-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19882-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 7 during fiscal year
2011             2011-12
19883-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19884-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19885-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 8 during fiscal year
2011             2011-12
19886-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19887-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19888-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 11 during fiscal year
2011             2011-12
19889-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19890-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19891-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 12 during fiscal year
2011             2011 -12
19892-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2011
19893-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19894-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-13-2011 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 14 during fiscal year
2011             2011 -12
19895-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2011
19896-
09-    9-13-2011 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 74
2011
19897-
09-    9-13-2011 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 75
2011
19898-           Vacation ( portions of a 15 foot wide alley right- of-way and Weber Street
09-    9-13-2011 Situated in the J. Smith Survey No. 1382)
2011
19899-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19900-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Environmental Protection Operating Fund)
2011
19901-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2011
19902-
09-    9-13-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19903- 9-20-
09-    2011;     Operating authority (A2K Transportation)
2011   eff. 9-
       29-2011
19904- 9-20-
09-    2011;     Operating authority (Bennett Limousine Service, LLC)
2011   eff. 9-
       29-2011
19905-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19906-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19907-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19908-
09-    9-20-2011 12.5-340
2011
19909- 9-20-
09-    2011;     35-56
2011   eff. 10-
       1-2011
19910- 9-20-
09-    2011;     35-56
2011   eff. 1-1-
       2012
19911-           Itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division and
09-    9-20-2011 office of the municipal government of the city
2011
19912-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2011
19913-           Providing for the levy and collection of an annual ad valorem tax on all
09-    9-20-2011 property, real, personal and mixed, situated within the territorial limits of
2011             the city
19914-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2011
19915-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (New Equipment Purchases Fund)
2011
19916-
09-    9-20-2011 Superseded by Ord. 20533-12-2012
2011
19917-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Fort Worth Housing Finance Corporation Fund)
2011
19918-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19919-
09-    9-20-2011 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 76
2011
19920-
09-    9-20-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19921- 9-20-
09-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 10-
       7-2011
19922-
09-    9-27-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19923-
09-    9-27-2011 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2011
19924-
09-    9-27-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19925-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of drainage utility system revenue bonds,
09-    9-27-2011 series 2011
2011
19926-
09-    9-27-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19927-
09-    9-27-2011 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19928-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19929-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19930-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19931-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19932-
10-              
2011
19933-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19934-
10-    10-4-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19935- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19936- 10-18-
10-    2011;     Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2011   eff. 10-
       31-2011
19937- 10-18-
10-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 10-
       31-2011
19938- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (various funds)
2011
19939- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19940- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19941- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (Airports Grants Fund)
2011
19942- 10-18-
10-    2011      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19943- 10-25-
10-    2011      Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Program Fund)
2011
19944- 10-25-
10-    2011;     Operating authority (Anointed Carrier Transportation)
2011   eff. 10-
       28-2011
19945- 10-25-
10-    2011      Fund (General Fund)
2011
19946- 10-25-    Extending the moratorium on the acceptance of applications for salt water
10-    2011      disposal wells
2011
                 10-22,
                 10-26,
19947- 10-25-    22-1,
10-    2011;     22-158.1,
2011   eff. 10-  22-162.1,
       29-2011   22-167,
                 22-169,
                 22-191
19948- 10-25-
10-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19949- 10-25-
10-    2011      Providing for the continued taxation of goods -in- transit
2011
19950- 10-25-
10-    2011      Annexation (38. 2 acre tract)
2011
19951- 10-25-    Boundary agreement between the City of River Oaks and the City of Fort Worth
10-    2011      releasing and accepting corporate limits
2011
19952- 10-25-
10-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19953- 10-25-
10-    2011      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19954- 10-25-
10-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 10-
       31-2011
19955- 11-1-
11-    2011;     Operating authority (Aries Shuttle - Dallas, LLC)
2011   eff. 11-
       9-2011
19956- 11-1-
11-    2011;     Operating authority (Wynne Enterprise I, LP, D/ B/A Wynne Sedan & Limousine
2011   eff. 11-  Group)
       9-2011
19957-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19958-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19959-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19960- 11-1-
11-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 11-
       16-2011
19961-
11-    11-1-2011 Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 77
2011
19962-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19963-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19964-
11-    11-1-2011 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2011
19965- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2011
19966- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (General Fund)
2011
19967- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (General Fund)
2011
19968- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2011
19969- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (General Fund)
2011
19970- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19971- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19972- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19973- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19974- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19975- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19976- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (various funds)
2011
19977-           30-14,
11-    11-15-    30-15,
2011   2011      30-33,
                 30-53
19978- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19979- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19980- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19981- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19982- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Transportation and Public Works Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2011
19983- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2011
19984- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19985- 11-15-
11-    2011      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19986-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
19987- 12-6-
12-    2011;     Operating authority (City Shuttle, LLC)
2011   eff. 12-
       12-2011
19988- 12-6-
12-    2011;     Operating authority (Vantage Way, Inc.)
2011   eff. 12-
       12-2011
19989-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
19990-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project Fund)
2011
19991-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19992-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
19993-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
19994-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
19995-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
19996-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project Fund)
2011
19997-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2011
                 7-394,
                 7-400,
                 7-401,
19998-           7-402,
12-    12-6-2011 7-403,
2011             7-404,
                 7-405,
                 7-410,
                 7-411,
                 7-416
19999-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2011
20000-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Community Tree Planting Program Fund)
2011
20001-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2011
20002-
12-    12-6-2011 Annexation (251.0 acre tract)
2011
20003- 12-6-
12-    2011;     Rezoning
2011   eff. 12-
       16-2011
20004-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20005-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (General Fund)
2011
20006-
12-    12-6-2011 Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20007- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (various funds)
2011
20008- 12-13-
12-    2011      Repealed by Ord. 20471-10-2012
2011
20009- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2011
20010- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (General Fund)
2011
20011- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20012- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20013- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20014- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20015- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20016- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20017- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20018- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20019- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20020- 12-13-
12-    2012;     Repealed by Ord. 24534-11-2020
2011   eff. 6-1-
       2012
20021- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Bond Fund)
2011
20022- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Stormwater Debt Service Fund)
2011
20023- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2011
20024- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2011
20025- 12-13-
12-    2011      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 78
2011
20026- 12-13-
12-    2011      Designating a certain area in the city as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 79
2011
20027- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2011
20028- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Grants Fund)
2011
20029- 12-13-
12-    2011      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2011
20030-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20031-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20032-
01-    1-10-2012 Vacation (Alston Avenue)
2012
20033-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Culture and Tourism)
2012
20034-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2012
20035-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20036-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2012
20037-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20038-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2012
20039-           Advisory commission on homelessness; repealing Ord. 16630-10-2005; repealed by
01-    1-10-2012 Ord. 21669-03-2015
2012
20040-
01-    1-10-2012 Annexation of 12.3 acre tract
2012
20041-
01-    1-10-2012 Zoning; amendment (rezoning)
2012
20042-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2012
                 12.5-103,
                 12.5-600,
                 12.5-604,
                 12.5-610,
                 12.5-610.1,
                 12.5-610.2,
                 12.5-613,
                 12.5-622,
                 12.5-631,
                 12.5-632,
                 12.5-633,
                 12.5-641,
20043-           12.5-643,
01-    1-10-2012 12.5-645,
2012             12.5-651,
                 12.5-654,
                 12.5-654.1,
                 12.5-655,
                 12.5-658,
                 12.5-660,
                 12.5-661,
                 12.5-663,
                 12.5-670,
                 12.5-671,
                 12.5-671.1,
                 12.5-677,
                 12.5-677.1,
                 12.5-677.2
20044-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20045-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20046-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20047-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20048-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20049-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2012
20050-
01-    1-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20051-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20052-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2012
20053-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20054-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20055-
01-    1-24-2012 Special election called
2012
20056-
01-    1-24-2012 Operating authority to Irvine Holdings
2012
20057-
01-    1-28-2012 Operating authority to Cowboy Cab Company
2012
20058-
01-    1-24-2012 Operating authority to Darya Corp.
2012
20059-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20060-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20061-
01-    1-24-2012 Zoning; amending; rezoning
2012
20062-
01-    1-24-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20063-
02-    1-31-2012 Operating authority for Ian’s Limousine Service
2012
20064-
02-    2-7-2012  Zoning; amending; rezoning
2012
20065-
02-    2-14-2012 Fund (Parks Dedication Fees Fund)
2012
20066-
02-    2-14-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects fund)
2012
20067-
02-    2-14-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20068-
02-    2-14-2012 Zoning; amending; rezoning
2012
20069-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20070-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2012
20071-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20072-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20073-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2012
20074-
02-    2-21-2012 Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 80
2012
20075-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20076-
02-    2-21-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20077-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Park Improvements Funds)
2012
20078-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20079-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Airport Lease Projects Fund)
2012
20080-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20081-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2012
20082-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20083-
03-    3-6-2012  Rezoning
2012
20084-
03-    3-6-2012  App. A, 2.102
2012
20085-
03-    3-6-2012  Adopting Comprehensive Plan
2012
20086-           30-154,
03-    3-6-2012  30-195
2012
20087-
03-    3-6-2012  Suspending implementation of rate schedule proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2012
20088-
03-    3-6-2012  Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2012
20089-
03-    3-6-2012  Street name change
2012
20090-
03-    3-6-2012  Street name change
2012
20091-
03-    3-6-2012  Street name change
2012
20092-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20093-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20094-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2012
20095-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2012
20096-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20097-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20098-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2012
20099-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2012
20100-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2012
20101-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2012
20102-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20103-
03-    3-6-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20104-           7-108,
03-    3-20-2012 7-222
2012
20105-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20106-
03-    3-20-2012 Appointing Raquel Brown as municipal judge for 2 yr. term
2012
20107-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Transportation Public Works Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2012
20108-
03-    3-20-2012 Vacation of alley
2012
20109-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2012
20110-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Airport Gas lease Project Fund)
2012
20111-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20112-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20113-
03-    3-20-2012 Designating area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 81
2012
20114-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20115-
03-    3-20-2012 Repealing Ord. 19558-02-2011 designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 72
2012
20116-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20117-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20118-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20119-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20120-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20121-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20122-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20123-
03-    3-20-2012 Fund (Specially funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20124-
03-    3-20-2012 Rezoning
2012
20125-
03-    3-27-2012 7-78
2012
20126-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20127-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20128-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20129-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20130-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20131-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20132-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20133-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20134-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20135-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20136-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20137-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20138-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20139-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20140-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20141-           Dallas /Fort Worth International Airport forty-eighth supplemental concurrent
03-    3-27-2012 bond ordinance
2012
20142-
03-    3-27-2012 7-47
2012
20143-
03-    3-27-2012 Renewing Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 34
2012
20144-
03-    3-27-2012 Renewing Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 2
2012
20145-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20146-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20147-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20148-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20149-
03-    3-27-2012 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2012
20150-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20151-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20152-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (New Development Fund)
2012
20153-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2012
20154-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20155-
04-    4-3-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20156-
04-    4-3-2012  Special election for purpose of selecting council member
2012
20157-
04-    4-3-2012  Repealed by Ord. 20159-04-2012
2012
20158-           App. A, 2.102,
04-    4-3-2012  App. A, 5.136,
2012             App. A, 5.137,
                 App. A, 9.101
                 App. A, 4.100,
                 App. A, 4.101,
                 App. A, 4.102,
                 App. A, 4.103,
                 App. A, 4.200,
                 App. A, 4.201,
                 App. A, 4.202,
                 App. A, 4.203,
                 App. A, 4.204,
                 App. A, 4.300,
                 App. A, 4.301,
                 App. A, 4.302,
                 App. A, 4.303,
                 App. A, 4.304,
                 App. A, 4.305,
                 App. A, 4.306,
                 App. A, 4.400,
                 App. A, 4.401,
                 App. A, 4.402,
                 App. A, 4.403,
                 App. A, 4.404,
                 App. A, 4.600,
                 App. A, 4.601,
                 App. A, 4.700,
                 App. A, 4.701,
                 App. A, 4.702,
                 App. A, 4.703,
                 App. A, 4.704,
                 App. A, 4.705,
20159-           App. A, 4.706,
04-    4-3-2012  App. A, 4.707,
2012             App. A, 4.708,
                 App. A, 4.709,
                 App. A, 4.710,
                 App. A, 4.711,
                 App. A, 4.712,
                 App. A, 4.713,
                 App. A, 4.800,
                 App. A, 4.801,
                 App. A, 4.802,
                 App. A, 4.900,
                 App. A, 4.901,
                 App. A, 4.902,
                 App. A, 4.903,
                 App. A, 4.904,
                 App. A, 4.905,
                 App. A, 4.1000,
                 App. A, 4.1003,
                 App. A, 4.1004,
                 App. A, 4.1100,
                 App. A, 4.1101,
                 App. A, 4.1102,
                 App. A, 4.1103,
                 App. A, 4.1104,
                 App. A, 4.1200,
                 App. A, 4.1201,
                 App. A, 4.1300, App. A, 4.1301 (Repealed by Ord. 22810-08-2017) ,
                 App. A, 4.1302, App. A, 4.1303 (Repealed by Ord. 22810-08-2017) ,
                 App. A, 4.1304,
                 App. A, 4.1305,
                 App. A, 4.1306
20160-
04-    4-3-2012  Rezoning
2012
20161-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20162-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund ( Special Trust Fund)
2012
20163-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2012
20164-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2012
20165-
04-    4-11-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20166-
04-    4-10-2012 15-42
2012
20167-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20168-
04-    4-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2012
20169-
04-    4-17-2012 Project and financing plan for tax increment reinvestment zone No. 3
2012
20170-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Neighborhood Patrol Officer Program)
2012
20171-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20172-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20173-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2012
20174-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20175-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20176-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (New Development Fund)
2012
20177-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2012
20178-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20179-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20180-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20181-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20182-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20183-
04-    4-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20184-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2012
20185-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20186-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20187-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20188-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20189-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20190-
05-    - -2012   Rezoning
2012
20191-
05-    5-1-2012  23-8
2012
20192-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Park Gas lease Project Fund)
2012
20193-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20194-
05-    5-1-2012  Fort Worth Youth Program Standards of Care for 2012
2012
20195-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20196-
05-    5-1-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20197-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20198-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20199-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20200-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2012
20201-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20202-
05-    5-8-2012  Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20203-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2012
20204-
05-    5-15-2012 Operating authority for Limo 10, Inc.
2012
20205-
05-    5-15-2012 Operating authority to X-quizit Transportation, LLC
2012
20206-
05-    5-15-2012 Appointment of judges
2012
20207-
05-    5-15-2012 Vacation
2012
20208-
05-    5-15-2012 Vacation
2012
20209-
05-    5-15-2012 Vacation
2012
20210-
05-    5-15-2012 Vacation
2012
20211-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20212-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20213-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20214-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20215-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20216-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2012
20217-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Gas Revenue Fund)
2012
20218-
05-    5-15-2012 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20219-
05-    5-15-2012 Denying rates and charges proposed by Atmos Energy Corp.
2012
20220-
05-    - -2012   Rezoning
2012
20221-
05-    5-17-2012 Ordering a run-off election
2012
20222-
06-    6-5-2012  Operating authority to Echo Transportation Solutions, LLC
2012
20223-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20224-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20225-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2012
20226-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20227-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20228-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Storm Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20229-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20230-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20231-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20232-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20233-
06-    6-5-2012  Rezoning
2012
20234- 6-5-2012;
06-    eff. 8-1- Repealed by Ord. 26964-06-2024
2012   2012
20235-
06-    6-5-2012  22-324
2012
20236-
06-    6-5-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20237-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20238-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2012
20239-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (New Development Fund)
2012
20240-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20241-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20242-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20243-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20244-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20245-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Airport Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20246-
06-    6-12-2012 Approving Res. 2011-11-327 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Board
2012
20247-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects fund)
2012
20248-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (ERP Capital Project Fund)
2012
20249-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2012
20250-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20251-
06-    6-12-2012 Annexation
2012
20252-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2012
20253-
06-    6-12-2012 Vacation
2012
20254-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20255-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Water and Sewer Gas Lease Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20256-
06-    6-12-2012 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20257-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20258-
07-    7-10-2012 Operating authority for Fernando Transportation
2012
20259-
07-    7-10-2012 Operating authority for Town Square Limo Service
2012
20260-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20261-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (New Development Fund)
2012
20262-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2012
20263-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20264-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20265-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20266-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20267-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20268-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20269-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20270-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20271-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20272-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20273-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2012
20274-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projection Fund)
2012
20275-
07-    7-10-2012 Rezoning
2012
20276-           Publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and revenue
07-    7-10-2012 certificates
2012
20277-           App. B, 11A-8,
07-    7-10-2012 App. B, 11A-9,
2012             App. B, 11A-10,
                 App. B, 11A-11
20278-
07-    7-10-2012 Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 82
2012
20279-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20280-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20281-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20282-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20283-
07-    7-10-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20284-
07-    7-17-2012 Operating authority to Silver West, Inc.
2012
20285-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20286-
07-    7-17-2012 Vacation
2012
20287-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20288-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20289-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20290-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20291-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
                 20-404,
                 20-410,
                 20-411,
20292-           20-412,
07-    7-17-2012 20-413,
2012             20-414,
                 20-415,
                 20-418,
                 20-434,
                 20-438
20293-
07-    7-17-2012 Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 83
2012
20294-
07-    7-17-2012 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20295-
07-    7-24-2012 Operating authority to Interconnection Limousine
2012
20296-
07-    7-24-2012 Operating authority to Premier Transportation Services
2012
20297-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20298-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20299-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20300-           Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding and improvement bonds,
07-    7-24-2012 series 2012
2012
20301-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
07-    7-24-2012 bonds, series 2012
2012
20302-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20303-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20304-
07-    7-24-2012 Vacation
2012
20305-
07-    7-24-2012 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20306- 8-7-2012;
07-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Allpoints Corporate Express)
2012   11-2012
20307- 8-7-2012;
07-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (First Run Limousine)
2012   14-2012
20308-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20309-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20310-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20311-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20312-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20313-
07-    8-7-2012  Fund (General Fund)
2012
20314-
08-    8-7-2012  Rezoning
2012
                 22-1,
20315-           22-158.2,
08-    8-7-2012  22-164,
2012             22-191,
                 22-209
20316-
08-    8-7-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20317-
08-    8-7-2012  35-85
2012
20318-
08-    8-7-2012  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20319-
08-    8-7-2012  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20320-
08-    8-7-2012  Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20321-
08-    8-14-2012 Operating authority to Bohemian Limo
2012
20322-
08-    8-14-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20323-
08-    8-14-2012 Adding 30 positions in the police officer classification
2012
20324-
08-    8-14-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20325-
08-    8-14-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20326-
08-    8-14-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20327-           Providing for the issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
08-    8-14-2012 obligation, series 2012
2012
20328-
08-    8-14-2012 Vacation
2012
20329-
08-    8-14-2012 Annexation
2012
20330-
08-    8-14-2012 Annexation
2012
20331-
08-    8-14-2012 Rezoning
2012
20332-
08-    8-21-2012 Operating authority to Simon’s Executive Car Service, Inc.
2012
20333-
08-    8-21-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20334-
08-    8-21-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20335-
08-    8-21-2012 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20336-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in various funds from the
08-    8-21-2012 sale of combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation
2012
20337-
08-    8-21-2012 Fund (Public Safety Training Facility Fund)
2012
20338-
08-    8-21-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20264-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20339-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20340-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20341-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20342-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20343-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20344-
09-    9-11-2012 Vacation (Conner Ave.)
2012
20345-
09-    9-11-2012 Vacation (J.A. Lee’s Subdivision)
2012
20346-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20347-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20348-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20349-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2012
20350-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20351-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20352-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20353-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20354-
09-    9-11-2012 Rezoning
2012
20355-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20356-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20357-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 1)
2012
20358-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20359-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20360-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 6)
2012
20361-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20362-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20363-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 7)
2012
20364-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20365-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20366-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 8)
2012
20367-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20368-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20369-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 11)
2012
20370-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20371-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20372-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 12)
2012
20373-
09-    9-12-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20374-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20375-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 14)
2012
20376-
09-    9-12-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20377-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2012
20378-
09-    9-11-2012 Assessments (P.I.D. No. 15)
2012
20379-
09-    9-11-2012 Funds (various funds)
2012
20380-
09-    9-11-2012 Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2012
20381-
09-    9-11-2012 Funds (Water Capital Projects Fund; Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
                 31-41,
                 31-42,
20382-           31-63,
09-    9-11-2012 31-81,
2012             31-103,
                 31-104,
                 31-106,
                 31-171
20383-
09-    9-11-2012 Vacation (Bell Ave., Floyd St., Carson St., Bordon St., Cochran St.)
2012
20384-           Vacation (Mary St., Alice St., Park Ln., Hagan Ave., NW 22nd St., Henry St.,
09-    9-11-2012 Bryan Ave.)
2012
20385-
09-    9-11-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20386-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20387-
09-    9-18-2012 Operating authority (Limo in DFW)
2012
20388-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20389-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
2012
20390-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20391-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20392-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20393-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20394-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20395-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Storm Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20396-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20397-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20398-
09-    9-18-2012 Road name change (Bell Helicopter Blvd.)
2012
20399-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20400-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2012
20401-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Public Safety Training Facility Fund)
2012
20402-
09-    9-18-2012 15-51
2012
20403-           12.5-558,
09-    9-18-2012 12.5-559,
2012             12.5-660,
                 26-2
20404-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20405- 9-18-
09-    2012;     35-56
2012   eff. 1-1-
       2013
                 35-70.2,
                 35-70.3,
20406- 9-18-     35-71,
09-    2012;     35-72,
2012   eff. 1-1- 35-73,
       2013      35-76,
                 35-77,
                 35-78
20407- 9-18-
09-    2012;     35-56
2012   eff. 10-
       1-2012
20408-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20409-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20410-
09-    9-18-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20411-
09-    9-18-2012 Appropriations
2012
20412-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20413-
09-    9-18-2012 Ad valorem tax
2012
20414-
09-    9-25-2012 License (Sprint Communications Company L.P.)
2012
20415-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2012
20416-
09-    9-25-2012 Vacation (Travis Ave.)
2012
20417-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20418-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20419-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20420-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20421-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20422-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20423-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20424-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20425- 9-25-
09-    2012;     7-47
2012   eff. 11-
       5-2012
20426- 9-25-
09-    2012;     2-321
2012   eff. 11-
       5-2012
                 7-47,
20427- 9-25-     7-62,
09-    2012;     7-167,
2012   eff. 11-  11-2,
       5-2012    26-2,
                 29-1
                 7-47,
20428- 9-25-     7-62,
09-    2012;     7-167,
2012   eff. 11-  11-2,
       5-2012    26-2,
                 29-1
20429-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20430-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20431-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20432-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20433-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2012
20434-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20435-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20436-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20437-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2012
20438-
09-    9-25-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20439-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2012
20440-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20441-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20442-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20443-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20444-
10-    10-2-2012 Designation of Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 84
2012
20445-
10-    10-2-2012 Designation of Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 85
2012
20446-
10-    10-2-2012 Vacation (Linden Ave.)
2012
20447-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20448-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20449-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20450-
10-    10-2-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20451-
10-    10-9-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20452-
10-    10-9-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20453-           App. A, 5.116,
10-    10-9-2012 App. A, 6.201,
2012             App. A, 6.300,
                 App. A, 6.506
                 App. A, 4.200,
                 App. A, 5.300,
20454-           App. A, 5.301,
10-    10-9-2012 App. A, 5.302,
2012             App. A, 5.303,
                 App. A, 5.304,
                 App. A, 6.506,
                 App. A, 9.101
20455-
10-    10-9-2012 Rezoning
2012
20456-
10-    10-9-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20457- 10-16-
10-    2012      Operating authority (Advance Transportation Solutions, LLC)
2012
20458- 10-16-
10-    2012      Fund (General Fund)
2012
20459- 10-16-
10-    2012      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20460- 10-16-
10-    2012      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20461- 10-16-
10-    2012      Funds (various funds)
2012
20462- 10-16-
10-    2012      Annexation (Haslet Heights Addition)
2012
20463- 10-23-
10-    2012      Rezoning
2012
20464- 10-16-
10-    2012      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20465- 10-16-
10-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20466- 10-23-
10-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20467- 10-23-
10-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20468- 10-23-
10-    2012      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20469- 10-23-
10-    2012      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20470- 10-23-
10-    2012      Appointment of substitute municipal judges
2012
                 2.5-1,
                 2.5-2,
                 2.5-3,
                 2.5-4,
                 2.5-5,
                 2.5-6,
                 2.5-7,
                 2.5-8,
                 2.5-9,
                 2.5-10,
                 2.5-11,
                 2.5-12,
                 2.5-13,
                 2.5-14,
                 2.5-15,
                 2.5-20,
                 2.5-21,
                 2.5-22,
                 2.5-23,
                 2.5-24,
                 2.5-25,
                 2.5-26,
                 2.5-27,
                 2.5-30,
                 2.5-31,
                 2.5-32,
                 2.5-33,
                 2.5-34,
                 2.5-35,
                 2.5-36,
20471-           2.5-37,
10-    10-23-    2.5-40,
2012   2012      2.5-41,
                 2.5-42,
                 2.5-43,
                 2.5-44,
                 2.5-45,
                 2.5-46,
                 2.5-47,
                 2.5-50,
                 2.5-51,
                 2.5-52,
                 2.5-53,
                 2.5-54,
                 2.5-55,
                 2.5-56,
                 2.5-57,
                 2.5-61,
                 2.5-62,
                 2.5-63,
                 2.5-64,
                 2.5-65,
                 2.5-66,
                 2.5-67,
                 2.5-226,
                 2.5-227,
                 2.5-228,
                 2.5-229,
                 2.5-230,
                 2.5-231,
                 2.5-232,
                 2.5-233,
                 2.5-234,
                 2.5-235
20473- 10-23-
10-    2012      Road name change (Metroport Way)
2012
20474- 10-23-
10-    2012      Rezoning
2012
20475-           Operating authority (RHP Property GT, LP d/b/a Gaylord Texan Resort and
11-    11-6-2012 Convention Center)
2012
20476-           Operating authority (Hoque and Mumith, Inc. d/b/a Alt Worldwide Chauffeured
11-    11-6-2012 Services)
2012
20477-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20478-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20479-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2012
20480-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (General Fund)
2012
20481-
11-    11-6-2012 Vacation (E. Peach St.)
2012
20482-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20483-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20484-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20485-
11-    11-6-2012 Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
                 32-16,
                 32-18,
20486-           32-19,
11-    11-6-2012 32-20,
2012             32-21,
                 32-21.1,
                 32-21.2
20487-
11-    11-6-2012 Designation of Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 4
2012
20488-
11-    11-6-2012 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 6
2012
20489- 11-12-
11-    2012      Budget (Planning and Development)
2012
20490- 11-12-
11-    2012      Budget (Transportation and Public Works Revenue)
2012
20491- 11-12-
11-    2012      Operating authority (Accent/Johnston Limousine, Inc. d/b/a AJL International)
2012
20492- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20493- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (General Fund)
2012
20494- 11-12-
11-    2012      Road name change (Mesa Springs Dr.)
2012
20495- 11-12-
11-    2012      Vacation (Martin Lydon Ave., Warren St.)
2012
20496- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2012
20497- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20498- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Federal Awarded Assets Fund)
2012
20499- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20500- 12-20-
11-    2012      Rezoning
2012
20501- 11-12-
11-    2012;     Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2012   eff. 11-
       20-2012
20502- 11-12-
11-    2012      Funds (various funds)
2012
20503- 11-12-
11-    2012      [Codification pending]
2012
20505- 11-12-
11-    2012      Designation of Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2012
20506- 11-12-
11-    2012      Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20507-
12-    12-4-2012 Operating authority (Choice Valet, Inc. D/B/A Choice Transport)
2012
20508-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2012
20509-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
       12-4-     App. A, Table 4.803,
20510- 2012;     App. A., Table 4.1203,
12-    eff. 12-  App. A, 5.406,
2012   11-2012   App. A, 6.201,
                 App. A, 9.101
20511- 12-22-    App. A, 4.1203,
12-    2012      App. A, 4.1307
2012
20512- 12-29-
12-    2012      Rezoning
2012
20513-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2012
20514-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Community Tree Planting Program Fund)
2012
20515-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2012
20516-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2012
20517-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20518-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20519-
12-    12-4-2012 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20520- 12-11-
12-    2012      Funds (various funds)
2012
20521- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20522- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fire department personnel staffing level changes
2012
20523- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (General Fund)
2012
20524- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20525- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Grants Fund)
2012
20526- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20527- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Information Systems Fund)
2012
20528- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20529- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
20530- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20531- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20532- 12-11-    7-431,
12-    2012;     7-432,
2012   eff. 12-  7-433,
       22-2012   7-434
20533- 12-11-
12-    2012      2-9
2012
20534- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20535- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2012
20536- 12-11-
12-    2012      Project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 4
2012
20537- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20538- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20539- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2012
20540- 12-11-
12-    2012      Fund (Airport Gas Lease Project Fund)
2012
20541- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Street Light and Signal Improvements Fund)
2012
20543- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20544- 12-18-
12-    2012      Vacation (Wray’s Subdivision)
2012
20545- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2012
20546- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2012
20547- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2012
                 2-236,
                 2-237,
                 2-238,
                 2-239,
                 2-239.1,
                 2-240,
                 2-241,
                 2-242,
20548- 12-18-    2-244,
12-    2012;     2-245,
2012   eff. 12-  2-247,
       22-2012   2-248,
                 2-250,
                 2-251,
                 2-252,
                 2-253,
                 2-254,
                 2-255,
                 2-256,
                 2-257
20549- 12-18-
12-    2012      Redefining the boundaries of the City Council Single-Member Districts
2012
20550- 12-18-
12-    2012      Vacation (Evans-Pearson Westwood Addition)
2012
20551- 12-18-
12-    2012      Boundary agreement with the City of Burleson, TX
2012
20552- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Transportation Impact Fees Fund)
2012
20553- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20554- 12-18-
12-    2012      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2012
20555- 12-22-
12-    2012      Amending Near Southside Development Standards and Guidelines
2012
20556- 12-22-
12-    2012      Rezoning
2012
20557-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20558-
01-    1-8-2013  Operating authority (Perfect Choice Limousine)
2013
20559-
01-    1-8-2013  Vacation (Edwards Heirs Addition)
2013
20560-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2013
20561-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20562-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20563-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20564-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2013
20565-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Environmental Protection Management Fund)
2013
20566-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20567-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2013
20568-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2013
20569-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20570-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20571-
01-    1-29-2013 Rezoning
2013
20572-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20573-
01-    1-8-2013  Annexation (C. Boyd, W. Bramlett, and M.E.P.&P. R.R. Co. Surveys)
2013
20574-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20575-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20576-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20577-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20578-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2013
20579-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20580-
01-    1-8-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20581-
01-    1-15-2013 Fund (New Development Fund)
2013
20582-
01-    1-22-2013 Operating authority (Continental Limousine, Inc.)
2013
20583-
01-    1-15-2013 Fund (Park Gas Lease Projects Fund)
2013
20584-           Designation of Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 81; amended by Ord. 20594-01-
01-    1-15-2013 2013
2013
20585-
01-    1-15-2013 Annexation (James Smith Survey)
2013
20586-
01-    1-15-2013 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2013
20587-
01-    1-15-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20588-
01-    2-3-2013  Rezoning
2013
20589-
01-    2-8-2013  Operating authority (Country Transportation Service)
2013
20590-           Operating authority (Irving Holdings, Inc., d/b/a Go Business Exec Sedan and
01-    2-8-2013  Limousine Service)
2013
20591-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2013
20592-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2013
20593-
01-    1-29-2013 Vacation (Main St. between 3rd and 4th Sts.)
2013
20595-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Special Trust; Juvenile Case Management Project Fund)
2013
20596-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20597-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20598-
01-    1-29-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20599-
01-    2-9-2013  Rezoning
2013
20600-
02-    2-5-2013  Vacation (alley in J. Baugh Survey No. 115)
2013
20601-
02-    2-5-2013  Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2013
20602-
02-    2-5-2013  Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2013
20603-
02-    2-5-2013  General election, 5-11-2013
2013
20604-
02-    2-22-13   Rezoning
2013
                 30-154,
                 30-156,
                 30-171,
20605- 2-5-2013; 30-172,
02-    eff. 4-1- 30-173,
2013   2013      30-181,
                 30-201,
                 30-202,
                 30-203
20606-
02-    2-5-2013  Project and financing plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 14
2013
20607-
02-    2-5-2013  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20608-
02-    2-5-2013  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20609-
02-    2-5-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20610-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20611-
02-    2-19-2013 Operating authority (Good Time Limo Service, LLC)
2013
20612-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20613-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20614- 2-12-
02-    2013;     11-2
2013   eff. 2-
       20-2013
20616-
02-    2-12-2013 Annexation (Greenberry Overton Survey)
2013
20617-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20618-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20619-
02-    2-12-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20620-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20621-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20622-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20623-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20624-           Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 49th Supplemental Concurrent Bond
02-    2-27-2013 Ordinance
2013
20625-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20626-
02-    2-19-2013 Annexation (A.F. Albright Survey)
2013
20627-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Parking Building Debt Service Fund)
2013
20628-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20629-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20630-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Project Fund)
2013
20631-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20632-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20633-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20634-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20635-
02-    2-19-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20636-
02-    3-5-2013  Rezoning
2013
20637-
03-    3-12-2013 Operating authority (DZ Limo Service)
2013
20638-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20639-
03-    3-5-2013  Vacation (two portions of Keller Hicks Rd.)
2013
20640-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20641-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20642-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20643-
03-    3-23-2013 Rezoning
2013
20644-
03-    3-5-2013  Adopting 2013 Comprehensive Plan
2013
20645-
03-    3-5-2013  2-14
2013
20646-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Environmental Protection Fund)
2013
20647-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20648-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20649-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20650-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20651-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20652-
03-    3-5-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20653-
03-    3-23-2013 Operating authority (Cowboy Cab Co., Inc.)
2013
20654-
03-    3-23-2013 Operating authority (Darya Corp. d/b/a Executive Taxi)
2013
20655-
03-    3-23-2013 Operating authority (G&G Executive Transportation, Inc.)
2013
20656-
03-    3-23-2013 Operating authority (Irving Holdings, Inc. d/b/a Yellow Cab)
2013
20657-
03-    3-19-2013 Declaring unopposed candidates to be elected
2013
20658-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20659-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20660-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20661-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20662-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20663-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20664-
03-    3-19-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20665- 3-19-
03-    2013;     16-101,
2013   eff. 3-   16-135
       23-2013
       3-19-     App. A, 5.145,
20666- 2013;     App. A, 6.201,
03-    eff. 4-9- App. A, 4.803,
2013   2013      App. A, 4.1203,
                 App. A, 9.101
20667-
03-    4-9-2013  Rezoning
2013
20668-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20670-
03-    3-26-2013 Vacation (Frisco Heights, Prospect Heights Additions)
2013
20671-
03-    3-26-2013 Vacation (Southland Ave.)
2013
20672-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20673-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20674-
03-    3-26-2013 Authorizing issuance of Water and Sewer System Direct Purchase Notes, Series WF
2013
20676-           Police Dept., terms and conditions of compensation and benefits for certain
03-    3-26-2013 positions
2013
20677-           Police Dept., terms and conditions of compensation and benefits for certain
03-    3-26-2013 positions
2013
20678-           27-1, 27-22, 27-23  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020) ,
03-    3-26-2013 27-24
2013
20679-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20680-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20681-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (New Development Fund)
2013
20682-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2013
20683-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (New Development Fund)
2013
20684-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20685-
03-    3-26-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20686- 4-2-2013;
04-    eff. 4-   Operating authority (West 7th Pedicab Company LLC)
2013   24-2013
20687-
04-    4-2-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20688-
04-    4-2-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20689- 4-2-2013;
04-    eff 4-23- Rezoning
2013   2013
20690-
04-    4-2-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20691-
04-    4-2-2013  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20692-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20693-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20694-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20695-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Park Improvements Fund)
2013
20696-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20697-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20698-
04-    4-9-2013  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2013
20699- 4-16-
04-    2013;     Operating authority (Limo Valet, LLC)
2013   eff. 4-
       23-2013
20700-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20701-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20702-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Airport Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20703-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2013
20704-
04-    4-16-2013 Vacation (T. White Survey)
2013
20705-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2013
20706-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20707-
04-    4-16-2013 Appointing substituting municipal judges
2013
20708-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20709-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20710-
04-    4-16-2013 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20711-
04-    4-30-2013 Rezoning
2013
20712- 4-23-
04-    2013;     Operating authority (Tesfay K. Gselasie)
2013   eff. 5-1-
       2013
20713- 4-23-
04-    2013;     Operating authority (Cowtown Transportation Services LP)
2013   eff. 5-1-
       2013
20714-
04-    4-23-2013 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20715-
04-    4-23-2013 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Fund)
2013
20716-
04-    4-23-2013 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20717-
04-    4-23-2013 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20718-
04-    4-23-2013 24-17
2013
20719-
04-    4-23-2013 Designation of Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 87
2013
20720-
04-    4-23-2013 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20721-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20722-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2013
20723- 5-7-2013;
05-    eff. 5-   Operating authority (JR Limo LLC)
2013   14-2013
20724-
05-    5-7-2013  Repealed 27-35
2013
20725-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20726-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20727-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Red Light Camera Enforcement Fund)
2013
20728-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2013
20729-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20730-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (HIDTA Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2013
20731-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20732-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20733-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20734-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20735- 5-7-2013;
05-    eff. 5-   App. A, 4.401
2013   21-2013
20736- 5-7-2013;
05-    eff. 5-   Rezoning
2013   28-2013
20737-           Extending the moratorium on the acceptance of applications for gas line
05-    5-7-2013  compressors in the AG districts
2013
20738-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Special Gift Fund)
2013
20739- 5-7-2013;
05-    eff. 5-   Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2013   14-2013
20740-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20741-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20742-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20743-
05-    5-7-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20744- 5-14-
05-    2013;     Operating authority (Carey Limousine Dallas, Inc.)
2013   eff. 5-
       21-2013
20745- 5-14-
05-    2013;     Operating authority (Jesse Perry Jr.)
2013   eff. 5-
       21-2013
20746- 5-14-
05-    2013;     Operating authority (Clarence James Miller d/b/a Panther City Carriage Company)
2013   eff. 5-
       21-2013
20747- 5-14-
05-    2013;     Operating authority (Dotson Ray Nelson d/b/a Texas Stage Line)
2013   eff. 5-
       21-2013
20748-
05-    5-14-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20749-
05-    5-14-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20750-
05-    5-14-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20751-
05-    5-14-2013 Annexation (390.5 acre tract of land)
2013
20752- 5-14-
05-    2013;     App. A, 5.406
2013   eff. 5-
       23-2013
20753-
05-    5-21-2013 Ordering a run-off election
2013
20754-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2013
20755-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20756-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20757-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20758-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20759- 5-21-
05-    2013;     35-23
2013   eff. 5-
       28-2013
20760-
05-    5-21-2013 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 10
2013
20761-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20762-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20763-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20764-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20765-
05-    5-21-2013 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20766- 5-21-
05-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 6-
       25-2013
20767- 6-4-2013;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Ian’s Limousine Service)
2013   11-2013
20768- 6-4-2013;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Beret Moore d/b/a Moore’s Airport Transportation)
2013   11-2013
20769-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (HIDTA Asset Forfeiture Fund )
2013
20770-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20771-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20772-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20773-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20774-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Airport Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20775-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20776-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20777-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20778-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20779-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20780- 6-4-2013;
06-    eff. 6-   Rezoning
2013   26-2013
20781- 6-4-2013;
06-    eff. 6-   4-4
2013   11-2013
20782-           Approving and adopting rate schedule “RRM - Rate Review Mechanism” filed by
06-    6-4-2013  Atmos Energy Corporation
2013
20783-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2013
20784-
06-    6-4-2013  Adopting the standards of care for 2013 for youth programs
2013
20785-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (New Development Fund)
2013
20786-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2013
20787-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2013
20788-
06-    6-4-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20789-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (General Fund)
2013
20790-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20791-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Transportation Impact Fees Fund)
2013
20792-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20793-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2013
20794-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20795-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20796-
07-    7-9-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20797- 7-9-2013;
07-    eff. 7-   Rezoning
2013   27-2013
20798-           Renewing the unit prices for city participation in certain community facilities
07-    7-16-2013 agreements adopted June 22, 2010
2013
20799-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
20800-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20801-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20802-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20803-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20804-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20805-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
07-    7-16-2013 revenue certificates of obligation
2013
20806-           Directing publication of notice of intention to issue combination tax and
07-    7-16-2013 revenue certificates of obligation
2013
20807-           Reducing boundaries of Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 15 R;
07-    7-16-2013 amends Ord. 19466-12-2010
2013
20808-
07-    7-16-2013 Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 88
2013
20809-
07-    7-16-2013 Annexation (John Edmonds and J.R. Knight Surveys)
2013
20810-
07-    7-16-2013 Annexation (R. Matney Survey)
2013
20811-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Street Improvement 2008 Fund)
2013
20812-
07-    7-16-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20813- 7-16-
07-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 7-
       27-2013
20814-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20815-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20816-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20817-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Airports Grant Fund)
2013
20818-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20819-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
2013
20820- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (About DFW Co., d/b/a AboutFW Car & Limousine Services)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20821- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (BLS Interstate, LLC)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20822- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (Echo Transportation Solutions, LLC)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20823- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (Fluxtra, Inc.)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20824- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (Frankcisco Hummersine, LLC)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20825- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Operating authority (Limo 10, Inc. d/b/a 360 Limo, Inc.)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20826-
07-    7-23-2013 Vacation (portion of right-of-way along Tillar Street)
2013
20827-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20828-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20829-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20830-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
2013
20831-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20832-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Special Gift Fund)
2013
20833-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20834- 7-23-
07-    2013;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2013   eff. 7-
       30-2013
20835-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2013
20836-
07-    7-23-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20837-
08-    8-6-2013  2-261
2013
20838- 8-6-2013;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Embarque Dallas, Inc.)
2013   17-2013
20839- 8-6-2013;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Sharon Limousine, Inc.)
2013   17-2013
20840- 8-6-2013;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Simple Yes Corp d/b/a Federal Limo)
2013   17-2013
20841- 8-6-2013;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Town Square Limo Service, LLC)
2013   17-2013
20842-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20843-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20844-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20845-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2013
20846-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20847-
08-    8-6-2013  Vacation (Factory Place Addition)
2013
20848-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20849-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20850-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20851- 8-6-2013;
08-    eff. 8-   Rezoning
2013   22-2013
20852-           30-154,
08-    8-6-2013  30-195
2013
20853-           Further extending moratorium on acceptance of applications for gas line
08-    8-6-2013  compressor stations in AG Districts; see also Ord. 20737-05-2013
2013
20854-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20855-
08-    8-6-2013  Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20856-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20857- 8-13-
08-    2013;     Operating authority (Silver West, Inc.)
2013   eff. 8-
       17-2013
       8-13-     10-17,
20858- 2013;     10-18,
08-    eff. 8-   10-19,
2013   19-2013   10-20,
                 10-21
20859-
08-    8-13-2013 Vacation (Chamberlin Arlington Heights Addition)
2013
20860-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20861-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20862-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Grants)
2013
20863-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20864- 8-13-     22-194,
08-    2013;     22-197,
2013   eff. 8-   22-198
       17-2013
20865-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20866-
08-    8-13-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20867- 8-20-
08-    2013;     Operating authority (Najia Farhan d/b/a Aces Limousines and Transportation)
2013   eff. 8-
       26-2013
20868- 8-13-
08-    2013;     Operating authority (American Fernando Transportation )
2013   eff. 8-
       26-2013
20869- 8-13-
08-    2013;     Operating authority (Premier Transportation Services, L.C.)
2013   eff. 8-
       26-2013
20870-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2013
20871-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20872-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2013
20873-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2013
20874-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20875-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Environmental Protection Operating Fund)
2013
20876-           Providing for issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
08-    8-20-2013 obligation, series 2013A; amended by Ord. 20930-09-2013
2013
20877-           Providing for issuance of general purpose refunding and improvement bonds,
08-    8-20-2013 Series 2013
2013
20878-           Providing for issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
08-    8-20-2013 obligation, series 2013B
2013
20879- 8-20-
08-    2013;     Repealed by Ord. 21539-11-2014
2013   eff. 8-
       30-2013
20880-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20881-
08-    8-20-2013 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2013
20882-
08-    8-20-2013 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 11
2013
20883-
08-    8-20-2013 Road name change (Altamesa Boulevard)
2013
20884-
08-    8-20-2013 Annexation (Juan Jose Albirado Survey, etc.)
2013
20885- 9-10-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Ala Limousine Services, LLC)
2013   eff. 9-
       20-2013
20886- 9-10-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Go Green Taxi, LLC)
2013   eff. 9-
       21-2013
20887- 9-10-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Medi-take, Inc. d/b/a 5 Stars Executive Limo)
2013   eff. 9-
       21-2013
20888- 9-10-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Neal Arnold d/b/a Allpoints Corporate Express)
2013   eff. 9-
       21-2013
20889-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20890-           Vacation (12-foot alley right-of-way located in Block 33, Jennings West
09-    9-10-2013 Addition)
2013
20891-
09-    9-10-2013 Vacation (Mercedes Avenue)
2013
20892-
09-    9-10-2013 Vacation (Elizabethtown Cemetery Road and Old Denton Road)
2013
20893-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Street Improvements Fund)
2013
20894-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20895-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20896-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20897-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20898- 9-10-
09-    2013;     App. A, 4.405,
2013   eff. 9-   App. A, 9.101
       25-2013
20899- 9-10-
09-    2013;     App. A, 5.403
2013   eff. 9-
       25-2013
20900- 9-10-
09-    2013;     App. A, 5.116.A
2013   eff. 9-
       25-2013
20901- 9-10-
09-    2013;     App. A, 5.201,
2013   eff. 9-   App. A, 9.101
       25-2013
20902- 9-10-
09-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 9-
       24-2013
20903-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 1 during fiscal year 2013
2013             -2014
20904-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20905-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20906-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 6 during fiscal year 2013
2013             - 2014
20907-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20908-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20909-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 7 during fiscal year 2013
2013             - 2014
20910-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20911-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20912-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 8 during fiscal year 2013
2013             - 2014
20913-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20914-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20915-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 11 during fiscal year
2013             2013 - 2014
20916-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20917-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20918-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 12 during fiscal year
2013             2013 - 2014
20919-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20920-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20921-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 14 during fiscal year
2013             2013 - 2014
20922-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20923-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20924-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and /or services
09-    9-10-2013 provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 15 during fiscal year
2013             2013 - 2014
20925-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Assessment District Fund)
2013
20926-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20927- 9-10-     15-31,
09-    2013;     15-34,
2013   eff. 9-   15-42
       20-2013
20928-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20929-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Water and Sewer Projects Fund)
2013
20930-           Providing for issuance of combination tax and revenue certificates of
09-    9-10-2013 obligation; amends Ord. 20876-08-2013
2013
20931-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20932-
09-    9-10-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20933-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20934-
09-    9-17-2013 2-186
2013
20935- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Agency LC Group, Inc)
2013   eff. 9-
       25-2013
20936- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Five Star Limo Service)
2013   eff. 9-
       25-2013
20937- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Classic Shuttle Acquisition Corp. d/b/a Go Yellow Checker
2013   eff. 9-   Shuttle)
       25-2013
20938- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Godfather Trans, Inc.)
2013   eff. 9-
       27-2013
20939- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Super Shuttle DFW, Inc.)
2013   eff. 9-
       25-2013
20940-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2013
20941-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20942-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20943-
09-    9-17-2013 Funds (various funds)
2013
20944-
09-    9-17-2013 Funds (various funds)
2013
20945-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Funds)
2013
20946- 9-17-
09-    2013;     35-56
2013   eff. 1-1-
       2014
20947- 9-17-
09-    2013;     35-56
2013   eff. 10-
       1-2013
20948-
09-    9-10-2013 Annexation (J. Matthews Survey)
2013
20949-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20950- 9-17-
09-    2013;     App. A, 4.1307
2013   eff. 10-
       4-2013
20951- 9-17-
09-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 10-
       4-2013
20952-
09-    9-17-2013 Appropriations
2013
20953-
09-    9-17-2013 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2013
20954-
09-    9-17-2013 Ad valorem tax
2013
20955-           Funds (Workers’ Compensation Fund, Unemployment Compensation Fund, Temporary
09-    9-17-2013 Labor Fund, Risk Management Fund)
2013
20956- 9-24-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (A+ Limousine Inc.)
2013   eff. 10-
       3-2013
20957- 9-24-
09-    2013;     Operating authority (Nessim Wahba Gerges d/b/a Dream Limo Executive
2013   eff.; 10- Transportation Svc)
       3-2013
20958- 9-24-
09-    2013;     Adjusting number of authorized sworn positions in Police Dept.
2013   eff. 10-
       1-2013
20959-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20960-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2013
20961-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20962-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20963-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20964-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20965-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2013
20966-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20967-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20968-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20969-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (General Fund)
2013
20970-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
20971-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Parking Garage Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20972-
09-    9-24-2013 2-61
2013
20973-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20974-
09-    9-24-2013 Designating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 40
2013
20975-           Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment
09-    9-24-2013 Zone No. 3
2013
20976-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20977-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20978-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20979-
09-    9-24-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
20980-
10-    10-7-2013 Fund (Risk Management Fund)
2013
20981- 10-7-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Bob K. Wilson d/b/a First Run Limousine)
2013   eff. 10-
       15-2013
20982- 10-7-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Simon’s Executive Car Service, Inc. d/b/a ECS Limo)
2013   eff. 10-
       15-2013
20983- 10-7-
10-    2013;     App. A, 4.901
2013   eff. 11-
       5-2013
20984- 10-7-
10-    2013;     App. A, 6.101
2013   eff. 11-
       5-2013
20985- 10-7-
10-    2013;     App. A, 4.1305
2013   eff. 11-
       5-2013
20986- 10-7-
10-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 10-
       26-2013
20987- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20988- 10-15-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Johnston Transportation, LLC)
2013   eff. 10-
       29-2013
20989- 10-15-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Jesus Vargas d/b/a Bohemian Limo)
2013   eff. 10-
       22-2013
20990- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20991- 10-15-    13-23  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020) ,
10-    2013      13-24,
2013             13-26
20992- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fire Department staffing; amends Ord. 20522-12-2012
2013
                 19-15, 19-17, 19-18  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020) ,
20993- 10-15-    19-23,
10-    2013      19-24,
2013             19-25,
                 19-26
20994- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
20995- 10-15-
10-    2013      Vacation (Bellevie Hill Addition)
2013
20996- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2013
20997- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
20998- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Grant Fund)
2013
20999-           App. A, 4.305,
10-    10-15-    App. A, 4.803,
2013   2013      App. A, 4.1203,
                 App. A, 5.140
21000- 10-15-
10-    2013      Establishing maximum permitted rates and charges (Atmos Energy Corp.)
2013
21001- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (General Fund)
2013
21002- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (SH121T Southwest Parkway Fund)
2013
21003- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
21004- 10-15-
10-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21005- 10-15-
10-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 10-
       28-2013
21006- 10-22-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Metwally Transportation)
2013   eff. 11-
       2-2013
21007- 10-22-
10-    2013;     Operating authority (Parven LLC)
2013   eff. 11-
       2-2013
21008- 10-22-
10-    2013      Vacation (Kennedy’s Addition)
2013
21009- 10-22-
10-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21010- 10-22-
10-    2013      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2013
21011- 10-22-
10-    2013      Designating Project Financing Zone No. 1
2013
21012- 10-22-
10-    2013      Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2013
21013- 10-22-
10-    2013      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21014- 10-29-
10-    2013      Fire Department staffing
2013
21015- 10-29-
10-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21016- 10-29-
10-    2013      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
21017- 10-29-
10-    2013      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
21018- 11-5-
11-    2013;     Operating authority (Mohammad Jan Qazi d/b/a 7 Star D.F.W. Limousine)
2013   eff. 11-
       15-2013
21019-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Parks and Recreation Improvement Fund)
2013
21020-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
21021-
11-    11-5-2013 Funds (various funds)
2013
21022-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2013
21023-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21024-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21025-
11-    11-5-2013 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21026- 11-5-
11-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 11-
       26-2013
21027- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21028- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21029- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2013
21030- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (General Fund)
2013
21031- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2013
21032- 11-12-    App. A, 4.405,
11-    2013      App. A, 9.101
2013
21033- 11-12-
11-    2013; 12- Rezoning
2013   10-2013
21034- 11-12-
11-    2013      Expanding Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 37
2013
21035- 11-12-
11-    2013      Expanding Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 2
2013
21036- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21037- 11-12-
11-    2013      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21038- 11-19-
11-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21039- 11-19-
11-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21040- 11-19-
11-    2013      Fund (General Fund)
2013
21041- 11-19-
11-    2013      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21042- 11-19-
11-    2013      Annexation (Hiram Little Survey)
2013
21043- 11-19-
11-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 12-
       31-2013
21044- 12-3-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Theo Limousine Co.)
2013   eff. 12-
       17-2013
21045-
12-    12-3-2013 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21046- 12-3-
12-    2013;     App. A, 4.405
2013   eff. 12-
       31-2013
21047- 12-3-
12-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 12-
       31-2013
21048-
12-    12-3-2013 Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21049- 12-10-
12-    2013;     Rezoning (correcting Ord. 13896)
2013   eff. 12-
       17-2013
21050- 12-10-
12-    2013;     Rezoning (correcting Ord. 19516)
2013   eff. 12-
       17-2013
21051- 12-10-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Cowtown Cycle Party, LLC)
2013   eff. 12-
       17-2013
21052- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21053- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21054- 12-10-
12-    2013;     12.5-841.1
2013   eff. 1-1-
       2014
21055- 12-10-
12-    2013      Annexation (R. Matney Survey and J. Smith Survey)
2013
21056- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21057- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21058- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21059- 12-10-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21060- 12-10-
12-    2013;     Rezoning
2013   eff. 12-
       31-2013
21061- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Magdi Fahiem d/b/a 1st Choice Limousines & Transportation
2013   eff. 12-  Service)
       24-2013
21062- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Advance Transportation Solutions, LLC)
2013   eff. 12-
       24-2013
21063- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Choice Transport)
2013   eff. 12-
       24-2013
21064- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Hoque & Mumith, Inc. d/b/a Alt Worldwide Chauffeured
2013   eff. 12-  Services)
       24-2013
21065- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Limo in DFW)
2013   eff. 12-
       24-2013
21066- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Operating authority (Walsh Integrity Investments, LLC d/b/a Aircar)
2013   eff. 12-
       24-2013
21067- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Federal Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2013
21068- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2013
21069- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2013
21070- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Community Tree Planting Program Fund)
2013
21071- 12-17-
12-    2013      Vacation (Bellaire and TCU Additions)
2013
21072- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21073- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21074- 12-17-
12-    2013;     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation sites (not codified)
2013   eff. 12-
       24-2013
21075- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Grants Fund)
2013
21076- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2013
21077- 12-17-
12-    2013      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2013
21078- 12-17-
12-    2013      Rezoning
2013
21079- 1-7-2014;
01-    eff. 1-   Operating authority (Prime Limousine Inc.)
2014   24-2014
21080-
01-    1-7-2014  Adopting water main capacity charge
2014
21081-
01-    1-7-2014  Adopting water main capacity charge
2014
21082-
01-    1-7-2014  Adopting sewer per acre charge
2014
21083-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21084-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21085-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21086- 1-7-2014;
01-    eff. 2-7- App. A, 4.401
2014   2014
21087- 1-7-2014;
01-    eff. 2-4- Rezoning
2014   2014
21088-
01-    1-7-2014  Funds (various funds)
2014
21089-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21090-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21091-
01-    1-7-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21092-
01-    1-14-2014 Vacation (portion of an alley; William Welch Survey)
2014
21093-
01-    1-14-2014 Vacation (15-foot wide strip; Hyde Park Addition)
2014
21094-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21095-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21096-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21097-
01-    1-14-2014 Operating authority (Maredi Corp. d/b/a United Cab Service)
2014
21098-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21099-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21100-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21101-
01-    1-14-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21102- 1-14-
01-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 2-4-
       2014
21103- 1-28-
01-    2014;     Operating authority (Accent Johnston Limousine, Inc. d/b/a AJL International)
2014   eff. 2-4-
       2014
21104- 1-28-
01-    2014;     Operating authority (Kepler Investment, Inc.)
2014   eff. 2-5-
       2014
21105- 1-28-     7-394,
01-    2014;     7-402,
2014   eff. 2-4- 7-403
       2014
21106-
01-    1-28-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21107-
01-    1-28-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21108-
01-    1-28-2014 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2014
21109-
01-    1-28-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21110-           Authorizing the issuance and sale of water and sewer system revenue refunding
01-    - -       and improvement bonds, series 2014
2014
21111-
01-    1-28-2014 Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21112-
02-    2-4-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21113-
02-    2-4-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21114-
02-    2-4-2014  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21115-
02-    2-4-2014  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2014
21116- 2-4-2014;
02-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2014   11-2014
21117- 2-4-2014;
02-    eff. 2-   23-19
2014   11-2014
21118-
02-    2-11-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21119-
02-    2-11-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21120-
02-    2-11-2014 Fund (TPW CFA Fund)
2014
21121-
02-    2-11-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21122-           2-57,
02-    2-11-2014 2-58,
2014             2-60,
                 2-61
21123-           Ordering election on May 10, 2014 regarding issuance of tax- supported
02-    2-11-2014 securities
2014
21124- 2-18-
02-    2014;     Operating authority (RHP Property GT, LP d/b/a Gaylord Texan Resort and
2014   eff. 3-8- Convention Center)
       2014
21125-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21126-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2014
21127-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21128-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21129-
02-              
2014
21130-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2014
21131-
02-    2-18-2014 Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21132- 3-4-2014;
03-    eff. 3-   Operating authority (American Executives Limo, Inc.)
2014   11-2014
21133- 3-4-2014;
03-    eff. 3-   Operating authority (Continental Limousine, Inc.)
2014   11-2014
21134- 3-4-2014;
03-    eff. 3-   Operating authority (DFW Prestige Limos, LLC d/b/a DFW Limos)
2014   11-2014
21135-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21136-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21137-
03-    3-4-2014  13-2
2014
21138-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Park Gas Well Leases Fund)
2014
21139-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21140-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21141-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21142-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21143-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21144-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21145-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Community Tree Planting Fund)
2014
21146-           Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport fiftieth supplemental concurrent bond
03-    3-4-2014  ordinance
2014
21147- 3-4-2014;
03-    eff. 3-   App. A, 4.405
2014   29-2014
21148- 3-4-2014;
03-    eff. 3-   Rezoning
2014   29-2014
21149- 3-4-2014; 23-14,
03-    eff. 3-   23-15,
2014   11-2014   29-1
21150-
03-    3-4-2014  Grant (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21151-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21152-
03-    3-4-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21153-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21154- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Operating authority (B.H. Eman and E.A. Yahya d/b/a Country Transportation
2014   eff. 3-   Services)
       29-2014
21155- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Operating authority (T.O. Gray and F.H. Gray d/b/a Elijah’s Palace Luxury Car
2014   eff. 3-   and Limousine Service)
       29-2014
21156-           Operating authority (Irving Holdings, Inc. d/b/a Go Businessexec Sedan &
03-    3-29-2014 Limousine Service)
2014
21157- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Operating authority (R.T. Brown d/b/a Perfect Choice Limousine Service)
2014   eff. 3-
       29-2014
21158- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Operating authority (N.C. Xasan d/b/a Royal Limousine)
2014   eff. 3-
       29-2014
21159-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21160-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21161-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2014
21162-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21163- 3-18-
03-    2014;     29-1
2014   eff. 3-
       25-2014
21164-
03-    3-18-2014 Adopting 2014 Comprehensive Plan
2014
21165- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Prohibiting certain activities related to NCAA Final Four
2014   eff. 3-
       25-2014
21166-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21167-
03-    3-18-2014 Establishing places for and appointing judges
2014
21168-
03-    3-18-2014 Appointing judges
2014
21169-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Aviation Improvements Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21170-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21171-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21172-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21173-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21174-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21175-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2014
21176-
03-    3-18-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21177- 3-18-
03-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 3-
       29-2014
21178-
03-    3-25-2014 Fire Department staffing; amends Ord. 20522-12-2012
2014
21179-
03-    3-25-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21180-
03-    3-25-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21181-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21182-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (TPW CFA Fund)
2014
21183-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21184-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21185-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21186-
04-    4-1-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21187- 4-1-2014;
04-    eff. 4-   Rezoning
2014   24-2014
21188-
04-    4-1-2014  30-173
2014
                 7-47,
21189- 4-1-2014; 7-62,
04-    eff. 4-8- 7-167,
2014   2014      11-2,
                 26-2,
                 29-1
21190- 4-1-2014;
04-    eff. 4-8- 2-321
2014   2014
21191-
04-    4-8-2014  Operating authority (DZ Limo Service, LLC)
2014
21192-
04-    4-8-2014  Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21193-
04-    4-8-2014  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21194- 4-8-2014; 35-23,
04-    eff. 4-   35-151
2014   16-2014
21195-
04-    4-8-2014  Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21196- 4-15-
04-    2014;     Approving Resolution 2014-03-058 of the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport
2014   eff. 4-   Board
       22-2014
       4-15-     2-83,
21197- 2014;     2-181,
04-    eff. 4-   2-182,
2014   22-2014   2-183,
                 2-184
21198- 4-15-
04-    2014;     Operating authority (AETS, LLC)
2014   eff. 4-
       22-2014
21199-
04-    4-15-2014 Vacation (Texas and 13th Streets)
2014
21200-
04-    4-15-2014 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Fund)
2014
21201-
04-    4-15-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21202-
04-    4-15-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21203-
04-    4-15-2014 Fund (Contract Street Maintenance Fund)
2014
21204-
04-    4-15-2014 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2014
21205-
04-    4-15-2014 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 16
2014
21206-
04-    4-15-2014 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 17
2014
21207- 4-15-
04-    2014;     App. A, 4.405
2014   eff. 5-
       26-2014
21208- 4-15-
04-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 5-
       26-2014
21209-
04-    4-22-2014 Grant (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21210-
04-    4-22-2014 Revising unit prices and bid items renewed in Ord. 20798-07-2013
2014
21211- 4-22-
04-    2014;     Operating authority (Dooni Inc. d/b/a Dooni Limousine Transportation)
2014   eff. 4-
       30-2014
21212- 4-22-
04-    2014;     Operating authority (Jerry Andrew Harris and Ruby Gilbert Harris d/b/a Harris
2014   eff. 4-   Limousines)
       30-2014
21213- 4-22-
04-    2014;     Operating authority (Travis Dean Stowers d/b/a Lonestar Bikecabs)
2014   eff. 4-
       29-2014
21214-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21215-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21216-           Expanding exemption from ad valorem taxation of freeport goods that are aircraft
04-    4-22-2014 parts
2014
21217-           7-78,
04-    4-22-2014 7-107,
2014             7-108
21218-
04-    4-22-2014 Renewing and redesignating Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 36
2014
21219-           15-40,
04-    4-22-2014 15-51
2014
21220-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2014
21221-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2014
21222-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Federal Asset Forfeiture Fund)
2014
21223-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21224-
04-    4-22-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21225- 5-6-2014;
04-    eff. 5-   Operating authority to (Ahmed Romadan d/b/a Kermit Transportations)
2014   13-2014
21226-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2014
21227-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Park Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21228- 5-6-2014;
05-    eff. 6-   Rezoning
2014   21-2014
21229-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2014
21230-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21231-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21232-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21233-
05-    5-6-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21234- 5-13-
05-    2014;     Operating authority (Super Shuttle DFW, Inc., d/b/a Execucar)
2014   eff. 5-
       26-2014
21235-
05-    5-13-2014 Vacation (Extinguishing portion of East Second Street)
2014
21236-
05-    5-13-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21237-
05-    5-13-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21238-
05-    5-13-2014 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2014
21239-
05-    5-13-2014 35-70.13
2014
21240-           Denying rate increase requested by Atmos Energy Corporation, d/b/a Atmos Energy
05-    5-13-2014 Corporation, Mid-Tex Division
2014
21241-           Finding that the special election conducted on May 10, 2014, on the question of
05-    5-20-2014 issuance of public securities was duly and lawfully held
2014
21242-
05-    5-20-2014 Ordering a run-off election by the qualified voters of city council district 9
2014
21243-
05-    5-20-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21244-
05-    5-20-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21245-           Vacation (Extinguishing portions of East Ramsey Street and an alley, situated in
05-    5-20-2014 the Ryan Southeast Addition)
2014
21246-           Vacation (Extinguishing a portion of an alley, situated in Lots 1 through 21,
05-    5-20-2014 Block 21, M.G. Ellis Addition)
2014
21247-
05-    5-20-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21248-
05-    5-20-2014 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2014
21249- 5-20-
05-    2014;     Operating authority (Four-S-Limo, LLC)
2014   eff. 5-
       26-2014
21250-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the police
05-    5-20-2014 department by adding ten positions in the classification of officer
2014
21251-           35-82,
05-    5-20-2014 35-83,
2014             35-88,
                 35-92
21252-           Annexation of an approximately 21.0 acre tract of land situated in the William
05-    5-20-2014 E. Conwill Survey
2014
21253-           Vacation (Portions of Throckmorton Street and Twelfth Street, situated in the J.
05-    5-20-2014 Childress Survey)
2014
21254- 5-20-
05-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 6-
       21-2014
21255- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (A1 Luxury Limo Limited)
2014   11-2014
21256- 6-3-2014; Operating authority (Alpha-Royal Limo and Car Services, Inc. d/b/a Bemnet Limo
06-    eff. 6-   Service)
2014   10-2014
21257- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Cowboy Cab Company, Inc.)
2014   10-2014
21258- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Cowtown Transportation Services, LP)
2014   10-2014
21259- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Darya, Inc. d/b/a Executive Taxi)
2014   11-2014
21260- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Five Star Limo, Inc.)
2014   10-2014
21261- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (G & G Executive Transportation, Inc.)
2014   11-2014
21262- 6-3-2014; Operating authority (Brian Scott High and Melvyn Edward High d/b/a North Star
06-    eff. 6-   Carriage)
2014   11-2014
21263- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Clarence James Miller d/b/a Panther City Carriage Company)
2014   14-2014
21264- 6-3-2014;
06-    eff. 6-   Operating authority (Irving Holdings d/b/a Yellow Cab)
2014   14-2014
21265-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Environmental Protection Project Fund)
2014
21266-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Intergovernmental Projects Fund)
2014
21267-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21268-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21269-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21270-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Special Donations Fund)
2014
21271-
06-    6-3-2014  App. A, 6.402
2014
                 App. A, 2.101,
                 App. A, 2.102,
                 App. A, 4.401,
                 App. A, 4.402,
21272-           App. A, 4.403,
06-    6-3-2014  App. A, 4.404,
2014             App. A, 4.1304,
                 App. A, 4.1305,
                 App. A, 4.1306,
                 App. A, 4.1307,
                 App. A, 5.137
21273-
06-    6-3-2014  Rezoning
2014
21274- 6-3-2014; 16-4,
06-    eff. 6-   16-124,
2014   11-2014   16-151
21275-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21276-
06-    6-3-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21277- 6-10-
06-    2014;     Operating authority (Albert Kevin Nosa, Adedayo Adebisi Bankale and Oluwarotimi
2014   eff. 6-   Olanrew Odubanjo d/b/a Bon Transport Services)
       18-2014
21278- 6-10-
06-    2014;     Operating authority (Kiflai Tesfamar Woldegabr d/b/a Key Limousine Service)
2014   eff. 6-
       18-2014
21279- 6-10-
06-    2014;     Operating authority (Ray Nelson Dotson d/b/a Texas Stage Line)
2014   eff. 6-
       18-2014
21280-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2014
21281-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Solid Waste Fund)
2014
21282-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21283-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21284-
06-    6-10-2014 2-9
2014
21285-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2014
21286-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21287-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Water and Sewer Operating Fund)
2014
21288-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (State Revolving Fund)
2014
21289-           Designating a certain area in the City of Fort Worth as Tax Abatement
06-    6-10-2014 Reinvestment Zone No. 89
2014
21290-           Adopting the standards of care for 2014 for youth programs offered by the parks
06-    6-10-2014 and community services department
2014
21291-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (2014 Bond Program Fund)
2014
21292-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (2014 Bond Program Fund)
2014
21293-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (2014 Bond Program Fund)
2014
21294-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21295-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21296-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21297-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21298-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21299-
06-    6-10-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21300- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Carey Limousine Dallas, Inc.)
2014   eff. 7-
       26-2014
21301- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (John Michael Gokey, Garvin William Harding, Tucker Evans,
2014   eff. 7-   Jr., Gordon Earnest Cowan, and Daryl James Gresham d/b/a Garvin Harding)
       26-2014
21302- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Jesse L. Perry Jr. d/b/a Limo-Scene)
2014   eff. 7-
       26-2014
21303- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Limo Valet, LLC)
2014   eff. 7-
       26-2014
21304- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Beret Moore d/b/a Moore’s Airport Transportation Service)
2014   eff. 7-
       26-2014
21305- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Town Square Limo Service, LLC)
2014   eff. 7-
       26-2014
21306-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Park Dedication Fees Fund)
2014
21307-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21308-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Park Gas Well Leases Project Fund)
2014
21309-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project Fund)
2014
21310-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Special Gifts Fund)
2014
21311-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21312- 7-15-
07-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 8-
       12-2014
21313-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21314-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21315-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21316-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21317-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21318-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21319-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21320-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (2014 Bond Program Fund)
2014
21321-
07-    7-15-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21322-
07-    7-22-2014 Operating authority (Ian Melvyn Kolombege d/b/a Ian’s Limousine Service)
2014
21323- 7-22-
07-    2014;     Operating authority (Teklezgi Tewolde Tesfatsion d/b/a Tess Limousine Service)
2014   eff. 7-
       20-2014
21324- 7-22-
07-    2014;     Fire Department staffing; amends Ord.         
2014   eff. 9-1-
       2014
21325-
07-    7-22-2014 Fire Department staffing; amends Ord. 21178-03-2014
2014
21326-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21327-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Water and Sewer Fund)
2014
21328-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Golf Debt Service Fund)
2014
21329-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Municipal Golf Fund)
2014
21330-           Vacation (Portion of West Broadway and a portion of Grainger Street, situated in
07-    7-22-2014 Block 36, Jennings South Addition)
2014
21331-           Vacation (Portions of Golden Triangle Boulevard, situated in the William McCowan
07-    7-22-2014 Survey, Abstract No. 999
2014
21332-           Vacation (Portion of W. 15th Street and two alleys, situated in Blocks V and W
07-    7-22-2014 OF Daggett’s Addition)
2014
21333-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21334-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Grants Fund; Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21335-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21336-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21337-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21338-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21339-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21340-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21341-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21342-
07-    7-22-2014 35-58
2014
21343-
07-    7-22-2014 7-47
2014
21344-
07-    7-22-2014 7-47
2014
21345-
07-    7-22-2014 Vacation (Portion of an alley, situated in Block 6, Grandview Addition)
2014
21346-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21347-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21348-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (Special Revenue Fund)
2014
21349-
07-    7-22-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21350- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Tracy Elaine Pratt d/b/a Brazos Carriage Company)
2014   12-2014
21351- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Chowdhry & Cruz DFW Limousine Services, LLC.)
2014   12-2014
21352- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Dablouk Inc.)
2014   12-2014
21353- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   Operating authority (Jeffrey Joseph Hronchek d/b/a J & E Private Drivers)
2014   12-2014
21354-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21355-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21356-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21357- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 9-4- Rezoning
2014   2014
21358- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 6.204
2014   12-2014
21359- 8-5-2014;
08-    eff. 8-   App. A, 4.1307
2014   12-2014
21360-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21361-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21362-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21363-
08-    8-8-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21364-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21365-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21366-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21367-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21368-
08-    8-5-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21369-
08-    8-12-2014 Fund (Solid Waste Projects Fund)
2014
21370-           Vacation (Portions of Old Denton Road, Situated in the William McCowan Survey,
08-    8-12-2014 Abstract No. 999)
2014
21371-
08-             Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21372-
08-    8-12-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21373-
08-    8-12-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21374-           Ordering a special election by the voters on 11-4-2014 On the question of
08-    8-12-2014 approving and implementing Res. 4327-07-2014 designating a multipurpose arena at
2014             the intersection of Harley Avenue and Gendy Street
21375-           Changing the name of Mascot Boulevard between Willow Springs Road and Prairie
08-    8-12-2014 Breeze Drive to Eagle Drive
2014
21376-           Changing the name of Hillwood Boulevard between Wagley Robertson Road and
08-    8-12-2014 Evening View Drive to Magma Drive
2014
21377-           Annexation (737.48 acres (1.15 square miles) of land, more or less, out of the
08-    8-12-2014 L.A. Butler Survey, Abstract No. 64)
2014
21378- 8-12-
08-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 9-4-
       2014
21379-
08-    8-19-2014 Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020
2014
21380-
08-    8-19-2014 10-3
2014
21381- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Operating authority (About DFW CO. d/b/a About FW Car & Limousine Services)
2014   eff. 8-
       27-2014
21382- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Operating authority (Echo Transportation Solutions, LLC)
2014   eff. 8-
       26-2014
21383- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Operating authority (Paradise Limo Inc.)
2014   eff. 8-
       27-2014
21384- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Fire Department staffing; amends Ord. 21325-07-2014
2014   eff. 9-1-
       2014
21385-
08-    8-19-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21386- 8-19-     Prohibiting certain activities in certain areas around Sundance Square Plaza and
08-    2014;     Main Street between 3rd Street and the Tarrant County Courthouse in connection
2014   eff. 8-   with activities related to ESPN’s broadcast programming for college game day
       25-2014   event and associated activities
21387-           Changing the name of McAlister Road between Hemphill Street and McAlister Road
08-    8-19-2014 to Archbury Road
2014
21388- 8-19-
08-    2014;     22-192
2014   eff. 8-
       26-2014
                 34-200,
                 34-201,
                 34-202,
                 34-203,
                 34-204,
                 34-205,
                 34-206,
                 34-207,
                 34-208,
21389- 8-19-     34-209,
08-    2014;     34-210,
2014   eff. 8-   34-211,
       26-2014   34-212,
                 34-213,
                 34-214,
                 34-215, 34-216, 34-217, 34-218, 34-219, 34-220, 34-221, 34-222, 34-223, 34-224,
                 34-225, 34-226, 34-227, 34-228, 34-229, 34-230, 34-231, 34-232, 34-240, 34-241,
                 34-242, 34-243, 34-244, 34-245, 34-246, 34-247, 34-248, 34-249, 34-250, 34-260,
                 34-261, 34-262, 34-264, 34-265, 34-266, 34-267, 34-268, 34-300, 34-301, 34-302,
                 34-303, 34-304, 34-305, 34-306, 34-307, 34-308, 34-321, 34-322, 34-323, 34-324,
                 34-325, 34-326, 34-327, 34-328, 34-329, 34-340, 34-341, 34-342, 34-343, 34-344,
                 34-345, 34-346, 34-347, 34-348, 34-349
21390- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Establishing a pay rate adjustment for Municipal Court judges
2014   eff. 8-
       23-2014
21391-           Annexation of a certain 64.3 acres (0.10 square miles) of land, more or less,
08-    8-19-2014 out of the John Edmonds Survey, Abstract No. 457
2014
21392-
08-    8-19-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21393- 8-19-
08-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 9-
       23-2014
21394-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21395-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21396-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21397-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Airport Grants Fund)
2014
21398-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21399-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21400-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21401-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21402-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21403-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21404-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21405-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21406-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (TPW Gas Well Revenues Fund)
2014
21407-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21408-
08-    8-26-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21409-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Temporary Labor Fund)
2014
21410-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21411-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grant Fund)
2014
21412-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21413-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2014
21414-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21415-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Street Improvements 2008 Fund)
2014
21416-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21417-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21418-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21419-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21420-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21421-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21422-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21423-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21424-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21425-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21426-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21427-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21428-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21429-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21430- 9-9-2014;
09-    eff. 10-  App. A, 4.405
2014   7-2014
21431- 9-9-2014;
09-    eff. 10-  Rezoning
2014   7-2014
21432-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 1 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21433-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 1 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21434-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 6 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21435-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 6 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21436-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 7 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21437-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 7 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the special assessment
2014             district fund
21438-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 8 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21439-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 8 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21440-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 11 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21441-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 11 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21442-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 12 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21443-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 12 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21444-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 14 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21445-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 14 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21446-           Increasing the estimated receipts and appropriations in the Public Improvement
09-    9-9-2014  District 15 fiscal year 2014-2015 project account of the Special Assessment
2014             District Fund
21447-           Levying assessments for the cost of certain improvements and/or services
09-    9-9-2014  provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 15 during fiscal year
2014             2014-15
21448- 9-9-2014;
09-    eff. 1-1- 35-56
2014   2015
21449- 9-9-2014;
09-    eff. 10-  35-56
2014   1-2014
21450-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (General Fund)
2014
21451-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21452-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Capital Projects Reserve Fund)
2014
21453-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project Fund)
2014
21454-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21455-
09-    9-9-2014  Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21456-
09-    9-16-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21457- 9-16-
09-    2014;     Fiscal year budget 2015
2014   eff. 9-
       20-2014
21458- 9-16-
09-    2014;     Ad valorem tax
2014   eff. 9-
       24-2014
                 2.5-1,
                 2.5-4,
                 2.5-7,
                 2.5-8,
21459-           2.5-70,
09-    9-16-2014 2.5-71,
2014             2.5-72,
                 2.5-73,
                 2.5-74,
                 2.5-75,
                 2.5-76,
                 2.5-77
21460-
09-    9-16-2014 Fund (Vehicle and Equipment Replacement Fund)
2014
21461-
09-    9-16-2014 Rezoning
2014
21462-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2014
21463-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21464-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (General Fund)
2014
21465-
09-    9-23-2014 Vacation (Portion of Paradise Street, situated in Riverside Addition)
2014
21466-
09-    9-23-2014 Vacation (Portions of Country Day Lane and Bryan Henderson Road)
2014
21467-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility Fund)
2014
21468-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21469-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21470-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21471-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21472-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (General Debt Service Fund)
2014
21473-
09-    9-23-2014 Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds, series 2014
2014
21474-
09-    9-23-2014 Providing for the issuance of general purpose refunding bonds, series 2015
2014
21475-
09-    9-23-2014 Funds (various)
2014
21476-
09-    9-23-2014 Funds (various)
2014
21477-
09-    9-23-2014 Amending the budget ord. 21457-09-2014
2014
21478-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Municipal Airports Fund)
2014
21479-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21480-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Project Fund)
2014
21481-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Water Capital Project Fund)
2014
21482-
09-    - -2014   Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with City of Benbrook
2014
21483-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (TPW Community Facilities Agreement Fund)
2014
21484-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Special Assessments Fund)
2014
21485-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Transportation Impact Fund)
2014
21486-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21487-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2014
21488-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Culture and Tourism Fund)
2014
21489-
09-    9-23-2014 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21490- 10-14-
10-    2014      Repealed by Ord. 23295-06-2018
2014
21491- 10-14-
10-    2014      7-405
2014
21492- 10-14-
10-    2014      Vacation (Excess portion of Wyoming Drive, situated in Bar C Ranch, Phase 2)
2014
21493- 10-14-    Vacation (Extinguishing two portions of Avondale Haslet Road, situated in B.R.
10-    2014      Lacy Survey, Abstract No. 990)
2014
21494- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (General Fund)
2014
21495- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (General Fund)
2014
21496- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Park Gas Well Leases Fund)
2014
21497- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Grant Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21498- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21499- 10-14-    App. A, 4.305,
10-    2014;     App. A, 4.803,
2014   eff. 10-  App. A, 9.101
       23-2014
21500- 10-14-    20-105, 20-106, 20-107, 20-108, 20-109, 20-110, 20-111, 20-112, 20-113, 20-114,
10-    2014;     20-115, 20-116, 20-117, 20-118, 20-119, 20-120, 20-121  (Repealed by Ord. 27222-
2014   eff. 10-  10-2024)
       23-2014
21501- 10-14-
10-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 11-
       11-2014
21502- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project Fund)
2014
21503- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21504- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21505- 10-14-
10-    2014      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21506- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21507- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21508- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21509- 10-21-    Establishing a moratorium on the acceptance of applications for one- family
10-    2014      residential building permits in one-family residential zoning districts
2014
                 2.5-1,
                 2.5-2,
                 2.5-3,
                 2.5-4,
                 2.5-7,
21510-           2.5-8,
10-    10-21-    2.5-60,
2014   2014      2.5-61,
                 2.5-62,
                 2.5-63,
                 2.5-64,
                 2.5-65,
                 2.5-66,
                 2.5-67
21511- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21512- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21513- 10-21-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21514- 10-28-
10-    2014;     Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the police
2014   eff. 10-  department by adding 14 positions in the classification of officer
       30-2014
21515- 10-28-    Establishing the classification of Deputy Chief in the Fire Department; amending
10-    2014      Fire Department staffing Ord. 21477-09-2014
2014
21516- 10-28-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21517- 10-28-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21518- 10-28-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21519- 10-28-
10-    2014      Fund (General Fund)
2014
21520- 10-28-
10-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21521-
11-    11-4-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21522-
11-    11-4-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21523-
11-    11-4-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21524-
11-    11-4-2014 Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21525- 11-11-
11-    2014      Fund (Special Trust Fund)
2014
21526-
11-    11-4-2014 Funds (various funds)
2014
21527- 11-11-
11-    2014      Rezoning
2014
                 App. A, 4.700,
21528- 11-11-    App. A, 4.701,
11-    2014      App. A, 4.702,
2014             App. A, 4.703,
                 App. A, 4.704
21529- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Public Events Fund)
2014
21530- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Public Events Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21531- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Will Rogers Improvement Fund)
2014
21532- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (General Fund)
2014
21533- 11-18-    Amending the Fire Department staffing Ord. 21515-10-2014 to reduce the number of
11-    2014      positions in the captain’s rank
2014
21534- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement Fund)
2014
21535- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Water Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21536- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Fund)
2014
21537- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21538- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21539- 11-18-
11-    2014      22-86
2014
21540- 11-18-    Annexation of 1.521 acres out of the B.R. Lacy Survey, Abstract No. 990, Tracts
11-    2014      1 and 2 and the G.S. Rall Survey, Abstract No. 1801
2014
21541- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21542- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants Fund)
2014
21543- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants)
2014
21544- 11-18-
11-    2014      Fund (Grants)
2014
21545- 11-18-
11-    2014;     Rezoning
2014   eff. 1-
       16-2015
21546-
12-    12-2-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21547- 12-2-
12-    2014;     App. A, 4.406
2014   eff. 12-
       8-2014
                 7-429.1,
                 7-429.2,
21548- 12-2-     7-429.3,
12-    2014;     7-429.4,
2014   eff. 12-  7-429.5,
       8-2014    7-429.6,
                 7-429.7,
                 7-429.8
21549-
12-    12- -2014 Rezoning
2014
21550-
12-    12-2-2014 Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 15
2014
21551-
12-    12-2-2014 Fund (Grants)
2014
21552-
12-    12-2-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21553-
12-    12-2-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21554- 12-9-     11-1,
12-    2014;     11-2,
2014   eff. 1-1- 11-3,
       2015      11-4
21555-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Capital Projects)
2014
21556-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve)
2014
21557-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
2014
21558-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility)
2014
21559-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water and Sewer Revenue Bonds Capital Projects)
2014
21560-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (General)
2014
21561-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Special Trust)
2014
21562-
12-    12-9-2014 Vacation (Mosier View Court)
2014
21563-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Stormwater Utility)
2014
21564-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Special Trust)
2014
21565-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve)
2014
21566-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Grants )
2014
21567-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Grants)
2014
21568-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
2014
21569-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21570-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21571-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21572-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21573-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21574-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21575-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21576-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21577-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21578-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21579-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21580-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21581-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21582-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21583-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21584-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21585-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21586-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21587-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21588- 12-9-
12-    2014;     Prohibiting certain activities in connection with ESPN's programming for college
2014   eff. 1-5- game day event
       2015
21589-
12-    12-9-2014 Adopting sewer per acre charge
2014
21590-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21591-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21592-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2014
21593-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2014
21594-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Grants)
2014
21595-
12-    12-9-2014 Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District Fund)
2014
21596-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the police
12-    12-9-2014 department
2014
 
2015/01
 
Ord. No. Date Passed/Eff. Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed/Eff. Description
21597-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (General)
21598-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Cultural and Tourism)
                               Vacation (portion of Scott Lane, an unnamed
21599-01-2015 1-6-2015         street reservation and an unnamed right-of-way
                               easement)
21600-01-2015 1-6-2015         Vacation (alley in the Peter T. Welch Survey)
21601-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Environmental Protection Project)
21602-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Environmental Protection Operating)
21603-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21604-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21605-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21606-01-2015 1-13-2015        Repealed by Ord. 24534-11-2020
21607-01-2015 1-6-2015         Funds (various)
21608-01-2015 1-6-2015         Funds (various)
21609-01-2015 1-6-2015         Funds (various)
21610-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Special Trust)
21611-01-2015 1-6-2015         Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 8
21612-01-2015 1-6-2015         Annexation (Albright, Alexander F. Survey)
21613-01-2015 1-6-2015         Rezoning
21614-01-2015 1-6-2015         Fund (Airport Grants)
                               20-383,
                               20-384,
                               20-385,
                               20-386,
                               20-387,
                               20-388,
21615-01-2015 1-27-2015        20-389,
                               20-390,
                               20-391,
                               20-392,
                               20-393,
                               20-394,
                               20-395,
                               20-396
21616-01-2015 1-27-2015        Funds (various)
21617-01-2015 1-27-2015        Funds (various)
21618-01-2015 1-27-2015        Funds (various)
21619-01-2015 1-27-2015        Funds (various)
21620-01-2015 1-27-2015        Fund (Special Trust)
21621-01-2015 1-27-2015        Rezoning
 
2015/02
 
Ord. No. Date Passed/Eff. Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed/Eff. Description
21622-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Grants)
21623-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement)
21624-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21625-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21626-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21627-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21628-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Capital Projects)
21629-02-2015 2-3-2015;        Rezoning
              eff. 3-2-2015
21630-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (General)
21631-02-2015 1-3-2015         Establishing fees for game rooms and amusement
                               redemption machines
21632-02-2015 1-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21633-02-2015 2-10-2015        Amending Budget Ordinance No. 21457-09-2014
21634-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Special Trust)
21635-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21636-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21637-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21638-02-2015 2-10-2015        Ordering a general election on May 9, 2015, for
                               mayor and city council
21639-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Special Trust)
21640-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21641-02-2015 2-10-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21642-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
21643-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21644-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21645-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21646-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21647-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21648-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21649-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
                               2-13,
                               2-148,
                               2.5-5,
21650-02-2015 2-17-2015        12.5-107,
                               20-370 
                               (Repealed by Ord. 24534-11-2020) ,
                               30-173,
                               31-63
                               2-171,
21651-02-2015 2-17-2015        2-172,
                               2-173,
                               2.5-5
                               2-164,
                               2-165,
21652-02-2015 2-17-2015        2-166, 2-301, 2-302, 2-303  (Repealed by Ord.
                               24030-02-2020) ,
                               2.5-5,
                               20-373 (Repealed by Ord. 24534-11-2020)
21653-02-2015 2-17-2015        1-12
21654-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (Special Gifts)
21655-02-2015 2-17-2015        Fund (General)
21656-02-2015 2-17-2015;       Rezoning
              eff. 3-2-2015
 
2015/03
 
Ord. No. Date Passed/Eff. Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed/Eff. Description
21657-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (portion of Old University Drive)
21658-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (portions of Dakota Street, Harrold
                               Street, West 6th Street and West 5th Street)
21659-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (alley situated in the Thomas White
                               Survey)
21660-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (portion of Grant Street)
21661-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Grants)
21662-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21663-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21664-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (portion of South Main Street)
21665-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (portion of West Annie Street)
21666-03-2015 3-3-2015         Vacation (Turtle Creek Court)
21667-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Special Donation)
21668-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Community Tree Planting Program)
21669-03-2015 3-3-2015         Repealed by Ord. 23146-03-2018
              3-3-2015;        App. A, §§
21670-03-2015 eff. 3-19-2015   4.1305,
                               4.1307
21671-03-2015 3-3-2015;        App. A, §
              eff. 3-19-2015   4.1307
                               App. A, §§
                               4.708,
21672-03-2015 3-3-2015;        4.709; repealing App. A, §§
              eff. 3-19-2015   6.503,
                               6.504,
                               6.505
21673-03-2015 3-3-2015;        Rezoning
              eff. 3-20-2015
                               20-141,
                               20-142,
21674-03-2015 3-3-2015         20-143,
                               20-144,
                               20-145,
                               23-14
                               Amending Ordinance Nos. 8911 and 15477,
21675-03-2015 3-3-2015         regarding the commission for women; repealed by
                               Ord. 21875-09-2015
21676-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Grants)
21677-03-2015 3-3-2015         Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 3
21678-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Grants)
21679-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21680-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21681-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21682-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21683-03-2015 3-3-2015         Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)   
21684-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (General Capital)
21685-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Special Trust)
21686-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (General Capital)
21687-03-2015 3-17-2015        10-3
21688-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21689-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Grants)
21690-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Grants)
21691-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Grants)
21692-03-2015 3-17-2015        Declaring elected to office unopposed candidates
                               for mayor and city council
21693-03-2015 3-17-2015        Adopting 2015 comprehensive plan
21694-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Stormwater Utility)
21695-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Water and Sewer)
21696-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects)
21697-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (General)
21698-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Red Light Enforcement Program)
21699-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Information Technology Systems)
21700-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Lake Worth Trust)
21701-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Contract Street Maintenance)
21702-03-2015 3-17-2015        13-27
21703-03-2015                  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21704-03-2015 3-17-2015        Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21705-03-2015 3-17-2015        Appointing substitute municipal judges
21706-03-2015 4-11-2015        Rezoning
21707-03-2015 3-24-2015        Establishing pedestrian and bicycle advisory
                               commission
21708-03-2015 3-24-2015        27-28
21709-03-2015 3-24-2015        Fund (Grants)
 
2015/04
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21710-04-2015 4-7-2015       27-25
21711-04-2015 4-7-2015       Fund (General)
21712-04-2015 4-7-2015       Vacation (portions of West 5th St., Nebraska St.,
                             and Greenleaf Ave.)
21713-04-2015                Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21714-04-2015                Fund (Water Capital Projects)
                             App. A, §§
21715-04-2015 4-25-2015      4.803,
                             9.101
21716-04-2015 4-25-2015      App. A, §
                             6.411
21717-04-2015 4-25-2015      Rezoning
21718-04-2015 4-8-2015       Fire Dept. staffing
21719-04-2015 4-7-2015       Fund (Grants)
21720-04-2015 4-7-2015       Fund (Grants)
21721-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Grants)
21722-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21723-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21724-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21725-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21726-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Grants)
21727-04-201  4-14-2015      Fund (Grants)
21728-04-2015 4-14-2015      Fund (Grant Capital Projects)
21729-04-2015 5-22-2015      Rezoning
21730-04-2015 4-21-2015      Fund (Grants)
21731-04-2015 4-21-2015      Annexation (A. Albright Survey)
21732-04-2015 5-22-2015      Rezoning
 
2015/05
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21733-05-2015
21734-05-2015 5-5-2015       Fund (Grants)
21735-05-2015 5-5-2015       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21736-05-2015 5-5-2015       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21737-05-2015 5-5-2015       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21738-05-2015 5-22-2015      Rezoning
21739-05-2015 5-5-2015       Funds (New Equipment Purchases; Vehicle Equipment
                             Replacement)
21740-05-2015 5-5-2015       Funds (Various)
21741-05-2015 5-12-2015      Fund (General)
21742-05-2015 5-12-2015      Fund (Grants)
21743-05-2015 5-12-2015      Texas Enterprise Zone Program; amending Ord. 15733
21744-05-2015 5-12-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21745-05-2015 5-12-2015      Fund (Grant Capital Projects)
21746-05-2015 5-12-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21747-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (General)
21748-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21749-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (General Capital Projects)
21750-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Grants)
21751-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Grants)
21752-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Grants)
21753-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Grants)
21754-05-2015 5-19-2015      Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2015
21755-05-2015 5-19-2015      Approving settlement agreement with Atmos Energy
                             Corp.
21756-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21757-05-2015 5-19-2015      Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 90
21758-05-2015 5-19-2015      Fund (Grant Capital Projects)
 
2015/06
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
21759-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
2015
21760-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Special Trust)
2015
21761-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (General)
2015
21762-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Special Trust)
2015
21763-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (General)
2015
21764-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2015
21765-
06-    7-14-2015 Rezoning
2015
21766-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Group Health and Life Insurance)
2015
21767-
06-    6-2-2015  Fund (Transportation Impact)
2015
21768-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
2015
21769-
06-    6-9-2015  Vacation (Alley in Pleasant Moore Survey)
2015
21770-
06-    6-9-2015  Vacation (Lowriemore Lane)
2015
21771-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Grants)
2015
21772-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Grants)
2015
21773-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Grants)
2015
21774-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Transportation Impact)
2015
21775-           Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Board’s Code of Rules and
06-    6-9-2015  Regulations
2015
21776-
06-    6-9-2015  Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
2015
21777-
06-    6-27-2015 Rezoning
2015
21778-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21779-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21780-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2015
21781-
06-    7-25-2015 Rezoning
2015
21782-           App. A, §§
06-    7-26-2015 4.1300, 4.1301 (Repealed by Ord. 22810-08-2017) ,
2015             4.1302, 4.1303 (Repealed by Ord. 22810-08-2017)
21783-           Water and Sewer System Revenue Refunding and Improvement Bonds,
06-    6-16-2015 Series 2015A
2015
21784-
06-    6-16-2015 General Purpose Refunding and Improvement Bonds, Series 2015A
2015
21785-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Capital Projects Reserve)
2015
21786-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects)
2015
21787-
06-    6-16-2015 Fund (Information Systems)
2015
2015/07
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21788-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21789-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (General)
21790-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Lake Worth Gas Least Capital Improvement)
21791-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Environmental Protection Project)
21792-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Environmental Protection Operating)
21793-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Environmental Protection Capital)
21794-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Environmental Protection Operating)
21795-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Grants)
21796-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21797-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Intergovernmental Contributions)
21798-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Improvement)
21799-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (General Capital Projects)
21800-07-2015 7-21-2015      Adopting standards of care for 2015 for youth
                             programs
21801-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Grants)
21802-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects)
21803-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Solid Waste)
21804-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Stormwater Utility)
21805-07-2015 7-21-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21806-07-2015 8-7-2015       Rezoning
21807-07-2015 7-28-2015      Fund (Grants)
21808-07-2015 7-28-2015      Fund (Grants)
21809-07-2015 7-28-2015      Fund (Grants)
21810-07-2015 8-29-2015      Rezoning
 
2015/08
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
21811-
08-    8-4-2015  Fund (General)
2015
21812-
08-    8-4-2015  Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 15
2015
21813-
08-    8-4-2015  Vacation (Right-of-way in Mitchell Baugh Survey)
2015
21814-
08-    8-4-2015  Vacation (Alley in S.G. Jennings Survery)
2015
21815-
08-    8-4-2015  Rezoning
2015
21816-           App. A, §§ 3.200,
08-    8-12-2015 3.201,
2015             3.202; repealing App. A. §§ 3.203, 3.204
21817-
08-    8-4-2015  Fund (Grants)
2015
21818-
08-    8-4-2015  Fund (Park Gas Well Leases)
2015
21819-
08-    8-4-2015  Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2015
21820-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (General)
2015
21821-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21822-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (Intergovernmental Contributions)
2015
21823-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21824-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21825-
08-    8-11-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21826-
08-    8-11-2015 Rezoning
2015
21827-
08-    8-22-2015 22-86
2015
21828-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21829-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Airport Grants)
2015
21830-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Airport Grants)
2015
21831-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
2015
21832-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Airport Grants)
2015
21833-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
2015
21834-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21835-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21836-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Park Gas Lease Capital Project)
2015
21837-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21838-           Prohibiting certain activities in connection with ESPN’s college game day
08-    8-23-2015 event
2015
21839-
08-    8-18-2015 Fund (Transportation Impact)
2015
21840-
08-    8-18-2015 Rezoning
2015
21841-
08-    8-25-2015 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2015
21842-
08-    8-25-2015 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2015
21843-
08-    8-25-2015 Adopting sewer per acre charge
2015
21844-
08-    8-25-2015 Fund (Grants)
2015
21845-           2-261,
08-    8-25-2015 2-262,
2015             2-263
21846-
08-    8-25-2015 Boundary agreement between Grand Prairie and Fort Worth
2015
 
2015/09
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21847-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (General Capital Projects)
21848-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (Crime Control and Prevention District
                             Capital Projects)
21849-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (Grants)
21850-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (Grants)
21851-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (Special Trust)
21852-09-2015 9-1-2015       Fund (Special Trust)
21853-09-2015 9-24-2015      Rezoning
21854-09-2015 9-1-2015       22-1; repealing 22-303.1
21855-09-2015 1-1-2016       35-56
21856-09-2015 10-1-2015      35-56
21857-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 1 - Downtown)
21858-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 1)
21859-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 6 - Park Glen)
21860-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 6)
21861-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 7 - Heritage)
21862-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 7)
21863-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 8 - Camp Bowie)
21864-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 8)
21865-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 11 - Stockyards)
21866-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 11)
21867-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 12 - Chapel
                             Hill)
21868-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 12)
21869-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 14 - Trinity
                             Bluff)
21870-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Pubic
                             Improvement District No. 14)
21871-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Public Improvement District 15 - Sun Valley)
21872-09-2015 9-15-2015      Levying assessments during FY 2015-16 (Public
                             Improvement District No. 15)
21873-09-2015 9-26-2015      Fiscal year 2016 budget
21874-09-2015 9-15-2015      Ad valorem tax
21875-09-2015 9-15-2015      Repealing Ords. 8911, 15477, 21675-03-2015 to
                             dissolve Commission for Women
21876-09-2015 9-24-2015      Repealed by Ord. 26964-06-2024
                             24-1,
                             24-2,
                             24-3,
                             24-5,
                             24-6,
                             24-8,
                             24-9,
                             24-10,
21877-09-2015 10-1-2015      24-15,
                             24-16,
                             24-17,
                             24-36, 24-37, 24-38  (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-
                             2020) ,
                             24-39,
                             24-40,
                             24-41,
                             24-42,
                             24-45
21878-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Capital)
21879-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture)
21880-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Transportation Impact)
21881-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Stormwater Capital)
21882-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Stormwater Utility)
21883-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Culture & Tourism Capital)
21884-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Culture & Tourism Capital)
21885-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Grants)
21886-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21887-09-2015 10-1-2015      10-12
21888-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21889-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Grants)
21890-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Grants)
21891-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21892-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Park Gas Lease Capital Project)
21893-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Park Gas Lease Capital Project)
21894-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Golf Gas Lease Capital Project)
21895-09-2015 9-15-2015      Fund (Grants)
21896-09-2015 10-1-2015      Rezoning
21897-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General Capital Projects)
21898-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Various)
21899-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General Capital Projects)
21900-09-2015 9-29-2015      Renaming Hattie St. to East Pennsylvania Ave.
21901-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Alliance Airport Maintenance Facility)
21902-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Capital)
21903-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
21904-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General)
21905-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Texas Water Development Board Clean Water
                             State Revolving)
21906-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21907-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General)
21908-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Transportation Public Works Community
                             Facilities Agreement)
21909-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Grants)
21910-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21911-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
21912-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21913-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21914-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Grants)
21915-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Grants)
21916-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Various)
21917-09-2015 9-29-2015      Repealing 2-11
21918-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Developer Contribution)
21919-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Enterprise Developer Contribution)
21920-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
21921-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Transportation and Public Works Community
                             Facility Agreement)
21922-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Contract Street Maintenance)
21923-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Capital Projects Reserve)
21924-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Various)
21925-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General Debt Service)
21926-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Various)
21927-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Special Trust)
21928-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Grants)
21929-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (CD Revolving Loan)
21930-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Rental Rehabilitation Program)
21931-09-2015 9-29-2015      Renaming Cass St. to Robert Hughes St.
21932-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Projects)
21933-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Culture and Tourism)
21934-09-2015 9-29-2015      32-17
21935-09-2015 10-1-2015      Adjusting total number of authorized civil service
                             positions in the police dept.
21936-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (General)
21937-09-2015 10-1-2015      Adjusting total number of authorized civil service
                             positions in the fire dept,
21938-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
21939-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
21940-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects)
21941-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Grants Capital Project)
21942-09-2015 10-1-2015      Fund (Parks Gas Lease Capital Project)
21943-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Transportation Impact)
21944-09-2015 9-29-2015      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
 
2015/10
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
21945- 10-17-
10-    2015      App. A, § 9.101
2015
21946- 10-17-
10-    2015      App. A, § 5.107A
2015
21947- 10-13-
10-    2015      Rezoning
2015
21948- 10-26-    Amending Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Board’s Code of Rules and
10-    2015      Regulations
2015
21949- 10-20-
10-    2015      Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 13
2015
21950- 10-20-
10-    2015      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2015
21951- 10-20-
10-    2015      Rezoning
2015
21952- 10-27-
10-    2015      Fund (General)
2015
21953- 10-27-
10-    2015      Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2015B
2015
21954- 10-27-
10-    2015      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture)
2015
 
2015/11
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21955-11-2015 11-3-2015      Fund (Street Improvement 2008)
21956-11-2015 11-3-2015      Vacation (Rutledge St.)
21957-11-2015 11-3-2015      Vacation (Valley Vista Dr.)
21958-11-2015 11-3-2015      Vacation (Park Vista Boulevard)
21959-11-2015 11-3-2015      Fund (Airport Grants)
21960-11-2015 11-3-2015      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
21961-11-2015 11-3-2015      Fund (Culture and Tourism)
21962-11-2015 11-3-2015      Fund (Culture & Tourism Capital Projects)
21963-11-2015 11-3-2015      Annexation (John F. Health Survey, Abstract No.
                             641)
21965-11-2015 11-10-2015     Fund (Culture & Tourism)
21966-11-2015 11-10-2015     Fund (Culture & Tourism Capital Projects)
21968-11-2015 11-10-2015     Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 91
21969-11-2015 11-10-2015     Fund (Culture & Tourism Capital Projects)
21970-11-2015 11-17-2015     Fund (Grants)
21971-11-2015 11-17-2015     Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
21972-11-2015 11-17-2015     Fund (Capital Projects Reserve)
21973-11-2015 11-17-2015     FY 2016 Community Facility Agreement Projects
                             funding
21974-11-2015 11-17-2015     Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation
                             sites (not codified)
21975-11-2015 11-17-2015     Fund (Airports Gas Lease Capital Project)
21976-11-2015 11-17-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
 
2015/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
21978-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (Grants)
21979-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (Grants)
21980-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
21981-12-2015 12-15-2015     Rezoning
21982-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project)
21983-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (TPW CFA)
21984-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (Culture and Tourism)
21985-12-2015 12-1-2015      Fund (General Capital Projects)
21986-12-2015 1-1-2016       34-206, 34-222, 34-248; repealing 34-263
21987-12-2015 12-8-2015      Fund (Risk Financing)
21988-12-2015 12-8-2015      Fund (Capital Improvement Program)
21989-12-2015 12-8-2015      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
21990-12-2015 12-8-2015      Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
21991-12-2015 12-8-2015      Fund (Park Improvements)
21992-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
21993-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Information Technology Systems)
21994-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects)
21995-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Capital)
21996-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (State Asset Forfeiture)
21997-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Street Improvements)
21998-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
21999-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Grants)
22000-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22001-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Park Improvements)
22002-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Park Improvements)
22003-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Capital Projects)
22004-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Capital Improvement Programs)
22005-12-2015 12-15-2015     Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 92
22006-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Grants Capital Projects)
22007-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects)
22008-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22009-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22010-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22011-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22012-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Transportation Impact)
22013-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Transportation Impact)
22014-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22015-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22016-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water/Sewer Direct Purchase Note)
22017-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Grant Capital Projects)
22018-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22019-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22020-12-2015 12-15-2015     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22021-12-2015 12-24-2015     Rezoning
 
2016/01
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22022-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grant Operating)
22023-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact)
22024-01-2016 1-12-2016      Vacation (Cedar Street; alley in Texas and Pacific
                             Railway Co. Addition)
22025-01-2016 1-12-2016      Vacation (Fairmount Avenue; two alleys in Fields
                             Welch Addition)
22026-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants)
22027-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22028-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants)
22029-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22030-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22031-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22032-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Municipal Airport Grants)
22033-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Project)
22034-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22035-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22036-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22037-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22038-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22039-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22040-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22041-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants)
22042-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Parks Dedication Fees)
22043-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22044-01-2016 1-12-2016      Rezoning
22045-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Public Events Capital Improvement Program)
22046-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Special Purpose)
22047-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Specially Funded Projects)
22048-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (PACS Improvement)
22049-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Special Purpose)
22050-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital)
                             31-81,
22051-01-2016 1-29-2016      31-101,
                             31-103,
                             31-106
22052-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22053-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22054-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22055-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22056-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22057-01-2016 1-12-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22058-01-2016 1-26-2016      13-2
22059-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22060-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22061-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
22062-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Municipal Airport Grants)
22063-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Capital Project)
22064-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Municipal Golf Gas Capital Conversion)
22065-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Special Purpose)
22066-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 5R
22067-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 7R
22068-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 8R
22069-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 9R
22070-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 15R
22071-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 37
22072-01-2016 1-26-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 39
22073-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Grants)
22074-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Grants)
22075-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Grants)
22076-01-2016 1-26-2016      Fund (Grants)
22077-01-2016 1-26-2016      Rezoning
 
2016/02
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22078-02-2016 2-2-2016       Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Operating)
22079-02-2016 2-2-2016       Fund (General Capital Projects)
22080-02-2016 2-2-2016       Fund (Special Purpose)
22081-02-2016 2-2-2016       Special election for proposed Charter amendments
22082-02-2016 2-2-2016       Codification pending
22083-02-2016 2-2-2016       App. A, § 4.407 (Repealed by Ord. 22703-05-2017)
22084-02-2016 2-2-2016       Rezoning
22085-02-2016 2-9-2016       Fund (General)
22086-02-2016 2-9-2016       Fund (Equipment Services)
22087-02-2016 2-9-2016       Fund (General Capital)
                             Adopts 2014 National Electrical Code and amends
22088-02-2016 2-9-2016       Construction and Fire Prevention Standards for
                             Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Board
22089-02-2016 2-9-2016       Fund (Public Art Capital Improvement Program)
22090-02-2016 2-9-2016       2-61
22091-02-2016 2-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22092-02-2016 2-16-2016      Fund (Government Community Facilities Agreement)
22093-02-2016 2-16-2016      Fund (Water & Sewer Community Facilities
                             Agreement)
22094-02-2016 2-16-2016      Adjusting total number of authorized civil service
                             positions in the police dept.
22095-02-2016 2-16-2016      Boundary agreement
22096-02-2016 2-16-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22097-02-2016 2-16-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
 
2016/03
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
                             17-107,
                             17-108,
                             17-109,
                             17-110,
22098-03-2016 3-1-2016       17-111,
                             17-112,
                             17-113,
                             17-114,
                             17-115
22099-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (Grants Operating-Other)
22100-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (General Capital Project)
22101-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (Vehicle Equipment Replacement)
22102-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
22103-03-2016 3-1-2016       Vacation (19th Street, 28th Street, Ridglea Drive,
                             Westridge Avenue)
22104-03-2016 3-1-2016       Vacation (Bluebonnet Drive, Scenic Hill, Lillian
                             Street, Dell Street)
22105-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (General)
22106-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (General Lease Capital Project)
22107-03-2016 3-1-2016       Annexation (Granbury Overton Survey, Abstract No.
                             1185)
22109-03-2016 3-1-2016       App. A, § 2.102
22110-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (Environmental Protection Capital Project)
22111-03-2016 3-1-2016       Fund (Environmental Protection)
22112-03-2016 3-1-2016       Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 37
22113-03-2016 3-1-2016       Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 8R
22114-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact)
22115-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (General)
22116-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Information Technology Systems)
22117-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Municipal Airports)
22118-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Solid Waste)
22119-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22120-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
22121-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Sewer capital Projects)
22122-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22123-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22124-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22125-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22126-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22127-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22128-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22129-03-2016 3-22-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22130-03-2016 3-22-2016      Adopting standards of care for 2016 for youth
                             programs
22132-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Special Donations)
22133-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Project)
22134-03-2016 3-29-2016      Vacation (alley, J. Montgomery Survey and J. Lynch
                             Survey)
22135-03-2016 3-29-2016      Vacation (alley, J. Montgomery Survey and J. Lynch
                             Survey)
22136-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Information Technology Systems)
22137-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects)
22138-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact)
22139-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (General)
22140-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Special Purpose)
22141-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22142-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22143-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Park and Recreation Improvements)
22144-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (General)
22145-03-2016 3-29-2016      Approving municipal judges for a two-year term
                             commencing April 1, 2016
22146-03-2016 3-29-2016      2016 Comprehensive Plan
22147-03-2016 3-29-2016      Fund (Culture and Tourism)
 
2016/04
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22148-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Special Purpose)
22149-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Special Purpose)
22150-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture)
22151-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Capital)
22152-04-2016 4-5-2016       Vacation (alley, E.S. Harris Survey)
22153-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
                             App. A, §§ 4.603,
                             4.803,
22154-04-2016 4-21-2016      4.1203,
                             5.406,
                             9.101
22155-04-2016 5-15-2016      Rezoning
22156-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Street Improvement 2008)
22157-04-2016 4-5-2016       Vacation (Sarah G. Jennings Survey)
22158-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Fiscal Year 2016 Water and Wastewater
                             Capital Improvement)
22159-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Airport Grants)
22160-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22161-04-2016 4-5-2016       Fund (2016 Stormwater Capital Improvement Plan)
22162-04-2016 4-12-2016      Fund (Grants)
22163-04-2016 4-12-2016      Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 92
22164-04-2016 4-12-2016      Annexation (Alexander F. Albright Survey)
22165-04-2016 4-12-2016      Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
22166-04-2016 4-12-2016      Rezoning
22167-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Public Improvement District 15 - Sun Valley)
22168-04-2016 4-19-2016      Vacation (Crowley Survey)
22169-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22170-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22171-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Street Improvements)
22172-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects)
22173-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
22174-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (Street Improvements Supplemental)
22175-04-2016 4-19-2016      Fund (2015-2016 Park and Recreation Capital
                             Improvement Program)
22176-11-2015 4-19-2016      Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting designation
                             sites (not codified)
22177-04-2016 4-19-2016      Rezoning
 
2016/05
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
22178-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Culture and Tourism)
2016
22179-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Special Purpose)
2016
22180-
05-    5-3-2016  Vacation (Shelby County School Land Survey)
2016
22181-
05-    5-3-2016  Vacation (Portion Lot 1R, Block 26 Jennings West Addition)
2016
22182-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Grants)
2016
22183-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22184-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22185-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22186-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22187-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22188-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22189-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22190-
05-    5-3-2016  Rezoning
2016
22191-
05-    5-3-2016  2016 Master Thoroughfare Plan
2016
22192-
05-    5-3-2016  Vacation (Lubbock Ave., Blocks 67 and 67A, South Hills Addition)
2016
22193-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
2016
22194-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Grant Capital Projects Federal)
2016
22195-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22196-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22197-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22198-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22199-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22200-
05-    5-3-2016  Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22201-
05-    5-10-2016 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
2016
22202-
05-    5-10-2016 Vacation (Moses A. Jackson Survey)
2016
22203-           Annexation (Int’l & Great Northern R.R. Co. Survey, M.C. Moulton
05-    5-10-2016 Survey)
2016
22204-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (General)
2016
22205-           Negotiated settlement between Atmos Cities Steering Committee and
05-    5-17-2016 Atmos Energy Corp.
2016
22206-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
2016
22207-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2016
22208-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22209-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22210-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22211-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22212-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2015A)
2016
22213-
05-    5-17-2016 Drainage Utility System Revenue Refunding Bonds, Series 2016
2016
22214-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Stormwater Debt Service)
2016
22215-
05-    5-17-2016 General Purpose Refunding and Improvement Bonds, Series 2016
2016
22216-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (General Debt Service)
2016
22217-           Water & Sewer System Revenue Refunding and Improvement Bonds,
05-    5-17-2016 Series 2016
2016
22218-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Service)
2016
22219-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2016)
2016
22220-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (2004 Bond Program Residuals)
2016
22221-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (2008 Bond Program Residuals)
2016
22222-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Street Improvements COs Residuals)
2016
22223-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (General Capital Projects)
2016
                 22-158.3,
                 30-89,
                 30-90,
                 30-91,
                 30-92,
22224-           30-93,
05-    5-17-2016 30-94,
2016             30-95,
                 30-96,
                 30-97,
                 30-98,
                 30-99,
                 30-100,
                 30-101
22225-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22226-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22227-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22228-
05-    5-17-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22229-
05-    5-17-2016 Rezoning
2016
22230-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Grants)
2016
22231-
05-    5-24-2016 Vacation (White Bear Trail, Presidio West Addition)
2016
22232-
05-    5-24-2016 Vacation (Coleman St., Bundy St., Jennie St., Golfers St.)
2016
22233-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2016
22234-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2016
22235-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Grants)
2016
22236-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Grants)
2016
22237-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (TPW Gas Lease Projects)
2016
22238-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22239-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
22240-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
2016
22241-
05-    5-24-2016 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2016
                 16-101,
                 16-171,
                 16-172,
                 16-173,
                 16-174,
                 16-175,
                 16-176,
                 16-177,
                 16-178,
22242-           16-179,
05-    5-24-2016 16-180,
2016             16-181,
                 16-182,
                 16-184,
                 16-185,
                 16-186,
                 16-187,
                 16-188,
                 16-189, repealing 16-132, 20-161, 20-162, 20-163, 10-164, 20-165,
                 20-166, 20-167, 20-168, 20-169, 20-170, 20-171, 20-172, 20-173,
                 20-174, 20-175, 20-176, 20-177, 20-178, 20-179, 20-180, 20-181
 
2016/06
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22243-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Grants Operating)
22244-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Grants)
22245-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (General)
22246-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (General Capital Projects)
22247-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22248-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
22249-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22250-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Developer Contribution)
22251-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Transportation Impact)
22252-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22253-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Transportation Impact)
22254-06-2016 6-7-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22255-06-2016 6-7-2016       App. A, § 6.201
22256-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22257-06-2016 6-14-2016      Vacation (Jennings Ave., South Hemphill Heights
                             Addition)
22258-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects)
22259-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22260-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22261-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22262-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22263-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22264-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22265-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22266-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22267-06-2016 6-14-2016      Annexation (569.426 acres)
22268-06-2016 7-24-2016      App. A, § 4.402
22269-06-2016 7-24-2016      Rezoning
22270-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Risk Financing)
22271-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
22272-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (Pacs Gas Lease Capital Projects)
22273-06-2016 6-14-2016      Disannexation (G. Cardinas Survey)
22274-06-2016 6-23-2016      31-81,
                             31-106
22275-06-2016 6-14-2016      Fund (General)
22276-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22277-06-2016 6-21-2016      Street name change (Old Denton Rd. to North
                             Riverside Dr.)
22278-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
22279-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact)
22280-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22281-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22282-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22283-06-2016 7-24-2016      Rezoning
22284-06-2016 7-24-2016      App. A, § 4.707
22285-06-2016 6-21-2016      Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 38
22286-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
22287-06-2016 6-21-2016      Fund (Water/Sewer Department)
22288-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Street Improvements)
22289-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Municipal Parking Capital Projects)
22290-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Municipal Parking Residuals)
22291-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Municipal Parking Debt Service)
22292-06-2016 6-28-2016      22-86
22293-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
22294-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (PACs Gas Lease Capital Project Legacy)
22295-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Information Technology Systems)
22296-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Information Systems Capital Projects)
22297-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (TPW Gas Lease Project)
22298-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
22299-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
22300-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22301-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22302-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
22303-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Bond)
22304-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (2014 Bond Program)
22305-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
22306-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22307-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
                             Repealing 34-200, 34-201, 34-202, 34-203, 34-204,
                             34-204.1, 34-204.2, 34-205, 34-206, 34-207, 34-
                             208, 34-209, 34-210, 34-211, 34-212, 34- 213, 34-
                             214, 34-215, 34-216, 34-217, 34-218, 34-219, 34-
                             220, 34-221, 34-222, 34-223, 34-224, 34-225, 34-
                             226, 34-227, 34-228, 34-229, 34- 330, 34-331, 34-
                             332, 34-240, 34-241, 34-242, 34-243, 34-244, 34-
                             245, 34-246, 34-247, 34-248, 34-249, 34-250, 34-
22308-06-2016 10-1-2016      260, 34-261, 34-262, 34- 263, 34-264, 34-265, 34-
                             266, 34-267, 34-268, 34-300, 34-301, 34-302, 34-
                             303, 34-304, 34-305, 34-306, 34-307, 34-308, 34-
                             321, 34-322, 34- 323, 34-324, 34-325, 34-326, 34-
                             327, 34-328, 34-329, 34-340, 34-341, 34-342, 34-
                             343, 34-344, 34-345, 34-346, 34-347, 34-348, 34-
                             349; adding 34-200, 34-201, 34-202, 34-203, 34-
                             204, 34-205, 34-206, 34- 207, 34-208, 34-209, 34-
                             210, 34-211, 34-212, 34-213, 34-214, 34-215
22309-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22310-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22311-06-2016 6-28-2016      Annexation (80.85 acres)
22312-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
22313-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Water/Sewer Department)
22314-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Equipment Services)
22315-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Municipal Airport Grants)
22316-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Capital Project)
22317-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Water/Sewer Department)
22318-06-2016 6-28-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
 
2016/07
 
 
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22319-06-2016 7-24-2016      Rezoning
 
2016/08
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22320-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Grants)
22321-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22322-08-2016 8-2-2016       Water Main Capacity Charge (Morningstar)
22323-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Grant Operating)
22324-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Grant)
22325-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Intergovernmental Contributions)
22326-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22327-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Municipal Airport Grants)
22328-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Airports Gas Lease Capital Projects)
22329-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22330-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22331-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22332-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22333-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22334-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
                             App. A, §§ 4.603,
                             4.803,
22335-08-2016 8-2-2016       4.1203,
                             5.146,
                             9.101
                             4-4,
22336-08-2016 8-2-2016       App, A, §§ 4.100,
                             4.1203,
                             4.1304
                             App. A, §§ 4.1203,
22337-08-2016 8-2-2016       4.1306,
                             9.101
22338-08-2016 8-25-2016      Rezoning
22339-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Chesapeake Settlement)
                             Removing property from Neighborhood Empowerment
22340-08-2016 8-2-2016       Reinvestment Zone No. 38 and creating Neighborhood
                             Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 93
22341-08-2016 8-2-2016       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22342-08-2016 8-9-2016       Vacation (San Jacinto Dr., John Bursey Survey,
                             Abstract #128)
22343-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22344-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22345-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22346-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22347-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22348-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22349-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Intergovernmental Contributions)
22350-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Group Health and Insurance)
22351-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Grants)
22352-08-2016 8-9-2016       Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22353-08-2016 8-25-2016      Rezoning
22354-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Municipal Airports)
22355-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22356-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22357-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22358-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22359-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects Closed)
22360-08-2016 8-16-2016      Bond (DFW International Airport)
22361-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22362-08-2016 8-16-2016      Fund (Clean Water State Revolving)
22363-08-2016 9-1-2016       Rezoning
22364-08-2016 8-23-2016      Annexation (J. Walker Survey)
22365-08-2016 8-23-2016      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
22366-08-2016 8-23-2016      Fund (Waterside Direct Purchase Note)
22367-08-2016 8-23-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22368-08-2016 8-23-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22369-08-2016 8-30-2016      Fund (General)
22370-08-2016 8-30-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22371-08-2016 8-30-2016      Fund (Grants Operating)
                             7-47,
                             7-62,
22372-08-2016 8-30-2016      7-167,
                             11-2,
                             26-2,
                             29-1
22373-08-2016 8-30-2016      2-321
22374-08-2016 1-1-2017       35-56
22375-08-2016 10-1-2016      35-56
22376-08-2016 8-30-2016      22-115
22377-08-2016 8-30-2016      Fund (Developer Contribution)
 
2016/09
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22378-08-2016 9-9-2016       Rezoning
22379-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Government Communities Facilities Agreement)
22380-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22381-09-2016 9-13-2016      Adjusting total number of authorized civil service
                             positions in the police depart.
22382-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Network Infrastructure and Telephone System
                             project)
22383-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22384-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22385-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22386-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22387-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22388-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22389-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22390-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22391-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22392-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22393-09-2016 9-13-2016      Adopting the FY 2017 Operating Budget
22394-09-2016 9-13-2016      Adopting the FY 2017 Capital Program Budget
22395-09-2016 9-18-2016      Ad valorem tax
22396-09-2016 10-14-2016     Rezoning
22397-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #1 Downtown - levying assessments
22398-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #1 Downtown - appropriations
22399-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #1 Downtown)
22400-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #6 Park Glen - levying assessments
22401-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #6 - Park Glen appropriations
22402-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #6 Park Glen)
22403-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #7 Heritage - levying assessments
22404-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #7 Heritage - appropriations
22405-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #7 Heritage)
22406-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #8 Camp Bowie - levying assessments
22407-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #8 Camp Bowie - appropriations
22408-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #11 Stockyards - levying assessments
22409-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #11 Stockyards - appropriations
22410-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #12 Chapel Hill - levying assessments
22411-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #12 Chapel Hill - appropriations
22412-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #12 Chapel Hill)
22413-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #14 Trinity Bluff - levying assessments
22414-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #14 Trinity Bluff - appropriations
22415-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #14 Trinity Bluff)
22416-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #15 Sun Valley - levying assessments
22417-09-2016 9-13-2016      PID #15 Sun Valley - appropriations
22418-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (PID #15 Sun Valley)
22419-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22420-09-2016 9-20-2016      15-42
22421-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Arundel Storm Drain Improvements)
22422-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22423-09-2016 9-13-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22424-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Various Enterprise Operating Funds)
22425-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Urban Villages Central Clusters project)
22426-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Equipment Services)
22427-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Equipment Services Capital)
22428-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (General from various Gas Lease funds)
22429-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Grants)
22430-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22431-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Projects)
22432-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (Group Health and Life Insurance)
22433-09-2016 9-20-2016      Budget adjustments for FY 2016
22434-09-2016 9-20-2016      Fund (decreasing Non Departmental and increasing
                             Neighborhood Services)
22435-09-2016 9-20-2016      Annexation (1.83 acres out of the Alexander F
                             Albright Survey)
22436-09-2016 10-14-2016     Rezoning
22437-09-2016 9-27-2016      Amending Ord. 22004-12-2015 Vehicle Replacement
                             Fund reduction
22438-09-2016 9-27-2016      Amending Ord. 21873-09-2016 reallocating Capital
                             dollars
22439-09-2016 9-27-2016      Amending Ord. 22004-12-2016 Vehicle Replacement
                             Fund reduction
22440-09-2016 9-27-2016      Amending Ord. 21873-09-2016 reallocating Capital
                             dollars
22441-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Risk Financing)
22442-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Stormwater Utility)
22443-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Grants)
22444-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
22445-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Special Donations)
22446-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Grants)
22447-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Old Denton Road)
22448-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22449-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22450-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Governmental Community Facilities Agreement)
22451-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Water & Sewer Community Facilities
                             Agreement)
22452-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Various Gas Lease Endowment Funds)
22453-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Various Gas Lease Capital projects)
22454-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Closed)
22455-09-2016 9-27-2016      Fund (Water Capital Projects Closed)
22456-10-2016
 
2016/10
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22457-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project Legacy)
22458-10-2016 10-11-2016     Vacation (Lafayette Ave., Gendy St., Dexter Ave.,
                             Bryce Ave., Thomas White Survey, Abstract #1636)
22459-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Federal Grant Operations)
22460-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Sewer Capital)
22461-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Water Capital)
22462-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Sewer Capital)
22463-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Water Capital)
22464-10-2016 12-1-2016      Zoning
                             App. A, §§ 3.503,
22465-10-2016 11-3-2016      3.504,
                             3.505,
                             3.506
22466-10-2016 10-11-2016     Fund (Grants Operating/Federal)
22467-10-2016 10-18-2016     Fund (Alliance Airport Maintenance)
22468-10-2016 10-18-2016     Fund (Airport Grants)
22469-10-2016 10-18-2016     Fund (Airport Grants)
22470-10-2016 10-18-2016     Fund (Water Capital)
22471-10-2016 10-18-2016     Tax notes
22472-10-2016 10-18-2016     Fund (Fire Apparatus Capital Project)
22473-10-2016 10-18-2016     Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone 90A
22474-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (General Debt Service)
22475-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (IT Capital Projects)
22476-10-2016 10-29-2016     Amending Ord. 11783 to correct ZC-07-160
22477-10-2016 10-29-2016     Amending Ord. 22177-04-2016 to correct ZC-16-080
                             and ZC-16-082
22478-10-2016 10-29-2016     Amending Ord. 22283-06-2016 to correct ZC-16-115
22479-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (Grants Operating State)
22480-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (Airport Grants)
22481-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22482-10-2016 10-25-2016     Vacation (Evening View Dr., Henry Robertson
                             Survey, Abstract #1259)
22483-10-2016 10-25-2016     Vacation (Darcy St., JR Montgomery Survey)
22484-10-2016 10-25-2016     Vacation (Clyde St., Lafayette Ave., Dexter Ave.,
                             Bryce Ave., Thomas White Survey, Abstract #1636)
22485-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (Developer Contribution)
22486-10-2016 10-25-2016     Vacation (Southgate Dr., South Hills Addition)
22487-10-2016 10-25-2016     Funds for enacting the fiscal year 2017 Public Art
                             Capital Improvement Program
22488-10-2016 10-25-2016     Fund (Love Circle Water and Sewer Program)
 
2016/11
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22489-11-2016 11-4-2016      34-203
22490-11-2016 12-1-2016      App. A, § 4.303
22491-11-2016 12-1-2016      App. A, § 5.403
22492-11-2016 12-1-2016      Zoning
22493-11-2016 11-8-2016      Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture Capital)
22494-11-2016 11-8-2016      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Capital)
22495-11-2016 11-8-2016      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22496-11-2016 11-8-2016      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22497-11-2016 11-8-2016      Fund (Water Capital)
22498-11-2016 11-8-2016
22499-11-2016 11-8-2016      Adjusting total number of authorized civil service
                             positions in the police depart.
22500-11-2016 11-15-2016     Fund (Special Purpose)
22501-11-2016 11-15-2016     Fund (Parks Gas Lease Capital Project)
22502-11-2016 11-15-2016     Annexation (44.38 acres)
22503-11-2016 11-15-2016     Annexation (89.05 acres)
22504-11-2016 11-15-2016     Annexation (94.3 acres)
22505-11-2016 11-15-2016     Fund (Developer Contribution)
 
2016/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22516-12-2016 12-6-2016      App. A, § 4.402
                             7-46,
                             7-47,
22517-12-2016 1-1-2017       7-48,
                             7-49,
                             7-226,
                             20-358
                             7-166,
22518-12-2016 1-1-2017       7-167,
                             7-168,
                             7-169
                             7-61,
22519-12-2016 1-1-2017       7-62,
                             7-63,
                             7-64
                             7-41,
22520-12-2016 1-1-2017       7-42,
                             7-43,
                             7-44
                             26-1,
22521-12-2016 1-1-2017       26-2,
                             26-3,
                             26-4
                             7-431,
22522-12-2016 1-1-2017       7-432,
                             7-433,
                             7-434
                             7-1,
                             7-47,
                             7-62,
22523-12-2016 12-18-2016     7-167,
                             7-432,
                             11-1,
                             26-2,
                             29-1
22524-12-2016 12-18-2016     13-1,
                             13-2
                             35-70.2,
                             35-70.3,
                             35-70.5,
                             35-71,
22525-12-2016 4-1-2017       35-72,
                             35-73,
                             35-76,
                             35-77,
                             35-78
22526-12-2016 12-6-2016      Tax Abatement Zone 93
22527-12-2016 12-6-2016      Fund (Grants)
22528-12-2016 12-6-2016      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
22529-12-2016 12-6-2016      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22530-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (General Capital Project, Street Improvement
                             2008 and the Street Improvement Supplemental)
22531-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund
22532-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund
22533-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund
22534-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Special Purpose)
22535-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Special Purpose)
22536-12-2016 12-13-2016     Vacation (Lake Country Dr.)
                             Vacation (two alleys and all of Refinery St., N.W.
22537-12-2016 12-13-2016     28th St., a portion of Houston St., Throckmorton
                             St. and NW 7th St.)
22538-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
22539-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Legacy)
22540-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Grants)
22541-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Developer Contribution)
22542-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2015A)
22543-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Grants)
22544-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Grants)
22545-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Water Capital)
22546-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Sewer Capital)
22547-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Sewer Capital Projects)
22548-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Water and Sewer Community Facilities
                             Agreement)
22549-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22550-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22551-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Special Donations Capital)
22552-12-2016 12-24-2016     Residential Parking Pilot Program
22553-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fort Worth Golf Capital Improvement Program
22554-12-2016 12-13-2016     2016-2017 Park and Recreation Capital Improvement
                             Program
22555-12-2016 12-13-2016     Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 24
22556-12-2016 1-1-2017       2-9
22557-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects)
22558-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects)
22559-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
22560-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Street Improvements Supplemental)
22561-12-2016 12-13-2016     Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
2017/01
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22562-12-2016 1-13-2017      Zoning
22563-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Productivity Investment)
22564-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (General, Economic Development)
22565-01-2017 1-24-2017      Adopting sewer per acre charge
22566-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (2014 Bond)
22567-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22568-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Grants)
22569-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Grants)
22570-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Grants)
22571-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Grants)
22572-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22573-01-2017 1-24-2017      30-16
22574-01-2017 3-10-2017      Zoning
22575-01-2017 1-24-2017      23-19
22576-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Various)
22577-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22578-01-2017 1-24-2017      (Fund (Water Capital)
22579-01-2017 1-24-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22580-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (General)
22581-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22582-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (Municipal Airports)
22583-01-2017 1-31-2017      Amends Vehicle and Equipment Replacement Fund
22584-01-2017 1-31-2017      Vacation (Old Denton Road)
22585-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22586-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (Grants Operating)
22587-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22588-01-2017 1-31-2017      Fund (Airports Gas Lease Capital Project)
22589-01-2017 3-10-2017      Zoning
 
2017/02
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22590-02-2017 2-7-2017       Fund (Grants)
22591-02-2017 2-7-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22592-02-2017 2-7-2017       Election 5-6-2017
                             App. A §§
22593-02-2017 2-7-2017       4.1200,
                             4.1308
22594-02-2017 3-19-2017      Zoning
22595-02-2017 2-7-2017       22-86
22596-02-2017 2-7-2017       Fund (Water Capital)
22597-02-2017 2-7-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22598-02-2017 2-14-2017      Fund (Municipal Airports Capital Project)
22599-02-2017 2-14-2017      (Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22600-02-2017 2-14-2017      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
22601-02-2017 2-14-2017`     Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22602-02-2017 2-14-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22603-02-2017 2-14-2017      Annexation (19.77 acres)
22604-02-2017 2-14-2017      Annexation (9.75)
22605-02-2017 2-14-2017      Annexation (16.79)
22606-02-2017 2-14-2017      Fund (Grants)
22607-02-2017 2-14-2017      Fund (Grants)
22608-02-2017 3-30-2017      Zoning
22609-02-2017 2-14-2017      Vacation (West 7th St.)
22610-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Transportation Impact)
22611-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Grants)
22612-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Culture and Tourism DFW Revenue Share
                             Capital)
                             Repealing 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5, 5-6, 5-16, 5-
                             17, 5-18, 5-19, 5-20, 5- 21, 5-31; adding
                             5-1,
                             5-2,
                             5-3,
                             5-16,
22613-02-2017 2-21-2017      5-17,
                             5-18,
                             5-19,
                             5-20,
                             5-31,
                             5-32,
                             5-33
22614-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22615-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22616-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund Legacy)
22617-02-2017 2-21-2017      Fund (Grants)
 
2017/03
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22618-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Culture and Tourism)
22619-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (General Capital Projects)
22620-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (General)
22621-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Park Gas Lease Project)
22622-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project Legacy)
22623-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
22624-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22625-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22626-03-2017 3-7-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22627-03-2017 4-27-2017      Zoning
22628-03-2017 3-8-2017       Fund (Grants)
22629-03-2017 3-7-2017       Adopting The City of Fort Worth 2017 Comprehensive
                             Plan
22630-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
22631-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22632-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22633-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer Prior Lien Debt Service)
22634-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Service Reserve)
22635-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Grants Capital Project)
22636-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22637-03-2017 3-21-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22638-03-2017
                             Fund (amends Ord. 22394-09- 2016 to appropriate
22639-03-2017 3-28-2017      fund to the Vehicle and Equipment Repair Project
                             of the Equipment Services Capital Projects Fund)
22640-03-2017 3-28-2017      Vacation (Schadt St. ROW and alley in A. Anderson
                             Survey)
22641-03-2017 3-28-2017      Vacation (Wilderman St., Belknap St., portion of
                             alley in Rebecca Briggs Survey)
22642-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Parks and Recreation Dept. Budget in the
                             General Fund)
22643-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Botanic Garden Special Revenue)
22644-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Park and Recreation Project of the Special
                             Purpose Fund)
22645-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (General)
22646-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Solid Waste)
22647-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (General Capital Projects)
22648-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
22649-03-2017 3-28-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
 
2017/04
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Description
              Date
22650-04-2017 4-4-2017  Repealing 4-1, 4-2; adding
                        4-1
22651-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Grants)
22652-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Grants Operating)
22653-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Water and Sewer Direct Purchase Note)
22654-04-2017 4-4-2017
22655-04-2017 4-4-2017  Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds Series 2017
22656-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2017)
22657-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Service Reserve)
22658-04-2017 4-4-2017  Fund (Water and Sewer)
22659-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Service)
22660-04-2017 4-11-2017 Suspending the 4-21-2017 effective date of Oncor
                        Electric Delivery Company LC’s requested rate change
22661-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
22662-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22663-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Grants)
22664-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22665-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
22666-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Closed)
22667-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Water Capital Projects Closed)
22668-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22669-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
22670-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (General Gas Lease Capital)
                        Re-establishing, revising and renaming the Ridglea
22671-04-2017 4-11-2017 Village/Como Area to the Como/Sunset Heights Area (NEZ
                        No. 2)
22672-04-2017 4-11-2017
22673-04-2017 4-11-2017 Annexation (13.865 acres)
22674-04-2017 4-11-2017 Fund (Airport Grants)
22675-04-2017 4-11-2017
22676-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Transportation Impact Capital Legacy)
22677-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Grant other Capital Projects)
22678-04-2017 4-22-2017 22-86
22679-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
22680-04-2017           Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22681-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22682-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22683-04-2017 4-18-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
22684-04-2017 4-18-2017 Annexation (84.18 acres)
22685-04-2017 4-18-2017 Zoning
 
2017/05
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22686-05-2017 5-2-2017       Repealing 20-122, 2-123, 20- 124, 20-125
22687-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Grants)
22688-05-2017 5-2-2017       Appointing substitute Municipal Judges for a two
                             year term ending March 31, 2017
22689-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Municipal Golf Gas Lease Capital Projects)
22690-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22691-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22692-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22693-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22694-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital)
22695-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water/Sewer DPN)
22696-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22697-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22698-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water/Sewer DPN)
22699-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22700-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22701-05-2017 5-2-2017       Appointing James D. Rodgers as Chief Judge, term
                             ending March 31, 2018
22702-05-2017 5-2-2017       Text amendment
                             App. A §§ 4.100,
22703-05-2017 5-2-2017       4.1203,
                             4.1309,
                             9.101, Repealing App. A § 4.407
22704-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Airport Grant)
22705-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22706-05-2017 5-2-2017       Fund (F.W. Public Improvement District No. 16
                             (Walsh Ranch/Quail Valley))
                             Approving a Service and Assessment Plan for the FW
22707-05-2017 5-2-2017       Public Improvement District No. 16 (Walsh Ranch/
                             Quail Valley)
22708-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (PACS Dedication Fees)
22709-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
22710-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Grants)
22711-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Grants)
22712-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Grants)
22713-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22714-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
22715-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
22716-05-2017 5-9-2017       Water and Sewer System Revenue Refunding and
                             Improvement Bonds 2017A
22717-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2017A)
22718-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Service)
22719-05-2017 5-9-2017       Fund (Grants)
                             Approving negotiated settlement between Atmos
22720-05-2017 5-9-2017       Cities Steering Committee and Atmos Energy
                             Corporation d/b/a Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex.
                             Division
22721-05-2017 5-16-2017      Issuance of 2017 tax notes
22722-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (2017 Tax Note Project)
22723-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (General Debt Service)
22724-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22725-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Legacy)
22726-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
22727-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
22728-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Street Improvements Fund Close)
22729-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
22730-05-2017 5-16-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22731-05-2017 5-16-2017      Zoning
 
2017/06
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
22732-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Developer Tech Improvements Project)
2017
22733-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22734-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Grants Operating other)
2017
22735-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Grants)
2017
22736-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Special Purpose)
2017
22737-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Specially Funded Projects)
2017
22738-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Culture and Tourism)
2017
22739-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2017
22740-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22741-
06-              Zoning
2017
                 32-50,
22742-           32-51,
06-    6-25-2017 32-52,
2017             32-53,
                 32-54
                 32-70,
22743-           32-71,
06-    6-25-2017 32-72,
2017             32-73,
                 32-74
                 32-60,
22744-           32-61,
06-    6-25-2017 32-62,
2017             32-63,
                 32-64
22745-
06-    6-6-2017  Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone 91A
2017
22746-
06-    6-6-2017  Adoption of Standards of Care for 2017 for Youth Programs
2017
22747-
06-    6-6-2017  Special Tax Revenue Bonds Series 2017A
2017
22748-
06-    6-6-2017  Special Tax Revenue Bonds Series 2017B
2017
22749-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Venue Capital Project various sub funds)
2017
22750-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Venue Project)
2017
22751-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Venue Debt Service various sub funds)
2017
22752-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22753-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Sewer Capital Fund Legacy)
2017
22754-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22755-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (Sewer Capital Fund Legacy)
2017
22756-
06-    6-6-2017  Fund (2014 Bond Program)
2017
22757-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Fund Legacy)
2017
22758-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22759-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22760-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22762-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (2014 Bond Program Fund - Sidewalks Program)
2017
22763-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2017
22764-
06-    6-13-2017 Fund
2017
22765-
06-    6-13-2017 Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number 95
2017
22766-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (General Capital Projects Close Fund - Aviation Project)
2017
                 2-290,
                 2-291,
22767-           2-292,
06-    6-20-2017 2-293,
2017             2-294,
                 2-297,
                 2-299
22768-           20-66,
06-    6-20-2017 20-97
2017
22769-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Water and Sewer)
2017
22770-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (General Debt Service)
2017
22771-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Library Improvements)
2017
22772-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (CO Special Projects)
2017
22773-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (CO Special Projects)
2017
22774-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Projects Legacy)
2017
22775-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Street Improvements)
2017
22776-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Grants Other Operating)
2017
22777-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (General Capital Projects)
2017
22778-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Information Technology Systems)
2017
22779-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Information Technology Systems Capital Projects)
2017
22780-
06-    6-20-2017 Vacation (two alleys in Blocks 30 and 38, Tucker’s Addition)
2017
22781-
06-    6-20-2017 Vacation (alley in Block 29, Tucker’s Addition)
2017
22782-
06-    6-20-2017 Vacation (alley, a portion of Block 18, Wm. J. Bailey Addition)
2017
22783-           Vacation (portion of Washington Avenue ROW and portions of two alleys in
06-    6-20-2017 the W. Welch Survey, Abstract No. 1644)
2017
22784-           Vacation (portion of excess ROW of Crawford St., in heirs of John
06-    6-20-2017 Childress Survey Abstract No. 250, part of unrecorded plat of Daggett’s
2017             Second Addition)
22785-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2015A)
2017
22786-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2017
22787-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
2017
22788-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund
2017
22789-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Water and Sewer Direct Purchase Note)
2017
22790-
06-    6-20-2017 Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
2017
 
2017/07
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22791-06-2017 7-29-2017      Zoning
22792-06-2017 8-4-2017       App. A, § 4.404
22793-06-2017 6-20-2017      Fund (Various Tax Increment Funds)
22794-06-2017 6-20-2017      Fund (Group Health Insurance)
22795-06-2017 6-20-2017      Fund (Retiree Healthcare Trust)
22796-06-2017 6-20-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22797-06-2017 6-20-2017      Fund (Streets Improvement Fund Close)
 
2017/08
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22798-08-2017 8-1-2017       Vacation (alley, Block 55 Chamberlain Heights
                             Add.)
22799-08-2017 8-1-2017       Vacation (portion of Halbert St.)
22800-08-2017 8-1-2017       Vacation (East 4th Street, Belknap and Hogg)
22801-08-2017 8-1-2017       Vacation (Swift Street)
22802-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project Legacy)
22803-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Grants)
22804-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22805-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22806-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22807-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22808-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Special Purpose)
22809-08-2017 9-7-2017       App. A, § 4.713
                             App. A, §§ 4.100,
                             4.1203,
22810-08-2017 9-7-2017       4.1300,
                             4.1302,
                             6.300,
                             9.101
22811-08-2017 8-31-2017      Zoning
22812-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (General)
22813-08-2017 7-22-2017      Police staffing
22814-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Grants)
22815-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22816-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer Community Facility
                             Agreement)
22817-08-2017 8-1-2017       Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22818-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental Contributions)
22819-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22820-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund Legacy)
22821-08-2017 8-15-2017      Denying the application to change rates in the
                             city filed by Oncor
22822-08-2017 8-15-2017      16-121,
                             16-135
22823-08-2017 8-15-2017      Adopting a Sewer Per Acre Charge (Walsh Ranch
                             Phase 1C)
                             Vacation (two alleys and a potion of Myrtle St. in
22824-08-2017 8-15-2017      the Bellevue Hill Addition and Brooks and Baileys
                             Subdivision)
22825-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Grants)
22826-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Grants)
22827-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Grants)
22828-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22829-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22830-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22831-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
                             Approving a Service and Assessment Plan for the FW
22832-08-2017 8-15-2017      Public Improvement District No. 17 (Rock Creek
                             Ranch)
                             Bonds (Special Assessment Revenue Bonds, Series
22833-08-2017 8-15-2017      2017 (Fort Worth Public Improvement District No.
                             17 (Rock Creek Ranch) Major Improvement Project)
22834-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Rock Creek Ranch PID Debt Service)
22835-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Series 2017 Rock Creek Ranch PID Major
                             Improvement Project)
                             11-1,
22836-08-2017 9-1-2017       11-2,
                             11-3,
                             11-4
                             7-1,
                             7-47,
                             7-62,
22837-08-2017 8-15-2017      7-167,
                             7-432,
                             11-2,
                             26-2,
                             29-1
                             3-1,
                             3-2,
                             3-81,
                             3-82,
                             3-83,
                             3-84,
                             3-96,
                             3-97,
                             3-98,
                             3-101,
                             3-107,
                             3-108,
                             3-116,
                             3-117,
                             3-118,
                             3-119,
                             3-120,
                             3-121,
22838-08-2017 8-15-2017      3-122,
                             3-123,
                             3-124,
                             3-136,
                             3-137,
                             3-138,
                             3-139,
                             3-140,
                             3-141,
                             3-142,
                             3-143,
                             3-144,
                             3-145,
                             3-146,
                             3-147,
                             3-155,
                             3-156,
                             3-160,
                             3-161,
                             3-162
22839-08-2017 8-26-2017      30-19,
                             Ch. 30, Art. I, App. A
22840-08-2017 8-15-2017      Renewing and redesigning Neighborhood Empowerment
                             Zone 34
22841-08-2017 8-15-2017      Boundary agreement with the City of Saginaw
22842-08-2017 8-15-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22843-08-2017 9-7-2017       Zoning
22844-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Grants)
22845-08-2017                Fund (Grants)
22846-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Grants)
22847-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22848-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22849-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22850-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital)
22851-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22852-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
                             Approving and adopting the final service plan for
22853-08-2017 8-29-2017      Public Improvement District No. 18 (the Tourism
                             PID)
22854-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (Tourism PID Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Project
                             Account of the Special Assessment District)
22855-08-2017 8-29-2017      Fund (FY 2018 Special Trust)
 
2017/09
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
22856-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions by adding
08-    9-16-2017 45 positions in the classification of police officer
2017
22857-
08-    9-30-2017 Zoning
2017
22858-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Lake Worth Trust)
2017
22859-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Various Gas Lease Endowment)
2017
22860-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Various Gas Lease Capital Project)
2017
22861-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Special Purpose)
2017
22862-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Grants Operating)
2017
22863-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
2017
22864-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22865-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital)
2017
22866-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Sewer Bond 2018A)
2017
22867-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Water Capital Projects)
2017
22868-           Bond (Dallas Fort Worth Int’l Airport 52nd Supplemental Concurrent
09-    9-12-2017 Ordinance)
2017
22869- 10-26-
09-    2017      Zoning
2017
22870-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 11
2017
22871-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 11 Stockyards)
2017
22872-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID no. 12
2017
22873-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 12 - Chapel Hill)
2017
22874-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 12 - Chapel Hill)
2017
22875-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 14
2017
22876-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 14 - Trinity Bluff)
2017
22877-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 14 - Trinity Bluff)
2017
22878-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 15
2017
22879-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 15 - Sun Valley)
2017
22880-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 15 - Sun Valley)
2017
22881-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 1
2017
22882-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 1 - Downtown)
2017
22883-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 1 - Downtown)
2017
22884-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 6
2017
22885-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 6 - Park Glen)
2017
22886-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 6 - Park Glen)
2017
22887-
09-    9-12-2017 Assessments PID No. 7
2017
22888-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 7 - Heritage)
2017
22889-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (FWPID 7 - Heritage)
2017
22890-
09-    10-1-2017 35-56
2017
22891-
09-    1-1-2018  35-56
2017
22892-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Water Capital)
2017
22893-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital)
2017
22894-
09-    9-12-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Fund - Legacy)
2017
22895-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (Municipal Airport Debt Service)
2017
22896-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (Municipal Airport Operating)
2017
22897-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (various)
2017
22898-           Vacation (alley situated in the W. Welch Survey, Abstract No. 1644,
09-    9-19-2017 Block 6, Terrell’s subdivision)
2017
22899-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (Water Projects)
2017
22900-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects - Legacy)
2017
22901-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22902-
09-    9-19-2017 Assessments PID 8
2017
22903-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (FY 2017-18 FWPID 8 - Camp Bowie)
2017
22904-
09-    9-19-2017 Fund (FWPID 8 - Camp Bowie)
2017
22905-           Annexation (28.55 acres, Houston Tap & Brazoria Survey, Abstract No.
09-    9-19-2017 654 in Parker County)
2017
22906-
09-    9-19-2017 Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with the City of Crowley
2017
22907- 10-28--
09-    2017      Zoning
2017
22908-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Projects)
2017
22909-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Information Systems)
2017
22910-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Information Technology Systems Capital Project)
2017
22911-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Information Technology Systems)
2017
22912-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (General Debt Service)
2017
22913-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Water Priority Lien Service)
2017
22914-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Water Subordinate Lien Debt Service)
2017
22915-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Project Financing Zone)
2017
22916-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund Venue Debt Service)
2017
22917-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Project)
2017
22918-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Water Capital Perfects Closed)
2017
22919-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Closed)
2017
22920-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22921-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Grants)
2017
22922-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
2017
22923-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
2017
22924-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Projects)
2017
22925-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (2017A Water and Sewer Bond)
2017
22926-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (General Capital Projects)
2017
22927-
09-    9-26-2017 Adopt Operating Budget FY 2018
2017
22928-
09-    9-26-2017 Adopt Capital Improvement Plan Budget
2017
22929-
09-    9-26-2017 Tax Levy FY 2018
2017
22930-
09-    9-26-2017 FY 2017 Budget Adjustments
2017
22931-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Municipal Parking)
2017
22932-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Retiree Healthcare)
2017
22933-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture)
2017
22934-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
2017
22935-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (State Asset Forfeiture)
2017
22936-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (General)
2017
22937-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (General)
2017
22938-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Municipal Golf)
2017
22939-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Solid Waste)
2017
22940-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Fleet and Equipment Services)
2017
22941-
09-    9-26-2017 Setting the salary for each classification of Peace Officer
2017
22942-
09-    9-26-2017 Increases the authorized positions in the Police Department
2017
22943-
09-    9-26-2017 Increases the authorized positions in the Fire Department
2017
22944-           Setting the salary for each classification of Fire Protection
09-    9-26-2017 Personnel
2017
22945-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2017
22946-
09-    9-26-2017 Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
2017
 
2017/10
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22947-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Airport Grants)
                             Vacation (a portion of 12th St. ROW and a portion
22948-10-2017 10-10-2017     of an unnamed street ROW in the B.E. Waller Survey
                             Abstract 1659)
                             Vacation (a portion of East Dagget St. ROW and a
22949-10-2017 10-10-2017     portion of South Freeway ROW in the John Childress
                             Survey, Abstract 250)
                             Vacation (a portion of Stella St. ROW in the Peter
22950-10-2017 10-10-2017     T. Welch Survey, Abstract 1642 and the Elizabeth
                             Jones Survey, Abstract 839)
22951-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Developer Contribution)
22952-10-2017 10-10-2017     MOU US Department of Justice
22953-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Grants Operating Other)
22954-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Grants)
22955-10-2017 10-10-2017     Appointment of Deputy Chief Judge
22956-10-2017 12-21-2017     Zoning
22957-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Tax Increment)
22958-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (2017A Water and Sewer Bond)
22959-10-2017 10-10-2017     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22960-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Grants)
22961-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Airport Grants)
22962-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Airport Grants)
22963-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Grants Operating Other)
22964-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Grants Operating Other)
22965-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (General)
22966-10-2017 10-17-2017     Appropriating funds to enact FY 2018 Public Art
                             Capital Improvement Program
22967-10-2017 10-17-2017     Bond (Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds Series
                             2017B)
22968-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2017B)
22969-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Water and Sewer Debt Series Reserve)
22970-10-2017 10-17-2017     Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22971-10-2017 12-21-2017     Zoning
22972-10-2017 10-29-2017     Repealed by Ord. 24534-11-2020
22973-10-2017 10-24-2017     Fund (Alliance Maintenance Facility)
22974-10-2017 10-24-2017     Repealed by Ord. 23102-02-2018
22975-10-2017 10-24-2017     Fund (General Capital Projects)
22976-10-2017 10-24-2017     Fund (Grants Operating State)
                             2.5-1,
                             2.5-7,
                             2.5-24,
                             2.5-27,
                             2.5-34,
                             2.5-37,
22977-10-2017 10-24-2017     2.5-44,
                             2.5-47,
                             2.5-53,
                             2.5-54,
                             2.5-57, 2.5-64,
                             2.5-67,
                             2.5-74,
                             2.5-77
 
2017/11
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
22978-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Projects Close)
22979-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects Close)
22980-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Municipal Golf Gas Lease Capital)
22981-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Grant Operating)
22982-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Grants)
22983-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund
22984-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22985-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22986-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22987-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22988-11-2017 11-7-2017      Zoning
22989-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
22990-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
22991-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water and Sewer DPN)
22992-11-2017 11-7-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
22993-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
22994-11-2017 11-14-2017     Vacation (alley)
22995-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
22996-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
22997-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
22998-11-2017 11-14-2017     27-24
                             Establishing the new classification of Commander,
22999-11-2017 11-14-2017     adjusting the total number of authorized sworn
                             positions in the Police Department by six
23000-11-2017 11-14-2017     Prescribing salary for the classification of
                             Commander in the Police Department
23001-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
23002-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
23003-11-2017 11-14-2017     Fund
23004-11-2017 12-30-2017     Zoning
 
2017/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
23005-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Environmental Management Projects Close)
23006-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Solid Waste Capital Projects Close)
23007-12-2017 12-5-2017      2018 Budget Adjustments
                             Temporarily increasing the number of authorized
23008-12-2017 12-5-2017      positions in the classification of Police Officer
                             by 29
                             Support accounting reconciliation and align FY
23009-12-2017 12-5-2017      2017 appropriations for Energy Conservation
                             Program Debt Service payments with adopted Debt
                             Service Schedules
                             Support accounting reconciliation and align FY
23010-12-2017 12-5-2017      2017 appropriations for Energy Conservation
                             Program Debt Service payments with adopted Debt
                             Service Schedules
                             Support accounting reconciliation and align FY
23011-12-2017 12-5-2017      2017 appropriations for Energy Conservation
                             Program Debt Service payments with adopted Debt
                             Service Schedules
                             Support accounting reconciliation and align FY
23012-12-2017 12-5-2017      2017 appropriations for Energy Conservation
                             Program Debt Service payments with adopted Debt
                             Service Schedules
23013-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Stormwater Capital Project 2007)
23014-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Stormwater Debt Service)
23015-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Municipal Parking Capital Project Legacy)
23016-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental)
23017-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Grants)
23018-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Grants Capital Project)
23019-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Intergovernmental Contribution)
23020-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Projects Legacy)
23021-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Municipal Airport Grants)
23022-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Projects Legacy)
23023-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
                             App. A §§ 2.100,
23024-12-2017 3-17-2018      2.101,
                             2.102,
                             3.505
23025-12-2017 1-5-2018       Zoning
23026-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
23027-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Information Technology Solutions Capital
                             Projects)
23028-12-2017 12-5-2017      Bond - Water and Sewer System Commercial Paper
                             notes
23029-12-2017 12-5-2017      Thirty Second Supplemental Ordinances - Water and
                             Sewer System Revenue Refunding Bonds
23030-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Callable Commercial Paper Program)
23031-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Water Capital)
23032-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23033-12-2017 12-5-2017      Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23034-12-2017 12-12-2017     2.5-1,
                             2.5-4
23035-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Lake Worth Trust)
23036-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Lake Worth Trust)
23037-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Water and Sewer)
23038-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23039-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Grants)
23040-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23041-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Grants Operating)
23042-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Botanic Gardens Special Revenue)
23043-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (General Capital Projects)
23044-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Special Donations Capital)
23045-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Grants Operating)
23046-12-2017 12-23-2017     7.1
                             29.5-1,
23047-12-2017 3-12-2018      29.5-3,
                             29.5-14
                             22-180,
                             22-181,
                             22-182,
23048-12-2017 12-23-2017     22-183,
                             22-184,
                             22-185,
                             22-186
23049-12-2017 12-12-2017     Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 4
23050-12-2017 12-12-2017     Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zone No. 6
23051-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Grants)
23052-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Water Capital)
23053-12-2017 12-12-2017     Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
 
2018/01
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date        Description
23054-01-2018 1-9-2018              Vacation (alley)
23055-01-2018 1-9-2018              Vacation (alley)
23056-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23057-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
23058-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Grants)
23059-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23060-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23061-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital)
23062-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water/Sewer CP)
23063-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23064-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23065-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
23066-01-2018 2-10-2018             Zoning
23067-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Special Donation)
23068-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Grants)
23069-01-2018 1-9-2018              Standards of Care for 2018 Youth Programs
23070-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23071-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23072-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23073-01-2018 1-9-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer CP)
23074-01-2018 1-23-2018             Budget corrections for Energy Conservation
                                    Program Debt Service
23075-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (General Debt Service)
23076-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Project
                                    Legacy)
23077-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Culture and Tourism Capital Projects)
23078-01-2018 1-23-2018             Vacation (alley)
23079-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23080-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23081-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23082-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23083-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23084-01-2018 4-1-2018              Transportation Impact Fees
23085-01-2018 2-2-2018              Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting
                                    designation sites (not codified)
23086-01-2018 2-2-2018              Ch. 12.5, App. A, municipal setting
                                    designation sites (not codified)
23087-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23088-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital)
23089-01-2018 1-23-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer CP)
23090-01-2018 3-2-2018              Zoning
23091-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (ERP Capital Project)
23092-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Rock Creek Ranch PID Debt Service)
23093-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Special Purpose)
23094-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Special Purpose)
23095-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (General Capital)
23096-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (General)
23097-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Specially Funded Projects)
23098-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23099-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23100-01-2018 1-30-2018             Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone 96
23101-01-2018 1-30-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer CP)
23102-02-2018 2-6-2018              Repealing Ord. 22974-10-2017 and Fund (Lake
                                    Worth Trust)
23103-02-2018 2-6-2018              Fund (General Capital Projects)
23104-02-2018 2-6-2018              Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Project)
23105-02-2018 2-6-2018              Fund (Developer Contribution)
23106-02-2018 2-6-2018              Fund (Developer Contribution)
23107-02-2018 2-6-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Project Close)
23108-02-2018 2-6-2018              Calling Bond election for May 5, 2018
23109-02-2018 3-17-2018             Zoning
                                    App. A. §§
                                    4.602,
                                    4.603,
23110-02-2018 3-2-2018              4.802,
                                    4.803,
                                    4.1202,
                                    4.1203,
                                    9.101
23111-02-2018 3-2-2018              App. A. §
                                    7.105
23112-02-2018 2-6-2018              2-61
23113-02-2018 2-13-2018             Fund (Grants)
23114-02-2018 2-13-2018             Fund (Grants)
23115-02-2018 2-13-2018             Fund (Various)
23116-02-2018 2-13-2018             Fund (Grants)
23117-02-2018 2-20-2018             13-27
23118-02-2018 2-20-2018             Vacation (2 alleys)
23119-02-2018 2-20-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer CP)
23120-02-2018 2-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23121-02-2018 2-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23122-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Government Community Facility
                                    Agreement)
23123-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Facilities Agreement)
23124-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Grants)
23125-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Grants)
23126-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23127-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Grants Operating State)
23128-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23129-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23130-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23131-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Project)
23132-03-2018 4-15-2018             Zoning
23133-03-2018 3-6-2018              Adopting the 2018 Comprehensive Plan
23134-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23135-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23136-03-2018 3-6-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
                                    Amending Ord. 22702-05-2017 to reflect and
23137-03-2018 3-20-2018             add correct zoning district information
                                    exhibit for Zoning case ZC-17-058
23138-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Park Dedication Fees)
23139-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (General)
23140-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23141-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23142-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23143-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital Projects)
23144-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23145-03-2018 3-20-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
                                    Repealing Ord. 21669-03-2015 to dissolve
23146-03-2018 3-20-2018             the Forth Worth Commission on Ending
                                    Homelessness
23147-03-2018 4-1-2018 - 12-31-2018 Transportation Impact Fees
23148-03-2018 1-1-2019              Transportation Impact Fees
23149-03-2018 3-20-2018             Atmos Rate Review
23150-03-2018 4-15-2018             Zoning
23151-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (FW PID #1 - Downtown)
23152-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital)
23153-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project
                                    Legacy)
23154-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Legacy)
23155-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23156-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Grants Operating)
23157-03-2018 3-27-2018             Appointing Municipal Judges, Chief Judge
                                    and Deputy Chief Judge for a two year term
23158-03-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23159-04-2018 4-4-2018              Repealed 32-41
23160-04-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Risk Financing)
23161-04-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23162-04-2018 3-27-2018             Adopting a Sewer Per Acre Charge (Keller
                                    Park Vista)
23163-04-2018 3-27-2018             Vacating (two portions of South Jennings
                                    Ave.)
23164-04-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
23165-04-2018 3-27-2018             Fund (Water Capital)
                                    App. A §§
23166-04-2018 4-8-2018              2.103,
                                    4.401,
                                    9.101
23167-04-2018 5-5-2018              Zoning
23168-04-2018 4-3-2018              Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital
                                    Legacy)
23169-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23170-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23171-04-2018 4-10-2018             Issue Tax Notes
23172-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (2018 Tax Note Project)
23173-04-2018 4-10-2018             Issue General Purpose Bonds
23174-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (General Debt Service)
23175-04-2018 4-10-2018             33rd Supplemental Ordinance - Water and
                                    Sewer System Revenue Bonds
                                    Amended and restated 32nd Supplemental
23176-04-2018 4-10-2018             Ordinance - Water and Sewer System Revenue
                                    Refunding Bonds
23177-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2018)
23178-04-2018 4-10-2018             Fund (Street Improvement)
23179-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (PACS Endowment Gas Lease)
23180-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (General Endowment Gas Lease)
23181-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Aviation Endowment Gas Lease)
23182-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Water/Sewer Endowment Gas Lease)
                                    Vacation (portion of McLemore Ave. and
23183-04-2018 4-17-2018             portion of 2 alleys in John Little Survey,
                                    Abstract No. 959)
                                    Vacation (portion of Old Denton Road,
23184-04-2018 4-17-2018             situated in Milly Gilbert Survey, Abstract
                                    No. 565 and the Heirs of WW Thompson Survey
                                    Abstract No. 1498)
23185-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
23186-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
23187-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Grants Operating)
23188-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Grants Operating)
23189-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Stormwater Debt Service)
23190-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Municipal Parking Debt Service)
23191-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (General)
23192-04-2018 4-17-2018             Fund (Various Tax Increment Reinvestment
                                    Zone (TIRZ)
                                    22-1,
                                    22-159,
23193-04-2018 4-17-2018             22-162.1,
                                    22-162.2,
                                    22-162.3,
                                    22-162.4
23194-04-2018 5-19-2018             Zoning
23195-05-2018 5-1-2018              31-5
                                    Vacation (portion of West 13th St. ROW and
23196-05-2018 5-1-2018              portion of Burnett St. ROW, Sarah Gray
                                    Jennings Survey, Abstract No. 844)
                                    Fund (Recurring Facility Maintenance and
23197-05-2018 5-1-2018              Repair Programmable Project of the General
                                    Capital Projects)
23198-05-2018                       Zoning
23199-05-2018 5-1-2018              Fund (Airports Grant)
23200-05-2018 5-1-2018              Fund (Airports Gas Lease Projects)
23201-05-2018 5-1-2018              Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
23202-05-2018 5-8-2018              Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23203-05-2018 5-8-2018              Fund (Municipal Airports Grant)
23204-05-2018 5-8-2018              Fund (Grants Operating)
23205-05-2018 5-8-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Capital)
                                    Vacation (portion of Old Granbury Road in
23206-05-2018 5-8-2018              the IF Health Survey, Abstract No. 641, the
                                    J Vanlent Survey, Abstract No. 1576)
23207-05-2018 5-8-2018              Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23208-05-2018                       Zoning
23209-05-2018 5-15-2018             Bond Election Canvass
23210-05-2018 5-15-2018             Adjusting the number of authorized sworn
                                    positions in the Police Department
23211-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (2017 Critical Capital Projects)
                                    Vacation (portion of Shire Meadow Drive in
23212-05-2018 5-15-2018             the Henry Robertson Survey, Abstract No.
                                    1259)
                                    Vacation (portion of Maria Jones Road ROW
23213-05-2018 5-15-2018             in the David Strickland Survey, Abstract
                                    No. 1376)
23214-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23215-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23216-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (General Capital Projects)
                                    Vacation (portion of Old Granbury Rd. and
                                    Columbus Trail situated in IF Health
23217-05-2018 5-15-2018             Survey, Abstract No. 641, J. Asbury Survey,
                                    Abstract No. 52, AH Hodges Survey, Abstract
                                    No. 1789 and T&P Railroad Survey, Abstract
                                    No. 1576)
23218-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (Municipal Parking)
23219-05-2018 5-15-2018             Fund (Municipal Parking)
23220-05-2018 8-3-2018              22-191,
                                    22-192
23221-05-2018 8-13-2018             29.5-1,
                                    29.5-2
                                    Repealing 34-176, 34-177, 34-178, 34-179,
                                    34-180, 34-180.1, 34-180.2, 34-181, 34-182,
                                    34-183, 34-184, 34-185, 34-186, 34-187, 34-
                                    188, 34- 189, 34-190, 34-191, 34-192;
23222-05-2018 5-20-2018             adding 34-176, 34-177, 34-178, 34-179, 34-
                                    180, 34-181, 34-182, 34-183, 34-184, 34-
                                    185, 34-186, 34-187, 34- 188, 34-189, 34-
                                    190, 34-191, 34-192, 34-193, 34-194, 34-
                                    195, 34-196, 34-197
23223-05-2018 5-15-2018             Renewing and redesignating NEZ No. 10
23224-05-2018 6-5-2018
                                    31-81,
                                    31-101,
23225-05-2018 8-1-2018              31-102,
                                    31-103,
                                    31-106
23226-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (FW PID 14 - Trinity Bluff)
23227-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (General)
23228-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Special Purpose)
23229-06-2018 4-1-2018              Pay Rate Adjustment for Municipal Court
                                    Judges
23230-06-2018 6-5-2018              Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge
23231-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23232-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Grants)
23233-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Airports Gas Lease Project)
23234-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Capital)
23235-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Water Capital)
23236-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23237-06-2018
23238-06-2018 6-5-2018              Annexation (Walsh Ranch)
23239-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Aviation Endowment Gas Lease)
23240-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Park System Endowment Gas Lease)
23241-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Water and Sewer Endowment Gas Lease)
23242-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (General Endowment Gas Lease)
23243-06-2018 6-5-2018              Service on Assessment plan for FW PID No.
                                    17 - Rock Creek Ranch
                                    Authorizing issuance of Special Assessment
23244-06-2018 6-5-2018              Revenue Bonds, Series 2018 (FW PID No. 17
                                    Roadway Improvement Project)
23245-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Rock Creek Ranch PID Debt Service)
23246-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Rock Creek Ranch PID Road
                                    Improvement)
23247-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Rock Creek Ranch PID Operating)
23248-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
23249-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project)
23250-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project)
23251-06-2018 6-5-2018              Fund (Airport Grants)
                                    Street name change (Bell Helicopter
23252-06-2018 6-12-2018             Boulevard between Hurst Boulevard (SH 10)
                                    and Trinity Boulevard to Bell Flight
                                    Boulevard)
                                    Street name change (Walsh Creek Boulevard
23253-06-2018 6-12-2018             between Walsh Ranch Parkway to Cline Ridge
                                    Drive)
23254-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (General Capital Projects)
23255-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
23256-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (PACS Dedication Fees)
23257-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (Specially Funded Projects)
23258-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project
                                    Legacy)
23259-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital)
23260-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23261-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects 2018
                                    Bond)
23262-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
23263-06-2018 6-12-2018             Fund (2018 Bond Program)
 
2018/06 - 2018/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
23264-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (General Debt Service)
23265-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (General Debt Service)
23266-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Grants)
23267-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Vehicle and Equipment Replacement)
23268-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Capital Projects Service)
23269-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Street Improvements)
23270-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Street Improvement 2008)
23271-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
23272-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Street Improvements Close)
                             Approving Res. 2018-05-091 of the DFW
23273-06-2018 6-26-2018      International Airport Board, adding new street
                             names to be located within the passport
                             development site
                             Adopting a per acre charge for 689 acres located
23274-06-2018 6-26-2018      east of I30 and Loop 820 by Cooks Lane (M-339
                             Sewer Main Improvements)
23275-06-2018 6-26-2018      Water Main Capacity Charge (Morningstar
                             Development along Farmer Rd. (FM 3325))
                             Water Capacity Charge (Morningstar Development,
23276-06-2018 6-26-2018      north of Walsh Ranch Reservoir and Pump Station
                             along I-20)
23277-06-2018 6-26-2018      Vacation (portion of Kennedy Street; 2 alleys in
                             Moses A. Jackson Survey, Abstract No. 862))
23278-06-2018 6-26-2018      Vacation (portion of Beckham Place, E.S. Harris
                             Survey, Abstract No. 688)
23279-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Grants)
23280-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Airport Grants)
23281-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Airport Grants)
23282-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Project Legacy)
23283-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Water Capital Legacy)
23284-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23285-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Water Capital Legacy)
23286-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Sewer Capital Legacy)
23287-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Project 2018)
23288-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23289-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital)
                             Adjusting the total number of authorized positions
23290-06-2018 6-26-2018      in the police department by eliminating 26
                             positions in the classification of police officer
23291-06-2018 7-15-2018      Zoning
23292-06-2018 6-26-2018      Fund (2007 Critical Capital Needs Public Art Fund
                             reprogramming)
23293-06-2018 6-26-2018      Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone No. 4 (Southside
                             TIF) as Media Production Development Zone No. 1
                             Nominating the real property at 305 South main
23294-06-2018 6-26-2018      St., Suites 100-110, for designation as a
                             qualified media production location
                             Repealing 6-1, 6-2, 6-3, 6-4, 6-5, 6-6, 6-7, 6-8,
                             6-9, 6-10, 6-11, 6-12, 6-12.1, 6-12.2, 6-13, 6-
                             13.5, 6-14, 6-15, 6-16, 6-17, 6-18, 6-19, 6-20, 6-
                             20.1, 6-20.2, 6-20.3, 6-20.4, 6-20.5, 6-20.6, 6-
                             20.7, 6-20.8, 6-20.9, 6-20.10, 6-21, 6-22, 6-22.1,
                             6-23, 6-24, 6-25, 6-26, 6-27, 6-41, 6-42, 6- 43,
                             6-44, 6-45, 6-46, 6-47, 6-48, 6-61, 6-62, 6-63, 6-
                             64, 6-65, 6-77, 6- 78, 6-79, 6-80, 6-81, 6-82, 6-
                             83, 6-84, 6-85, 6-86; adding
                             6-1,
                             6-2,
                             6-3,
                             6-4,
                             6-5,
                             6-6,
                             6-7,
                             6-8,
                             6-9,
                             6-10,
                             6-11,
                             6-12,
                             6-12.1,
                             6-12.2,
                             6-13,
                             6-14,
                             6-14.1,
                             6-14.2,
                             6-14.3,
                             6-14.4,
                             6-14.5,
                             6-15.1,
                             6-15.3,
                             6-15.4,
                             6-15.5,
                             6-15.6,
                             6-15.7,
23295-06-2018 7-6-2018       6-15.8,
                             6-16,
                             6-17,
                             6-18,
                             6-19,
                             6-21,
                             6-22,
                             6-23,
                             6-24,
                             6-41,
                             6-42,
                             6-43,
                             6-44,
                             6-45,
                             6-46,
                             6-47,
                             6-48,
                             6-61,
                             6-62,
                             6-63,
                             6-64,
                             6-65,
                             6-66,
                             6-67,
                             6-68,
                             6-69,
                             6-70,
                             6-71,
                             6-72,
                             6-73,
                             6-74,
                             6-75,
                             6-76,
                             7-411,
                             16-434,
                             24-3,
                             App. B §§ 11A-20,
                             11A-22
23306-08-2018 8-7-2018       App. A §§ 2.102,
                             2.103
23308-08-2018 8-7-2018       App. A § 6.409
23309-08-2018 8-7-2018       App. A § 4.713
23377-09-2018 10-1-2018      35-56,
                             35-188
23383-09-2018 10-1-2018      2-321,
                             12-2
23429-09-2018 10-1-2018      35-56
23430-09-2018 9-25-2018      App. A § 6.507
23445-10-2018 10-16-2018     7-1,
                             7-47
23464-11-2018 11-6-2018      31-106
23477-12-2018 1-1-2019       7-1
23478-12-2018 12-4-2018      22-1,
                             22-158.4
                             App. A §§ 4.710,
                             4.711,
23495-12-2018 12-4-2018      4.712,
                             5.305,
                             6.506
                             2-147,
23503-12-2018 12-11-2018     2-148,
                             22-2
                             2.5-1,
                             2.5-3,
                             2.5-4,
                             2.5-8,
                             2.5-9,
                             2.5-22,
                             2.5-42,
                             2.5-44,
23516-12-2018 12-11-2018     2.5-45,
                             2.5-52,
                             2.5-54,
                             2.5-62,
                             2.5-64,
                             2.5-65,
                             2.5-72,
                             2.5-74,
                             2.5-75
                             3-102,
23517-12-2018 12-11-2018     3-103,
                             3-105,
                             3-106
2019/01 2019/06
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
23522-01-2019 1-15-2019      Adopting a per acre charge (Eagle Mountain ISD)
23523-01-2019 1-15-2019      Adopting a per acre charge (6601 Longvue Ave.)
23524-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
23525-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23526-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer)
23527-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23528-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23529-01-2019 3-14-2019      Amending the Zoning Ordinance
23530-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23531-01-2019 1-15-2019      Adopting a per acre charge (Crowley Deer Creek
                             Main - L Wastewater Collection Main)
23532-01-2019 1-15-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23533-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Special Purpose)
23534-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
23535-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (General Capital Projects 23536)
23536-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Aviation Gas Lease Capital Project)
23537-01-2019 1-29-2019      Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge for
                             oversizing a developer initiated water main
                             Adopting a per acre charge for the 3,666.82 acres
23538-01-2019 1-29-2019      serve by developer initiated sewer main project M-
                             673
                             Vacation (portions of Bellaire Drive North, Wabash
23539-01-2019 1-29-2019      Ave. and a portion of an alley in the Wade Hudson
                             Survey, Abst. No. 717 and the James Smith Survey,
                             Abst. No. 1383)
23540-01-2019 1-29-2019      Vacation (portion of an alley situated in Block
                             62, North Forth Worth Addition)
23541-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
23542-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23543-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23544-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23545-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23546-01-2019 1-29-2019      10-3
23547-01-2019 1-29-2019      Appointing Simon Gonzalez as Deputy Chief Judge
23548-01-2019 1-29-2019      City of Fort Worth Drainage Utility System Revenue
                             Refunding Bonds, Series 2019
23549-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Stormwater Utility)
23550-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Stormwater Debt Service)
23551-01-2019 1-29-2019      Repealing and terminating all designated
                             Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment Zones
                             Designating certain areas in the City of Fort
23552-01-2019 1-29-2019      Worth as Neighborhood Empowerment Reinvestment
                             Zones No. 1R - 6R
23553-01-2019 3-1-2019       Repealing and restating the Neighborhood and
                             Community Park Dedication Policy
23554-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
23555-01-2019 1-29-2019      Fund (Culture and Tourism DFW Revenue Share
                             Capital)
23556-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (General)
23557-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (Culture and Tourism Cap Projects)
23558-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (Multiple for FY 2018)
23559-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (General)
23560-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (General Capital)
23561-02-2019 2-5-2019       Annexation (18.818 acres out of the Jeremiah Ivy
                             Survey, Abst. No. 649, in Denton County AX-18-009)
                             Annexation (12.699 acres out of the James Smith
23562-02-2019 2-5-2019       Survey, Abst. No. 1149 in Denton County AX-18-
                             0010)
                             Annexation (13.251 acres out of the James Smith
23563-02-2019 2-5-2019       Survey, Abst. No. 1149 in Denton County (AX-18-
                             011)
23564-02-2019 2-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
                             Calling a General Election on May 4, 2019 for the
23565-02-2019 2-5-2019       purpose of election of the Mayor and City Council
                             members
23566-02-2019 5-28-19        App. A § 3.306
23567-02-2019 4-6-2019       Zoning
23568-02-2019 2-5-2019       Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone #97
                             1-6,
                             3-2,
                             7-44,
                             7-49,
                             7-64,
                             7-125,
                             7-169,
                             7-351,
                             7-416,
                             7-425,
                             7-434,
                             11-4,
                             12.5-123,
23569-02-2019 2-23-2019      13-4,
                             15-48.2,
                             16-15,
                             16-153,
                             16-181,
                             16-440,
                             16-474 (Repealed by Ord. 27902-08-2025),  
                             16-519  (Repealed by Ord. 27903-08- 2025),
                             26-4,
                             29-1,
                             29-3,
                             35-23,
                             35-187, App.
                             B § 11A-100
23570-02-2019 2-12-2019      Fund (Muni Airport Grants Federal)
23571-02-2019 2-12-2019      Joint Ordinance and ETJ release agreement between
                             the City of Willow Park and the City of Fort Worth
23572-02-2019 2-12-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23573-02-2019 2-12-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23574-02-2019 2-12-2019      Fund (General Capital Projects)
23575-02-2019 2-12-2019      Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone #98
23576-02-2019 4-13-2019      Zoning
                             7-68,
                             7-76,
                             7-77,
                             7-86,
                             7-91,
                             7-93,
                             7-94,
                             7-98,
                             7-100,
                             7-101,
                             7-102,
23577-03-2019 3-30-2019      7-102A,
                             7-102B,
                             7-103,
                             7-104,
                             7-105,
                             7-106,
                             7-108,
                             7-109,
                             7-110,
                             7-123,
                             7-124,
                             7-126, Repealing 7-99
23578-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
23579-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Como Community Center Project)
23580-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Cultural and Tourism DFW Revenue Share
                             Capital)
23581-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
23582-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23583-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23584-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23585-03-2019 6-8-2019       Zoning
                             App. A §§
23586-03-2019 4-13-2019      4.1203,
                             4.1305
                             App. A §§
23587-03-2019 4-13-2019      4.1000,
                             6.300
23588-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23589-03-2019 3-5-2019       Adopting the City of Fort Worth 2019 Comprehensive
                             Plan
23590-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project)
23591-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
23592-03-2019 3-5-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23593-03-2019 3-5-2019       Annexation (45.36 acres, Hiram Little Survey,
                             Abst. No. 930 in Tarrant County (AX-18-008))
23594-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Street Improvements Supplement)
23595-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Grants Operating State)
23596-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23597-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23598-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23599-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23600-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23601-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23602-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23603-03-2019 4-3-2019       7-1
                             Adopting a per acre charge for the 1,804/96 acres
23604-03-2019 3-19-2019      served by developer initiated sewer main project
                             CPN 02279
23605-03-2019 3-19-2019      Establishing pay rate adjustment for Municipal
                             Court Judges, Deputy Chief Judge, and Chief Judge
23606-03-2019 3-19-2019      Appointing substitute municipal court judges for 2
                             year term
23607-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (LVTrise Project of the PACS Dedication)
23608-03-2019 3-19-2019      Fund (General Capital Projects)
                             App. A §§ 4.100,
                             4.300,
                             4.301,
                             4.305,
                             4.407,
                             4.601,
                             4.603,
                             4.801,
                             4.803,
                             4.1201,
23609-03-2019 4-3-2019       4.1203,
                             5.100 ,
                             5.101,
                             5.106,
                             5.107,
                             5.111,
                             5.133,
                             5.141,
                             5.147,
                             5.148,
                             5.149,
                             5.150
23610-03-2019 5-16-2019      Zoning
23611-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
23612-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture)
23613-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Capital)
23614-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (Culture and Tourism Operating)
23615-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (Solid Waste)
23616-03-2019 3-26-2019      Fund (Solid Waste Capital Projects)
                             Annexation (53.397 acres and 4.394 acres, William
23617-03-2019 3-26-2019      Sample Survey, Abst. No. 1207, Denton County (AX-
                             18-0014))
                             Annexation (56.823 acres and 4.543 acres, William
23618-03-2019 3-26-2019      Sample Survey, Abst. No. 1207, Denton County (AX-
                             18-0014)
23619-03-2019 5-10-2019      Zoning
23620-03-2019 3-26-2019      Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 99
23621-03-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (Culture and Tourism 2% CY Hotel)
23622-04-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (Cultural and Tourism DFW Revenue Share)
23623-04-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (Public Events Capital Project)
23624-04-2019 4-2-2019       Vacation (portion of Kings Highway, situated in
                             the Lewis G. Tinsley Survey, Abst. No. 1523)
                             Vacating (Portion of Chapin Rd., County Rd. 1029,
23625-04-2019 4-2-2019       situated in the C.K. Gleason Survey, Abst. No.
                             559)
23626-04-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23627-04-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (the Botanic Garden Special Revenue)
23628-04-2019 4-2-2019       Fund (General Capital Projects)
23629-04-2019 5-4-2019       Zoning
23630-04-2019 4-9-2019       Fund (American Airlines ECFA Project of 2014 Bond
                             Program)
23631-04-2019 4-9-2019       Vacation (portion of Arbor Ave., situated in the
                             Edward Wilburn Survey, Abst. No 1679)
23632-04-2019 4-9-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23633-04-2019 4-9-2019       35-23
                             Annexation (48.558 acres, A. Castello Survey,
23634-04-2019 4-9-2019       Abst. No. 272, and the R.J. Ware Survey, Abst. No.
                             2008, Tarrant County (AX-19-002))
                             Annexation (12.419 acres, Willian Samples Survey,
23635-04-2019 4-9-2019       Abst. No.1207, and the W Zeckular Survey, Abst.
                             No. 1454, Denton County (AX-19-003))
                             Annexation (245.923 acres and 7.185 acres, J.F.
23636-04-2019 4-9-2019       Elliott Survey Abst. No. 493, John Bursey Survey
                             Abst. No. 128, and Nancey Casteel Survey Abst. No.
                             349, Tarrant County (AX-19-004))
23637-04-2019 6-22-2019      Zoning
23638-04-2019 4-9-2019       Annexation (21.5 acres, A. Albright Survey, Abst.
                             No 1849, Tarrant County (AX-19-005))
23639-04-2019 4-16-2019      Fund (PACS Gas Lease Capital Project)
23640-04-2019 4-16-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23641-04-2019 4-16-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23642-04-2019 4-16-2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23643-04-2019 6-8-2019       Zoning
23644-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (2018 Bond Program)
23645-05-2019 5-7-2019        
23646-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
23647-05-2019 12-25-19       App. A § 4.1308
                             App. A §§
23648-05-2019 6-6-2019       4.1203,
                             4.1300,
                             4.1302
23649-05-2019 6-20-2019      Zoning
23650-05-2019 5-7-2019       Authorizing issuance of tax notes
23651-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (2019 Tax Note Project)
23652-05-2019 5-7-2019       Issuance of the City of Fort Worth General Purpose
                             Bonds, Series 2019
23653-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (General Debt Service)
                             34th supplemental Ord., authorizing the issuance
23654-05-2019 5-7-2019       and sale of City of Fort Worth Water and Sewer
                             System Revenue Bonds, Series 2019
                             Amended and restated 32nd supplemental Ord.
23655-05-2019 5-7-2019       authorizing the sale and issuance of City of Fort
                             Worth Water & Sewer System Revenue Bonds, in one
                             or more series
                             2-148,
                             2-321,
                             9-1,
                             9-2,
                             9-3,
                             9-4,
                             9-5,
                             9-6,
                             9-100,
                             9-101,
                             9-102,
                             9-200,
                             9-201,
                             9-202,
                             9-203,
                             9-204,
                             9-205,
                             9-206,
                             9-207,
                             9-208,
                             9-300,
                             9-301,
                             9-302,
                             9-303,
                             9-304,
                             9-305,
23656-05-2019 6-1-2019       9-306,
                             9-307,
                             9-308,
                             9-309,
                             9-310,
                             9-311,
                             9-312,
                             9-313,
                             9-314,
                             9-315,
                             9-316,
                             9-317,
                             9-318,
                             9-400,
                             9-401,
                             9-402,
                             9-403,
                             9-404,
                             9-405,
                             9-406,
                             9-500,
                             9-501,
                             9-600,
                             9-601,
                             9-602,
                             9-603,
                             9-604,
                             9-605
                             Establishing new unit prices and methods for
23657-05-2019 6-1-2019       determining city participation in community
                             facilities agreements
23658-05-2019 5-7-2019       30-1
23659-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (2018 Transit Master Plan Implementation
                             Study Project)
23660-05-2019 5-7-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Bond 2019)
23661-05-2019 5-14-2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
23662-05-2019 5-14-2019      Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn
                             positions in the Police Department
23663-05-2019 5-14-2019      Fund (Police Department Budget of the Crime
                             Control and Prevention)
23664-05-2019 5-14-2019      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
23665-05-2019 6-8-2019       Zoning
23666-05-2019 5-21-2019      Fund (Sendera Ranch Boulevard and Diamonback Lane
                             Signal Improvement Project)
23667-05-2019 5-21-2019      Fund (Sendera Ranch Boulevard and Diamondback Lane
                             Signal Improvement Project)
23668-05-2019 6-6-2019       App. B, §
                             11A-29
23669-05-2019 5-21-2019      Joint Ordinance and Boundary Agreement
                             Vacation (portion of an alley, William Welch
                             Survey, Abst. No. 1644, of block 2, J.N. Brookers
23670-05-2019 5-21-2019      Subdivision of block 11, Field Welch addition, and
                             addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                             County)
23671-05-2019 5-21-2019      Fund (Municipal Parking)
23672-05-2019 5-21-2019      Fund (Municipal Parking Capital Project)
23673-05-2019 5-21-2019      Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 53rd
                             Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ord.
23674-05-2019 5-21-2019      Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport 54th
                             Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ord.
23675-05-2019 5-21-2019      Fund (2018 Bond Program)
                             Annexation (50.784 acres and 4.505 acres, W.N.
23676-05-2019 5-21-2019      Sample Survey, Abst. No. 1207, Denton County (AX-
                             18-006))
23677-05-2019 6-8-2019       Zoning
23678-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (2018 Bond Program)
                             31-62,
                             31-63,
                             31-81,
                             31-103,
23679-06-2019 6-16-2019      31-106,
                             31-131,
                             31-132,
                             31-133,
                             31-134
23680-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital Legacy)
23681-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (Transportation Impact Fee Capital)
23682-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (2018 Bond Program)
23683-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
23684-06-2019 6-4-2019       Fund (2014 Bond Program)
23685-06-2019 7-11-2019      Zoning
23686-06-2019 6-4-2019       7-1
                            
 
2019/06 2019/12
 
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
23687-
06-    6-11-2019 Fund (HUD 108 Loan)
2019
23688-
06-    6-11-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23689-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Fort Worth PID No. 7 Heritage)
2019
23690-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Fort Worth Public Improvement District 19 - Historic Camp Bowie)
2019
23691-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (West 7th Village Sidewalks Project)
2019
23692-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23693-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23694-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23695-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23696-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Fort Worth Public Improvement District 14 - Trinity Bluff)
2019
23697-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Specially Funded Capital Projects)
2019
23698-
06-    6-18-2019 Fund (Grants Capital Project State)
2019
23699-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23700-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Economic Incentives)
2019
23701-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Economic Incentives)
2019
23702-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Special Project)
2019
23703-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Cantrell Sansom Roadway Widening)
2019
23704-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Cantrell Sansom Roadway Widening)
2019
23705-
06-    6-25-2019 Amending Ord. 21011-10-2013 to clarify the center points and boundaries
2019
23706-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (CCPD Capital Projects)
2019
23707-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
                 35-58,
                 35-82,
23708-           35-84,
06-    6-25-2019 35-85,
2019             35-88,
                 35-91,
                 35-92,
                 35-93
23709-           Vacation (portion of S. Calhoun St. and E. Pennsylvania Ave., Peter T.
06-    6-25-2019 Welch Survey, Abst. No. 1643 of Tucker’s Addition, Tarrant County)
2019
23710-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23711-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23712-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23713-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23714-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23715-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water Impact Fee)
2019
23716-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (West Risinger Road Project)
2019
23717-
06-    8-29-2019 Zoning
2019
23718-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Grants Capital Project State)
2019
23719-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Park Dedication Fees, General Park Dedication)
2019
23720-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Muni Airport Grants Federal)
2019
23721-
06-    6-25-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23722-           Adding
08-    8-22-2019 12.5-348
2019
23723-           Fund (Public Safety Improvements Closed Project of the General Capital
08-    8-6-2019  Projects Close)
2019
23724-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (General Debt Service)
2019
23725-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (General Capital Projects Close)
2019
23726-
08-    8-6-2019  22-86
2019
23727-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (PARD Dedication Fees)
2019
23728-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (2014 Bond Program)
2019
23729-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
2019
23730-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23731-           Vacation (portion of an alley, John True Survey, Abst. No. 894 of Block
08-    8-6-2019  1, Town and County Village Shopping Center)
2019
23732-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23733-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23734-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23735-           Annexation (77.773 acres of land & 35.589 acres of right-of-way in
08-    8-6-2019  Denton Co.)
2019
23736-
08-    9-25-2019 Zoning
2019
23737-           App. A, §§
08-    9-8-2019  6.409,
2019             6.411
23738-           App. A, §
08-    9-8-2019  5.305
2019
23739-
08-    8-6-2019  Funds (PARD Dedication Fees)
2019
23740-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (2018 Bond Program)
2019
23741-
08-    8-6-2019  Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23742-
08-    8-13-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23743-
08-    8-13-2019 Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23744-
08-    8-13-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23745-
08-    8-13-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23746-
08-    9-28-2019 Zoning
2019
23747-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23748-           Vacation (portions of Dolores St., Nolin St., Garvey St. and alleys
08-    8-20-2019 located in Blocks B, C, D, E, F, G and K of Issaacs Fosters Addition,
2019             Felix G. Mulliken Survey Abst. 1045)
23749-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23750-
08-    8-20-2019 Funds (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23751-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23752-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23753-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23754-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23755-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23756-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23757-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (2018 Safe Routes to Schools Project)
2019
23758-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23759-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (2007 Critical Capital Projects)
2019
23760-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Street Improvements)
2019
23761-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (SH 121T Southwest Parkway)
2019
23762-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
2019
23763-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (Special Donations CAP Projects)
2019
23764-
08-    8-20-2019 Fund (FY 2019-2020 FW PID16 - Quail Valley)
2019
23765-
08-    10-3-2019 Zoning
2019
23766-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23767-
08-    8-27-2019 22-1
2019
23768-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23769-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23770-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23771-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23772-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23773-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23774-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23775-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23776-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 1 - Downtown)
2019
23777-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying assessments for FW PID 1 - Downtown
2019
23778-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 6 - Park Glen)
2019
23779-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying assessments for FW PID 6 - Park Glen
2019
23780-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (FY 2019-2020 FW PID 7 Heritage)
2019
23781-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying assessments for PID 7 Heritage
2019
23782-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 11 - Stockyards)
2019
23783-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments for PID 11 - Stockyards
2019
23784-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (FY 2019-2020 FW PID 12 Chapel Hill)
2019
23785-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments for PID 12 Chapel Hill
2019
23786-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 14 Trinity Bluff)
2019
23787-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments PID 14 Trinity Bluff
2019
23788-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 15 - Sun Valley)
2019
23789-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments PID 15 - Sun Valley Fund
2019
23790-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID - 19 Historic Camp Bowie)
2019
23791-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments FW PID - 19 Historic Camp Bowie
2019
23792-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (2019-2020 FW PID 20-East Lancaster)
2019
23793-
08-    8-27-2019 Levying Assessments PID 20-East Lancaster
2019
23794-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Aviation Endowment Gas Lease)
2019
23795-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Park System Endowment Gas Lease)
2019
23796-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Endowment Gas Lease)
2019
23797-
08-    8-27-2019 Fund (General Endowment Gas Lease)
2019
23798-
08-    10-3-19   Zoning
2019
23799-
09-    9-10-2019 (Repealed by Ord. 24030-02-2020)
2019
23800-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23801-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital)
2019
23802-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23803-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Harmon Road Design ROW Project)
2019
23804-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23805-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23806-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects Bond)
2019
23807-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23808-
09-    9-10-2019
2019
23809-
09-    9-10-2019
2019
23810-
09-    9-10-2019 Annexation (460.186 acres of land Denton County)
2019
23811- 10-24-    Adding App. A, §
09-    2019      4.408
2019
23812- 10-24-
09-    2019      Zoning
2019
23813-           Enacting the FY 2018-2019 year end budget adjustments in the General
09-    9-10-2019 Fund
2019
23814-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (General)
2019
23815-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Botanic Gardens)
2019
23816-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Botanic Gardens)
2019
23817-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Environmental Protection)
2019
23818-
09-    1-1-2020  35-56
2019
23819-
09-    10-1-2019 35-56
2019
23820-           2-321,
09-    10-1-2019 12-2; adding
2019             2-322
23821-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (General)
2019
23822-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (General Debt Service)
2019
23823-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (ITS Capital)
2019
23824-
09-    9-10-2019 Fund (Public Events Capital)
2019
23825-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
2019
23826-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (WRMC Museum Lot Project)
2019
23827-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Municipal Parking)
2019
23828-
09-    9-17-2019 Vacation (portions of Live Oak St., East 2nd St. and East 3rd St.)
2019
23829-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23830-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
2019
23831-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital)
2019
23832-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23833-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23834-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23835-
09-    9-17-2019 Adopting the FY 2020 Annual Budget
2019
23836-
09-    9-17-2019 Levy and collection of ad valorem tax
2019
23837-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Tourism PID)
2019
23838-
09-    9-17-2019 Levying Special assessment PID 18 - Tourism
2019
23839-
09-    9-25-2019 23-21
2019
23840-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23841-
09-    9-17-2019 Fund (2018 Bond Program)
2019
23842-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (2008 Street Improvement)
2019
23843-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Grants Operating)
2019
23844-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23845-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23846-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23847-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23848-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23849-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23850-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23851-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water Impact Fee)
2019
23852-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23853-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23854-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer)
2019
23855-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23856-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (PARD Dedication Fees)
2019
23857-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23858-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23859-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23860-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23861-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23862-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23863-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23864-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23865-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23866-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Street Improvements 2008)
2019
23867-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23868-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23869-           Negotiated settlement (ATMOS Cities Steering Committee and ATMOS Energy
09-    9-24-2019 Corp. Mid-Tex Division regarding the company's 2019 rate review)
2019
23870-           Adjusting the total number of authorized Civil Service positions in the
09-    10-1-2019 Fire Department by 14
2019
23871-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of Fire Protection
09-    10-1-2019 personnel in the Fire Department
2019
23872-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the Police
09-    10-1-2019 Department by adding 25 positions in the classification of police
2019             officer, 1 position in the classification of corporal/detective and
                 adding 12 positions in the classification of sergeant
23873-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of peace officer in the
09-    10-1-2019 police department
2019
23874-
09-    9-24-2019
2019
23875-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23876-
09-    9-24-2019 Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23877- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating State)
2019
23878- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23879- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23880- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Street Improvement)
2019
23881- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Special Purpose Fund - Resource Conservation Program Project)
2019
23882- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23883- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (General)
2019
23884-           12.5-336,
10-    1-1-2020  12.5-340
2019
23885- 12-22-
10-    2019      Zoning
2019
23886-           App. A, §§
10-    11-7-2019 4.100,
2019             4.403,
                 4.1304
23887- 10-15-
10-    2019      Fund (Multiple TIF Funds)
2019
23888- 10-15-
10-    2019      Annexation (19.384 acres of land, Wise County)
2019
23889- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23890- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23891- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (Programmable Project Business Application - IT)
2019
23892- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (Special Purpose)
2019
23893- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (Specially Funded Projects)
2019
23894- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (Municipal Airport Capital Project)
2019
23985-
10-    9-1-2019  Street name change from Se-Ha-Payak Road to Wat Road
2019
23896- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (2014 Bond Funds Timberland Boulevard Project)
2019
23897- 10-22-
10-    2019      Fund (2014 Bond Funds Silver Creek Road Project)
2019
23898- 11-28-
10-    2019      Zoning
2019
23899- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (Grant State Operating)
2019
23900- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (Grants Capital Project State)
2019
23901- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (General Gas Lease Capital Project)
2019
23902- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (General Capital Projects, Park Improvements Programmable Project)
2019
23903- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (Special Donations Capital Projects)
2019
23904- 10-29-
10-    2019      Fund (General Gas Lease Capital Project)
2019
23905- 12-22-
10-    2019      Zoning
2019
23906-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (State Asset Forfeiture)
2019
23907-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
2019
23908-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (General)
2019
23909-
11-    11-5-2019 Vacation (portion of Elizabethtown Cemetery Road)
2019
23910-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (Grants Capital Project State)
2019
23911-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (TIRZ#8 - Lancaster)
2019
23912-
11-    11-5-2019 Fund (TIRZ23921 -General Capital)
2019
23913-           Vacation (portion of an alley in William Welch Survey, Abs. No. 1644,
11-    11-5-2019 Southland Subdivision)
2019
23914-
11-    11-5-2019 Annexation (4.594 acres of land Tarrant County)
2019
23915- 12-22-
11-    2019      Zoning
2019
23916-
11-    11-5-2019 Joint Boundary Agreement with the City of New Fairview
2019
23917-           Fund (Adjusting the General Gund to reflect the reassignment of two
11-    10-1-2019 clerk positions with the responsibilities for the creation of
2019             Complaints in the Municipal Court)
23918- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (PID #8 - Camp Bowie)
2019
23919- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (PID #19 - Historic Camp Bowie)
2019
23920- 11-12-    Repealing 22-361, 22-362, 22-363, 22-364, 22-365, 22-366, 22-367, 22-
11-    2019      368, 22-369, 22-370, 22-371
2019
23921- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23922- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23923- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23924- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (2018 Bond Year 3 - Contract 7 Project)
2019
23925- 11-12-    Fund (2018 Bond Street Construction/Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
11-    2019      Project)
2019
23926- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23927- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (2018 Bond Year 3 - Contract 8 & 9 Project)
2019
23928- 11-12-    Fund (2018 Bond Street Construction/Reconstruction/Rehabilitation
11-    2019      Project)
2019
23929- 12-28-
11-    2019      Zoning
2019
23930- 11-21-    App. A, §
11-    2019      6.201
2019
23931- 11-12-
11-    2019      Fund (CFA Developer)
2019
                 31-1,
                 31-2,
                 31-3,
23932-           31-4,
11-    11-22-    31-5,
2019   2019      31-24,
                 31-42,
                 31-61,
                 31-62,
                 31-63; repealing 31-43
23933- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23934- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Capital)
2019
23935- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture)
2019
23936- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture)
2019
23937- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Treasury Asset Forfeiture Capital)
2019
23938- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Justice Asset Forfeiture Capital)
2019
23939- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (State Asset Forfeiture Capital)
2019
23940- 11-19-
11-    2019      Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23941- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (PARD Gas Lease Capital Project)
2019
23942- 11-19-
11-    2019      Vacation (portion of Windomere Street)
2019
23943- 11-19-
11-    2019      Vacation (portion of White Settlement Road)
2019
23944- 11-19-
11-    2019      Keller Haslet Culvert Pipe Rehab Project
2019
23945- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Stormwater Capital)
2019
23946- 11-19-
11-    2019      2-9
2019
23947- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23948- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (Lake Worth Gas Lease Capital Project)
2019
23949- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (General Capital Project)
2019
23950- 11-19-
11-    2019      Fund (General Capital Projects)
2019
23951- 11-19-
11-    2019      Zoning
2019
23952-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (CCPD Capital Projects)
2019
23953-
12-    12-3-2019 Canceling the Historic Site Tax Exemption for several properties
2019
23954-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23955-
12-    12-3-2019 Vacation (portion of West Lane)
2019
23956-
12-    12-3-2019 Vacation (portion Of Prince Court)
2019
23957-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23958-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23959-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23960-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23961-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23962-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Street Rehabilitation)
2019
23963-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (TIRZ - General Capital)
2019
23964-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Southside Medical District)
2019
23965-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23966-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23967-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Water Impact Fee)
2019
23968-
12-    12-3-2019 Fund (Sewer Impact Fee)
2019
23969-
12-    12-3-2019 Adopting the Standards of Care 2020 for Youth Programs
2019
23970- 12-29-
12-    2019      Zoning
2019
                 App. A, §§
23971- 12-11-    4.803,
12-    2019      4.1203,
2019             5.151,
                 9.101
23972- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23973- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23974- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants operating Other)
2019
23975- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23976- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23977- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23978- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Federal)
2019
23979- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23980- 12-14-
12-    2019      22-191
2019
23981- 12-18-    Adding
12-    2019      2-15
2019
23982- 12-10-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23983- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23984- 12-25-
12-    2019      7-109
2019
23985- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Grants Operating Other)
2019
23986- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (2014 Bond)
2019
23987- 12-17-    Vacation (portion of Lubbock Avenue and an alley located in the MJ
12-    2019      Arocha Survey)
2019
23988- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Commercial Paper)
2019
23989- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Water and Sewer Capital Projects)
2019
23990-           35-39,
12-    4-1-2020  35-56,
2019             35-61,
                 35-63
                 Adding
                 20-450,
                 20-451,
                 20-452,
                 20-453,
23991-           20-454,
12-    12-25-    20-455,
2019   2019      20-456,
                 20-457,
                 20-458,
                 20-459,
                 20-460,
                 20-461,
                 20-462
23992- 12-17-    2-240,
12-    2019      2-241,
2019             2-251
23993- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Stormwater Capital Projects)
2019
23994- 12-17-
12-    2019      Fund (Transportation Impact Fee)
2019
 
2020/01 - 2020/06
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.  Effective Description
          Date
23996-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
23997-01- 1-22-2020 16-135
2020
23998-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
23999-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24000-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24001-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24002-01- 1-14-2020 Vacation (16 ft. alley in blocks 5 and 10 Dagget's
2020                second addition)
24003-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24004-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24005-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24006-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24007-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24008-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24009-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24010-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24011-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24012-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24013-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24014-01- 1-14-2020 Appropriation
2020
24015-01- 1-14-2020 23-19
2020
24016-01- 1-14-2020
2020
24017-01- 1-14-2020 App. A, App. Map B.23, B.24
2020
24018-01- 3-6-2020  Zoning
2020
24019-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24020-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24021-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24022-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
                    17-1,
                    17-16,
                    17-17,
                    17-18,
                    17-19,
                    17-20,
                    17-21,
                    17-22,
                    17-46,
                    17-47,
                    17-48,
                    17-49,
                    17-50,
                    17-51,
                    17-52,
                    17-53,
                    17-65,
                    17-66,
                    17-67,
                    17-68,
                    17-69,
                    17-70,
                    17-71,
                    17-72,
                    17-86,
                    17-87,
24023-01- 2-2-2020  17-88,
2020                17-89,
                    17-90,
                    17-91,
                    17-92,
                    17-93,
                    17-94,
                    17-95,
                    17-96,
                    17-97,
                    17-98,
                    17-99,
                    17-100,
                    17-101,
                    17-102,
                    17-103,
                    17-104,
                    17-105,
                    17-106,
                    17-107,
                    17-108,
                    17-109,
                    17-110,
                    17-111,
                    17-112,
                    17-113,
                    17-114,
                    17-115
24024-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24025-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24026-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24027-01- 1-28-2020 Appropriation
2020
24028-01- 1-28-2020 Annexation (567.553 acres in the North Holbrook Survey,
2020                Abstract No, 647)
24029-01- 2-27-2020 Zoning
2020
                    2-9,
                    7-1,
                    7-47, 12.5-878 (Repealed by Ord. 26964-06-2024) ,
                    15-34, 20-112, Ch. 30, App.A,
                    31-107,
                    31-150, App. A, §§ 2.100,
                    2.101,
                    3.306,
                    3.404,
                    4.303,
                    4.402,
                    4.403,
                    4.404,
                    4.406,
                    4.710,
                    4.711,
                    4.712,
                    4.713,
                    4.1300,
                    4.1302,
                    4.1304, 
                    4.1305,
                    4.1306,
                    4.1307,
                    4.1308,
                    4.1309,
                    5.112,
                    5.137,
                    5.146,
                    5.202,
                    5.203,
                    5.120, 
                    5.305,
                    6.301,
                    6.302,
                    6.410,
                    6.414,
                    7.107,
                    9.101; adding
                    2-26,
                    2-27,
                    2-28,
                    2-29,
                    2-30,
                    2-31,
                    2-32,
                    2-33,
                    2-34,
                    2-35,
                    2-36,
                    2-37,
                    2-38,
                    2-100,
24030-02- 2-4-2020  2-101,
2020                2-102,
                    2-103,
                    2-104,
                    2-105,
                    2-106,
                    2-107,
                    2-108,
                    2-109,
                    2-119,
                    2-120,
                    2-121,
                    2-122,
                    2-123,
                    2-124,
                    2-125,
                    2-126,
                    2-127,
                    2-128,
                    2-129,
                    2-130,
                    2-131,
                    2-132,
                    2-133,
                    2-134,
                    2-135,
                    2-136,
                    2-137,
                    2-138,
                    2-139,
                    2-140,
                    2-141,
                    2-142,
                    2-143,
                    2-144,
                    2-145,
                    2-150,
                    2-151,
                    2-152,
                    2-153,
                    2-154,
                    2-155; repealing
                    2-26, 2-27, 2-28, 2-29,
                    2-118,
                    2-131, 2-132, 2-133, 2-134, 2-135, 2-176, 2-177,
                    2-301, 2-302, 2-303,
                    2-310, 2-311, 2-312, 2-313,
                    3-16, 3-17, 3-19,
                    3-25,
                    13-21, 13-22, 13-23,
                    19-16, 19-17, 19-18,
                    24-36, 24-37, 24-38,
                    27-21, 27-22, 27-23,
                    35-2,
                    App. B, §§ 11A-1, 11A-2, 11A-3, 11A-4
24031-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24032-02- 2-4-2020  Changing the name of "Bridge to Bridgewood/IH 30" to
2020                "Dairy Lane"
24033-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24034-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24035-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24036-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24037-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24038-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24039-02- 2-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24040-02- 3-19-2020 Zoning
2020
24041-02- 2-27-2020 Zoning
2020
24042-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24043-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24044-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24045-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24046-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24047-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24048-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24049-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24050-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24051-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24052-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24053-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24054-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24055-02- 3-19-2020 Zoning
2020
24056-02- 2-18-2020 Bond
2020
24057-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24058-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24059-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24060-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24061-02-           35-57,
2020      4-1-2020  35-57.4,
                    35-57.5
24062-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24063-02- 2-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24064-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24065-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24066-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24067-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24068-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24069-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24070-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24072-03- 3-3-2020  Annexation (18.46 Acres of land in the Heirs of Benjamin
2020                Thomas Survey, Abstract No. 1497)
24073-03- 4-10-2020 Zoning
2020
24074-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24075-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24076-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24077-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24078-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24079-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24080-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24081-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24082-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24083-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24084-03- 3-3-2020  Appropriation
2020
24085-03- 3-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24086-03- 3-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24087-03- 3-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24088-03- 3-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
                    Authorizing the City Manager to execute all contracts
                    and any other legal instruments necessary for conducting
24089-03-           city business for the declaration of public health
2020      3-19-2020 emergency order by Mayor Betsy Price on March 13, 2020
                    as may be continued, amended or renewed; temporarily
                    suspending §
                    2-9 of the City Code.
24090-03- 3-26-2020 Adding
2020                11.5-2.5 
24091-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24092-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24093-04- 4-7-2020  Appointing Municipal Judges
2020
24094-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24095-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24096-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24097-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24098-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24099-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24100-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24101-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24102-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24103-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24104-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24105-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24106-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24107-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24108-04- 4-7-2020  This number was not used
2020
24109-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24110-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24111-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24112-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24113-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24114-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24115-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24116-04- 4-7-2020  Vacation (Cobb Street between lots 1,2 and 3, Block A,
2020                North Glenwood Addition)
24117-04-           Vacation (public access easement located in the W. Wheat
2020      4-7-2020  Survey, Abstract No. 1647 and the W. Little Survey,
                    Abstract No. 945)
24118-04-           Vacation (public access easement located in the
2020      4-7-2020  Greenberry Overton Survey, Abstract No. 972 and the
                    Greenberry Overton Survey, Abstract No. 1185)
24119-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24120-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24121-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24122-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24123-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24124-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24125-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24126-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24127-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24128-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24129-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24130-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24131-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24132-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24133-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24134-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24135-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24136-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24137-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24138-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24139-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24140-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24141-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24142-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24143-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24144-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24145-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24146-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24147-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24148-04- 6-4-2020  Zoning
2020
24149-04- 6-4-2020  Zoning
2020
24150-04- 4-7-2020  Bond
2020
24151-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24152-04- 4-7-2020  Bond
2020
24153-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24154-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24155-04- 4-7-2020  Bond
2020
24156-04- 4-7-2020  Bond
2020
24157-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24158-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24159-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
24160-04- 4-7-2020  Appropriation
2020
                    Amending Ordinance No. 24089-03-2020 Authorizing the
                    City Manager to execute all contracts and any other
24161-04-           legal instruments necessary for conducting city business
2020      4-7-2020  for the declaration fo public health emergency order by
                    Mayor Betsy Price on March 13, 2020 as may be continued,
                    amended or renewed; temporarily suspending §
                    2-9 of the City Code.
24162-04- 4-7-2020  DFW Airport 57th Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ordinance
2020
                    Approving Resolution No. 2020-03-065 of the DFW
24163-04- 4-7-2020  International Airport board which amends Chapters 0-
2020                5 and 8 of the DFW International Airport Board's Code of
                    Rules and Regulations, as amended
24164-04- 4-7-2020
2020
24165-04- 4-7-2020
2020
24166-04- 4-29-2020 2-9
2020
24167-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24168-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24169-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24170-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24171-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24172-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24173-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24174-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24175-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24176-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24177-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24178-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24179-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24180-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24181-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
27482-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24183-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24185-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24186-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24187-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24188-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24189-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24190-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24191-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24192-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24193-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24194-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24195-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24196-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24197-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24198-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24199-05- 5-5-2020  Renewing Tax Abatement Zone Number 90
2020
24200-05- 6-4-2020  Zoning
2020
24201-05- 5-5-2020  Tax Notes
2020
24202-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
                    Suspending the portion of Section 2.6 of Resolution
24203-05-           4837-08-2017 and Section 4 of Ordinance No. 23838-09-
2020                2019 providing that Tourism PID assessments are to be
                    collected in the same manner as hotel occupancy tax
                    until September 1, 2020.
24204-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24205-05- 5-5-2020
2020
24206-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24207-05- 5-5-2020  Appropriation
2020
24208-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24209-05-           Adopting a per acre charge for the 16,010.97 acres
2020      5-19-2020 served by city initiated sewer main project located at
                    5000 Park Dr.
24210-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24211-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24212-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
                    5-1,
                    5-2,
                    5-3,
                    5-16,
24213-05-           5-17,
2020      5-28-2020 5-18,
                    5-19,
                    5-20,
                    5-31,
                    5-32,
                    5-33
24214-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24215-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24216-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24217-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24218-05- 5-19-2020 Appropriation
2020
24219-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24220-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24211-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24222-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24223-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24224-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24225-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24226-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24227-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24228-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24229-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24230-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24230-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24233-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24234-06- 6-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24235-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24236-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24237-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24238-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24239-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24240-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24241-06- 6-25-2020 22-86
2020
24242-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24243-06- 6-16-2020 Changing the name of a portion of Bethune Street to RW
2020                Bivens Lane
24244-06- 6-16-2020 Changing the name of a portion of Calumet Street to
2020                Pollard-Smith Avenue
24245-06- 6-16-2020 Changing the name of a portion on Kutman Court to Sayles
2020                Trail
24246-06- 6-16-2020 Vacation (NW Fourth Street in the A. Gouhenant Survey,
2020                Abstract No. 582)
24247-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24248-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24249-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24250-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24251-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24252-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24253-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24254-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24255-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24256-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24257-06- 6-16-2020 Appropriation
2020
24258-06- 9-24-2020 Zoning
2020
24259-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24260-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24261-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24262-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24263-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24264-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24265-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24266-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24267-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24268-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24269-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24270-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24271-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24272-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24273-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24274-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24275-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24276-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24277-06-           Annexation (94.691 acres of land and appx. 1.886 acres
2020      6-23-2020 of land right- of-way out of the Antonio Fenandez
                    Survey, Abstract No. 506, Tarrant County)
24278-06- 6-23-2020 App. A, § 3.506
2020
24279-06- 6-23-2020 Zoning
2020
24280-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24281-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24282-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
24283-06- 6-23-2020 Appropriation
2020
 
2020/06 - 2020/12
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
24284-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24285-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24286-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24287-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24288-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24289-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24290-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24291-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24292-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24293-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24294-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24295-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24296-           Adopting a per acre charge for the 11,723.11 acres served by Developer and
08-    8-4-2020  City initiated sewer main project for Southfork Estates
2020
24297-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24298-           Extinguishing a 15-foot wide alley in lots 17-20 and 1-4 of Block 2 of
08-    8-4-2020  Burch-Hill Addition
2020
24299-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24300-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24301-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24302-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24303-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24304-           Designating a certain area as Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number One
08-    8-4-2020  Hundred
2020
24305-
08-    9-24-2020 Zoning
2020
24306-           Adopting a per acre charge for the 22,122.56 acres served by City initiated
08-    8-4-2020  sewer main project Crowley Relief Interceptor M-325 for Village Creek Basin
2020             Parts 1&2
24307-           Adopting a per acre Charge for the 986.99 acres served by city initiated
08-    8-4-2020  sewer main project Crowley Relief Interceptor M-325 for Village Creek Basin
2020             Part 3
24308-
08-    8-4-2020  Appropriation
2020
24309-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24310-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24311-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24312-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24313-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24314-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24315-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24316-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24317-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24318-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24319-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24320-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24321-
08-    8-11-2020 Not used
2020
24322-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24323-
08-    8-11-2020 Not used
2020
24324-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24325-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24326-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24327-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24328-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24329-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24330-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24331-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24332-
08-    9-24-2020 Zoning
2020
24333-
08-    8-11-2020 Extinguishing a portion of Windowmere Street in the C.S. De Volls Addition
2020
24334-
08-    8-11-2020 Appropriation
2020
24335-
08-    8-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24336-
08-    8-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24337-
08-    9-24-2020 Zoning
2020
24338-
08-    8-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
24339-
08-    8-18-2020 Appropriation
2020
                 7-1,
24340-           7-440,
08-    9-1-2020  7-441,
2020             7-442,
                 7-443
24341-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24342-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24343-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24344-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24345-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24346-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24347-           Providing for the retraction of certain boundary limits of the City of Fort
08-    8-25-     Worth, providing for the disannexation of a certain 59.62 acres of land out
2020   2020`     of the G.W. Shambling Survey, Abstract 1191 and Lewis Medlin Survey
                 Abstract No 830 Denton County
24348-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24349-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24350-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24351-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24352-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24353-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24354-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24355-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24356-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 1
2020
24357-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24358-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 6
2020
24359-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24360-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 7
2020
24361-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24362-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 11
2020
24363-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24364-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 12
2020
24365-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24366-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 14
2020
24367-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24368-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 15
2020
24369-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24370-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 18
2020
24371-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24372-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 19
2020
24373-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24374-
08-    8-25-2020 Levying Assessments for PID No. 20
2020
24375-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24376-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24377-
08-    8-25-2020 Appropriation
2020
24378-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24379-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24380-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24381-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24382-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24383-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24384-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24385-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24386-           Approving a Service and Assessment plan update for the Fort Worth PID No.
09-    9-1-2020  16 (Walsh Ranch/Quail Valley)
2020
24387-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24388-
09-    9-1-2020  Appropriation
2020
24389-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24390-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24391-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24392-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24393-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24394-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24395-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24396-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24397-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24398-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24399-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24400-
09-    9-15-2020 DFW International Airport 58th Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ordinance
2020
24401-           Annexation (64.57 acres in the Archibald Robinson Survey Abstract No. 1119
09-    9-15-2020 and the Allen Henderson Survey, Abstract No. 596 in Denton County Texas)
2020
24402- 12-23-
09-    2020      Zoning
2020
24403- 10-15-
09-    2020      20-451
2020
24404-
09-    10-1-2020 7-1
2020
24405-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24406-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24407-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24408-
09-    9-15-2020 Appropriation
2020
24409-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24410-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24411-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24412-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24413-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24414-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24415-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24416-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24417-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24418-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24419-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24420-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24421-           Adjusting the total number of Authorized sworn positions in the Police
09-    10-1-2020 Department
2020
24422-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of Peace officer in the
09-    10-1-2020 Police Department
2020
24423-
09-    9-22-2021 Appropriation
2020
24424-           Adjusting the total number of civil service positions in the Fire
09-    10-1-2020 Department
2020
24425-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of Fire protection personnel
09-    10-1-2020 in the Fire Department
2020
24426-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24427-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24428-
09-              Not used
2020
24429-
09-    9-22-2020 Levying Assessments in FW PID No. 20
2020
24430-           Vacation (10 foot wide alley in the Daniel Dulany Survey, Abstract No 411,
09-    9-22-2020 Block 2, Walter Willi Addition)
2020
24431-           Vacation (16 foot wide Alley in the J. Abstract No 50, located in Block 7,
09-    9-22-2020 Prospect Heights Addition)
2020
24432-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24433-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24434-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24435-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24436-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24437-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24438-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24439-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24440-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24441-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24442-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24443-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24444-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24445-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24446-
09-    9-22-2020 Adopting the Budget and 5 year Capital Improvement plan
2020
24447-
09-    9-22-2020 Levying Ad Valorem Tax
2020
24448-           7-1,
09-    4-1-2021  29-1
2020
24449-
09-    4-1-2021  2-321
2020
24450-
09-    10-1-2020 35-56
2020
24451-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24452-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24453-           Authorizing the sale of City of Fort Worth Drainage Utility System Revenue
09-    9-22-2020 Refunding and Improvement Bonds
2020
24454-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24455-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24456-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
                 31-1,
24457-           31-5,
09-    9-22-2020 31-6,
2020             31-62,
                 31-63
24458-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24459-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24460-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24461-
09-    9-22-2020 Appropriation
2020
24462- 12-18-
09-    2020      Zoning
2020
24463- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24464- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24465- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24466- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24467- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24468- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24469- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24470- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24471- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24472- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24473- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24474- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24475- 10-20-
10-    2020      22-86
2020
24476- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24477- 10-20-
10-    2020      Approving a negotiated settlement
2020
24478- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24479- 10-20-    Adopting a Per Acre Charge for 5,009.46 acres located near 2544 Whispering
10-    2020      Pines Dr.
2020
24480- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24481- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24482- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24483- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24484- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24485- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24486- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24487- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24488- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24489- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24490- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24491- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24492- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24493- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24494-
10-    1-31-2021 Zoning
2020
24495- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24496- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24497- 10-20-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24498- 10-27-
10-    2020      22-86
2020
24499- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24500- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24501- 10-27-
10-    2020      Adopting a per acre charge for 993.1 acres located at 10800 Chapin Rd.
2020
24502- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24503- 10-27-    Adopting a per acre charge for 298.38 acres located at 12200 Old
10-    2020      Weatherford Rd.
2020
24504- 10-27-
10-    2020      35-56
2020
24505- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24506- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24507- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24508- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24509- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24510- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24511- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24512- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24513- 10-27-
10-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24514- 11-15-
11-    2020      7-47
2020
24515- 11-10-
11-    2020      Approving Res.2020-09-198 of the DFW International Airport Board
2020
24516- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24517- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24518- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24519-           Annexation (85.967 acres out of the A King Survey, Abstract No. 710, the W.
11-    11-10-    Sample Survey, Abstract No 1207, the L Butler Survey, Abstract No 64, the C
2020   2020      Perry Survey Abstract No 1031 and the A Robertson Survey, Abstract No 1553
                 in Denton County Texas)
24520-
11-    1-31-2021 Zoning
2020
24521- 11-10-
11-    2020      Adopting a per acre charge for 11,036.83 acres located at 10525 McCart Ave
2020
24522- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24523- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24524- 11-10-
11-    2020      Adopting a revision to the 2016 Master Thoroughfare Plan
2020
24525- 11-10-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24526- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24527- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24528- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24529-           Prohibiting certain activities in certain area in connection with
11-    12-1-2020 activities related to the Wrangler National Finals Rodeo (expires 12 noon
2020             December 13,2020)
24530- 11-17-    Annexation (132.362 acres out of the JD Kyle Survey, Abstract No 792 and
11-    2020      the C, Jackson Survey, Abstract No. 54 and approximately 3.875 acres of ROW
2020             out of the JC Lyle Survey, Abstract No 792 in Parker County)
24531-
11-    3-4-2020  Zoning
2020
24532-           12.5-851,
11-    1-1-2021  12.5-856,
2020             12.5-858
24533-           12.5-800,
11-    1-1-2021  12.5-844
2020
                 20-366,
                 20-367,
                 20-368,
24534-           20-369,
11-    1-1-2021  20-370,
2020             20-371,
                 20-372,
                 20-373,
                 20-374,
                 20-375
24535- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24536- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24537- 11-17-
11-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24538-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24539-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24540-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24541-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24542-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24543-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24544-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24545-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24546-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24547-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24548-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24549-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24550-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24551-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24552-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24553-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24554-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24555-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24556-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24557-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24558-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24559-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24560-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24561-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24562-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24563-
12-    12-1-2020 Adopting a per acre charge for 8053 acres near 1464 Archway Ct.
2020
24564-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for a development initiated 16 in
12-    12-1-2020 Westside V Water main to serve Morningstar Development and surrounding
2020             areas
24565-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for city initiated 30 inch Northside
12-    12-1-2020 II Water Main to serve identified wholesale customer cities and surrounding
2020             areas
24566-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for city initiated 16 inch Westside V
12-    12-1-2020 Water Main located at 1129 FM 3325
2020
24567-           Adopting a water main capacity charge for city initiated V Water
12-    12-1-2020 Transmission Main located at 1120 FM 3325
2020
24568-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24569-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24570-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24571-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24572-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24573-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24574-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24575-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24576-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24577-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24578-           Vacation (public access easement and a portion of an alley located
12-    12-1-2020 respectively in the SG Jennings Survey, Abstract No. 844, Cook Children’s
2020             Medical Center and Block 8, Grandview Addition)
24579-           Amending Ch. 12.5, Art. IV, Appendix A, Municipal Setting Designation Sites
12-    12-9-2020 in Fort Worth
2020
24580-
12-    3/4/2021  Zoning
2020
24581-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24582-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24583-
12-    12-1-2020 Appropriation
2020
24584-           11-1,
12-    1-1-2021  11-2,
2020             11-3,
                 11-4
24585-
12-    1-1-2021  7-1
2020
24586- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24587- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24588- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24589- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24590- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24591- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24592- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24593- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24594- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24595- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24596- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24597- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24598- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24599- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24600- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24601- 12-15-    Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge for a developer initiated 14-inch
12-    2020      Northside II Water Transmission main to serve McKelvey - Cole developments
2020             located at the intersection of FE 156 and Intermodal Parkway
24602- 12-15-    Vacation (a portion of Elizabeth Cemetery Road, in the A. Henderson Survey,
12-    2020      Abstract No. 596)
2020
24603- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24604- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24605- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24606- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24607- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24608- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24609- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24610- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24611- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24612- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24613- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24614- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24615- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24616- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24617- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24618- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24619- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24620- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24621- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24622- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24623- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24624- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24625- 12-15-    Adopting the Standards of care for 2021 for youth programs offered by the
12-    2020      city
2020
24626- 12-15-    Annexation (29.867 acres of land out of the Jose Chirino Survey, Abstract
12-    2020      No. 265 and the Thomas Logan Survey, Abstract No. 1797)
2020
24627- 12-15-
12-    2020      Annexation (29.2358 acres of land in the Josiah Walker Survey)
2020
24628- 12-15-
12-    2020
2020
24629- 12-15-
12-    2020      City of Fort Worth Tax notes, series 2021A, $74,000,000
2020
24630- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24631- 12-15-
12-    2020      City of Fort Worth Tax notes, series 2021B, $26,000,000
2020
24632- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24633- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24634- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24635- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
24636- 12-15-
12-    2020      Appropriation
2020
 
2021/01 - 2021/06
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
24637-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24638-
01-    1-12-2021 22-86
2021
24639-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24640-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24641-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24642-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24643-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24644-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24645-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24646-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24647-           Vacation (an excess portion of Missouri Ave. in the Peter T Welch
01-    1-12-2021 Survey, Abstract No. 1643 and in the Elizabeth Jones Survey,
2021             Abstract No. 839, located in Lot 1R-1, Block 1 Alford and Veal’s
                 Addition)
24648-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24649-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24650-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24651-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24652-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24653-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24654-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24655-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24656-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24657-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24658-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24659-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24660-
01-    1-12-2021 Not used
2021
24661-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24662-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24663-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24664-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24665-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24666-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24667-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24668-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24669-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24670-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24671-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24672-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24673-
01-    1-12-2021 Appropriation
2021
24674-
01-    3-27-2021 Zoning
2021
24675-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24676-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24677-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24678-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24679-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24680-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24681-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24682-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24683-           Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge for a developer initiated 24
01-    1-26-2021 inch Southside III water Transmission Main
2021
24684-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24685-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24686-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24687-
01-    1-26-2021 Ordering a General Election and Runoff if needed
2021
24688-           Approving an amended and restated service and assessment plan for
01-    1-26-2021 PID 17 (Rock Creek Ranch)
2021
24689-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24690-
01-    1-26-2021 Appropriation
2021
24691-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24692-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24693-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24694-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24695-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24696-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24697-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24698-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24699-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24700-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24701-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24702-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24703-
02-    2-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24704-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24705-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24706-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24707-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24708-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24709-           2-84,
02-    2-23-2021 2-85,
2021             2-86,
                 2-87
24710-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24711-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24712-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24713-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24714-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24715-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24716-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24717-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24718-           Directing publication of notice if intention to issue combination
02-    2-23-2021 tax and revenue certificates of obligation
2021
24719-
02-    2-23-2021 2-9
2021
24720-
02-    2-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24721-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24722-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24723-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24724-
03-    3-2-2021  Appointing substitute municipal judges
2021
24725-
03-    3-2-2021  Adopting a water main capacity charge
2021
24726-
03-    3-2-2021  Adopting a water main capacity charge
2021
24727-
03-    3-2-2021  Adopting a water main capacity charge
2021
24728-           Vacation (Extinguishing a portion of Mohawk Dr. and all of Cook
03-    3-2-2021  Dr.)
2021
24729-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24730-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24731-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24732-
03-    3-2-2021  Adopting the City of Fort Worth 2021 Comprehensive Plan
2021
24733-
03-    7-2-2021  Zoning
2021
24734-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24735-
03-    3-2-2021  Appropriation
2021
24736-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24737-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24738-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24739-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24740-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24741-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24742-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24743-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24744-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24745-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24746-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24747-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24748-
03-    3-9-2021  Appropriation
2021
24749-
03-    3-9-2021  Approving FY2020 CCPD budget amendment
2021
                 Increasing appropriations in the police department line item of
24750-           the crime control and prevention district fund by $671,159;
03-    3-9-2021  reducing budgeted contribution to fund balance line item by the
2021             same amount for funding costs through the end of FY2021 for adding
                 10 sergeant positions
24751-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the
03-    3-13-2021 police department
2021
24752-
03-    3-31-2021 23-8
2021
24753-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24754-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24755-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24756-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24757-
03-    3-23-2021 Joint boundary agreement with New Fairview
2021
24758-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24759-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24760-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24761-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24762-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24763-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24764-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24765-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24766-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24767-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24768-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24769-
03-    3-23-2021 Appropriation
2021
24770-
03-    7-2-2021  Zoning
2021
24771-           Increasing receipts and appropriations in the Fort Worth Public
03-    4-6-2021  Involvement District 6-Park Glen, in the amount of $111,941, from
2021             available unreserved fund balance for the purpose of funding
                 midyear adjustments
24772-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24773-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24774-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24775-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24776-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24777-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24778-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24779-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24780-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24781-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24782-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24783-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24784-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24785-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24786-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24787-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24788-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24789-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24790-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24791-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24792-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24793-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24794-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24795-
04-    4-6-2021  Appropriation
2021
24796-           Levying special assessments for the costs of certain improvement
04-    4-13-2021 and services benefitting certain additional hotel properties in
2021             PID 18 - Tourism
24797-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24798-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24799-
04-    4-13-2021 Issuing combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation
2021
24800-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24801-           37th supplement ordinance - water and sewer system revenue
04-    4-13-2021 refunding and improvement bonds
2021
24802-           Amended and restated 32nd supplemental ordinance authorizing the
04-    4-13-2021 issuance of water and sewer system revenue refunding bonds
2021
24803-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24804-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24805-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24806-
04-    4-13-2021 Issuing general purpose refunding and improvement bonds
2021
24807-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24808-
04-    4-13-2021 Issuing general purpose refunding bonds
2021
24809-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24810-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24811-
04-    4-13-2021 Issuing tax notes
2021
24812-
04-    4-13-2021 Appropriation
2021
24813-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24814-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24815-
04-    4-20-2021 2-12
2021
24816-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24817-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24818-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24819-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24820-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24821-
04-    4-20-2021 Appropriation
2021
24822-
04-    4-20-2021 Annexation (242.279 acres)
2021
24823-
04-    8-5-2021  Zoning
2021
24824-           22-361,
04-    4-25-2021 22-362,
2021             22-363,
                 22-364
24825-
04-    4-25-2021 22-159
2021
24826-
05-    5-4-2021  Appropriation
2021
24827-
05-    5-4-2021  Appropriation
2021
24828-
05-    5-4-2021  Appropriation
2021
24829-
05-    5-4-2021  Appropriation
2021
24830-
05-    5-11-2021 2-9
2021
24831-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24832-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24833-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24834-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24835-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24836-
05-    5-11-2021 Appropriation
2021
24837-
05-    11-1-2021 Zoning
2021
24838-
05-    5-27-2021 App. A, § 6.302
2021
24839-
05-    5-27-2021 12.5-658
2021
24840-
05-    5-18-2021 Water main capacity charge
2021
24841-
05-    5-18-2021 Water main capacity charge
2021
24842-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24843-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24844-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24845-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24846-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24847-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24848-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24849-
05-    5-18-2021 59th supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
2021
24850-
05-    5-18-2021 60th supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
2021
24851-
05-    5-18-2021 61st supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
2021
24852-
05-    5-18-2021 62nd supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
2021
24853-
05-    5-18-2021 Zoning
2021
24854-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24855-
05-    5-18-2021 Appropriation
2021
24856-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24857-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24858-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24859-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24860-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24861-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24862-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24863-
06-    6-8-2021  Vacation (alley in Block 27, Polytechnic Heights Addition)
2021
24864-           Vacation (portion of Morphy St. and alley in Block 79, Highlands
06-    6-8-2021  to Glenwood)
2021
24865-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24866-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24867-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24868-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24869-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24870-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24871-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24872-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24873-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24874-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24875-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24876-
06-    6-8-2021  Approving negotiated settlement agreement - CoServe Gas Ltd.
2021
24877-
06-    6-8-2021  CCPD appropriation
2021
24878-
06-    6-8-2021  Appropriation
2021
24879-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24880-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24881-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24882-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24883-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24884-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
                 3-23,
                 3-280,
24885-           3-281,
06-    7-2-2021  3-282,
2021             3-283,
                 3-284,
                 3-285
24886-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24887-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24888-
06-    6-22-2021 Water main capacity charge - Westside III Live Oak Creek
2021
24889-
06-    6-22-2021 Water main capacity change - Northside II Northlink - Wilson
2021
24890-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24891-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24892-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24893-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24894-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24895-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24896-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24897-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24898-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24899-
06-    6-22-2021 Joint with City of Crowley - adjusting city limit boundaries
2021
24900-
06-    6-22-2021 Vacation (portion of alley in Block D, WB Tuckers Addition)
2021
24901-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24902-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24903-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24904-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24905-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24906-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24907-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24908-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24909-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24910-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24911-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24912-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24913-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24914-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24915-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24916-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24917-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24918-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24919-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24920-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24921-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24922-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24923-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24924-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24925-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24926-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24927-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24928-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24929-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24930-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24931-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24932-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24933-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24934-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24935-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24936-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24937-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24938-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24939-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24940-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24941-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24942-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24943-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24944-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24945-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24946-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24947-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24948-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24949-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24950-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24951-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24952-
06-    6-22-2021 Zoning
2021
24953-           Increase estimated receipts and appropriations in Grants
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation Fund
2021
24954-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24955-
06-    6-22-2021 Appropriation
2021
24956-
06-    6-22-2021 Joint with City of Aledo - ETJ boundary adjustment
2021
 
2021/06 - 2021/12
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.    Effective Description
No.     Date
24957-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24958-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24959-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24960-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24961-  8-3-2021  Joint boundary agreement - River Oaks, Castleberry ISD
08-2021
24962-  8-3-2021  Vacation (unnamed portion of Prescriptive ROW)
08-2021
24963-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24964-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24965-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24966-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24967-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24968-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24969-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24970-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24971-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24972-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24973-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24974-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24975-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24976-  8-3-2021  Annexation (45.949)
08-2021
24977-  8-3-2021  Annexation (121.53)
08-2021
24978-  8-3-2021  Appropriation
08-2021
24979-  8-3-2021  Annexation (197.754)
08-2021
24980-  8-3-2021  Zoning
08-2021
24981-  9-2-2021  Correct Zoning Ordinance 23736-08-2019
08-2021
24982-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24983-  8-10-2021 Vacation (portions of Elizabeth Town Cemetery Road and Old
08-2021           Litsey Road)
24984-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24985-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24986-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24987-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24988-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24989-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24990-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24991-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24992-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24993-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24994-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24995-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24996-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24997-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24998-  8-10-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
24999-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25000-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25001-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25002-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25003-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25004-  8-17-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25005-  8-17-2021 TARZ No. 101
08-2021
25006-  8-17-2021 Zoning
08-2021
25007-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25008-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25009-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25010-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25011-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25012-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25013-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25014-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25015-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25016-  8-24-2021 Vacation (portion of an alley in Block 3, JN Brookers
08-2021           Subdivision of Block 11 Fields Welch Addition)
25017-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25018-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25019-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25020-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25021-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25022-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25023-  8-24-2021 Appropriation
08-2021
25024-  8-24-2021 Zoning
08-2021
25025-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25026-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25027-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25028-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25029-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25030-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25031-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25032-  9-14-2021 Water main capacity charge
09-2021
25033-  9-14-2021 Water main capacity charge
09-2021
25034-  9-14-2021 Water main capacity charge
09-2021
25035-  10-1-2021 35-56
09-2021
25036-  9-14-2021 Annexation (3.805 acres)
09-2021
25037-  9-14-2021 Vacation (50' wide Tarrant Co Road easement)
09-2021
25038-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25039-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25040-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25041-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25042-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25043-  9-14-2021 Franchise to Universal Gas
09-2021
25044-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25045-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25046-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25047-  9-14-2021 Zoning
09-2021
25048-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25049-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25050-  9-14-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
                  Approve negotiated settlement and establish a maximum
25051-  9-21-2021 permitted rate and charges that Atmos Energy Corporation dba
09-2021           Atmos Energy Corporation, Mid-Tex Division may assess
                  customers in the City of Fort Worth
25052-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25053-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25054-  9-21-2021 Water main capacity charge
09-2021
25055-  9-21-2021 31-1
09-2021
25056-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25057-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25058-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25059-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25060-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25061-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25062-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25063-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25064-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25065-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25066-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25067-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25068-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25069-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25070-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25071-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25072-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25073-  9-21-2021 FY 2022 budget adoption
09-2021
25074-  9-21-2021 2021 tax rate adoption
09-2021
25075-  9-21-2021 PID 1 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25076-  9-21-2021 PID 1 - appropriation
09-2021
25077-  9-21-2021 PID 6 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25078-  9-21-2021 PID 6 - appropriation
09-2021
25079-  9-21-2021 PID 7 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25080-  9-21-2021 PID 7 - appropriation
09-2021
25081-  9-21-2021 PID 11 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25082-  9-21-2021 PID 11 - appropriation
09-2021
25083-  9-21-2021 PID 12 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25084-  9-21-2021 PID 12 - appropriation
09-2021
25085-  9-21-2021 PID 14 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25086-  9-21-2021 PID 14 - appropriation
09-2021
25087-  9-21-2021 PID 15 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25088-  9-21-2021 PID 15 - appropriation
09-2021
25089-  9-21-2021 PID 18 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25090-  9-21-2021 PID 18 - appropriation
09-2021
25091-  9-21-2021 PID 19 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25092-  9-21-2021 PID 19 - appropriation
09-2021
25093-  9-21-2021 PID 20 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25094-  9-21-2021 PID 20 - appropriation
09-2021
25095-  9-21-2021 PID 21 - budget ordinance
09-2021
25096-  9-21-2021 PID 21 - appropriation
09-2021
25097-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25098-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25099-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25100-  9-21-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
                  35-70.2,
                  35-70.3,
                  35-71,
25101-  1-1-2022  35-72,
09-2021           35-73,
                  35-76,
                  35-77,
                  35-78
25102-  9-28-2021 Increasing the number of authorized civil service positions
09-2021
25103-  9-28-2021 Prescribing salaries for the police department
09-2021
25104-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25105-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25106-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25107-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25108-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25109-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25110-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25111-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25112-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25113-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25114-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25115-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25116-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25117-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25118-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25119-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25120-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25121-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25122-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25123-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25124-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25125-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25126-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25127-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25128-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25129-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25130-  9-28-2021 Amending fire department staffing
09-2021
25131-  9-28-2021 Setting salaries for fire department
09-2021
25132-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25133-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25134-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25135-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25136-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25137-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25138-  9-28-2021 Appropriation
09-2021
25139-  11-1-2021 22-86
10-2021
25140-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25141-  10-12-    Street name change from Lizzie Davis Street to Russell Path
10-2021 2021      Drive
25142-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25143-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25144-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25145-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25146-  10-12-    Vacation (portion of Cedar St. and alley in Block 92)
10-2021 2021
25147-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25148-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25149-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25150-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25151-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25152-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25153-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25154-  10-12-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25155-  10-12-    Zoning
10-2021 2021
25156-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25157-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25158-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25159-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25160-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25161-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25162-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25163-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25164-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
                  20-366,
                  20-367,
                  20-368,
                  20-369,
25165-  10-19-    20-370,
10-2021 2021      20-371,
                  20-372,
                  20-373,
                  20-374,
                  20-375
25166-  10-19-    Appropriation
10-2021 2021
25167-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25168-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25169-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25170-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25171-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25172-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25173-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25174-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25175-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25176-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25177-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25178-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25179-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25180-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25181-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25182-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25183-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25184-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25185-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25186-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25187-  11-9-2021 Annexation (65.305 acres - Fenner property)
11-2021
25188-  11-9-2021 Annexation (116.77 acres - Shipman tract)
11-2021
25189-  11-9-2021 App. A, §§ 4.1300,
11-2021           4.1302
25190-  12-6-2021 App. A, § 4.713
11-2021
25191-  12-9-2021 App. A, § 4.1307
11-2021
25192-  11-9-2021 Zoning
11-2021
25193-  11-9-2021 Appropriation
11-2021
25194-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25195-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25196-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25197-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25198-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25199-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25200-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25201-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25202-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25203-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25204-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25205-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25206-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25207-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25208-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25209-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25210-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25211-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25212-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25213-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25214-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25215-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25216-  11-30-    Establishing standards of care for youth programs in the city
11-2021 2021      for 2022
25217-  11-30-    TARZ No. 102
11-2021 2021
25218-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25219-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25220-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25221-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25222-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25223-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25224-  11-30-    Appropriation
11-2021 2021
25225-  1-1-2022  2.5-2
12-2021
25226-  12-14-    2-180
12-2021 2021
25227-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25228-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25229-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25230-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25231-  12-14-    Water main capacity charge - Rock Creek Ranch/Tarleton State
12-2021 2021      University Southside III
25232-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25233-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25234-  12-14-    Vacation (two alleys in Block I, Mattison’s Addition to Hi-
12-2021 2021      Mount)
25235-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25236-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25237-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25238-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25239-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25240-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25241-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25242-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25243-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25244-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25245-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25246-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25247-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25248-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25249-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25250-  12-14-    Zoning
12-2021 2021
25251-  12-14-    App. A, §§ 2.102,
12-2021 2021      2.103
25252-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25253-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25254-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
25255-  12-14-    Appropriation
12-2021 2021
 
2022/01 - 2022/06
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
25256-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25257-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25258-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25259-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25260-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25261-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25262-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25263-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25264-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25265-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25266-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25267-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25268-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25269-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25270-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25271-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25272-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25273-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25274-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25275-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25276-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25277-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25278-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25279-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25280-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25281-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25282-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25283-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25284-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25285-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25286-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25287-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25288-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25289-
01-    3-1-2022  Zoning
2022
25290-           Accept $877,500 in donations from the Sid Richardson, Amon Carter and Rainwater
01-    1-11-2022 Foundations and Affiliated Bank for the Hub, a proposed new multipurpose center
2022             in the Stop Six Neighborhood
25291-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25292-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25293-
01-    1-11-2022 Appropriation
2022
25294-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25295-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25296-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25297-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25298-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25299-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25300-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25301-
01-    1-25-2022 Designate TARZ No. 103
2022
25302-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25303-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25304-
01-    1-25-2022 Annexation (0.8642 Acres - AutoZone Avondale)
2022
25305-
01-    3-1-2022  Zoning
2022
25306-
01-    1-25-2022 Appropriation
2022
25307-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25308-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25309-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25310-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25311-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25312-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25313-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25314-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25315-
02-    2-8-2022  Vacation (Alley in Block 8, Graham Park Addition)
2022
25316-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25317-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25318-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25319-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25320-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25321-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25322-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25323-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25324-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25325-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25326-           Ordering an election by the qualified voters of the City of Fort Worth, Texas,
02-    2-8-2022  on May 7, 2022, on the question of the issuance of Ad Valorem Tax Supported
2022             Public Securities for the 2022 General Obligation Debt Program
25327-           Ordering a special election by the qualified voters of the City of Fort Worth,
02-    2-8-2022  Texas, on May 7, 2022, for the purpose of electing a City Council member for
2022             City Council District 4 to serve the remainder of an unexpired term and
                 ordering a runoff election, if needed
25328-           Ordering a special election by the qualified voters of the City of Fort Worth,
02-    2-8-2022  Texas, on May 7, 2022, for the purpose of submitting to the qualified voters of
2022             said city, for adoption or rejection, 13 proposed amendments to the existing
                 charter of the City of Fort Worth and ordaining related matters
25329-
02-    2-8-2022  App. A, § 4.1305
2022
25330-
02-    5-3-2022  Zoning
2022
25331-
02-    2-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25332-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25333-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25334-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25335-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25336-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25337-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25338-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25339-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25340-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25341-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25342-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25343-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25344-
02-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25345-
02-    3-8-2022  Appropriation
2022
25346-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25347-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25348-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25349-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
                 7-301,
                 7-302,
                 7-303,
                 7-304,
                 7-316,
                 7-317,
                 7-318,
                 7-331,
                 7-332,
                 7-333,
                 7-334,
                 7-346,
                 7-347,
                 7-348,
                 7-349,
                 7-350,
                 7-351,
                 7-352,
                 7-353,
25350-           7-354,
03-    2-22-2022 7-371,
2022             7-372,
                 7-373,
                 7-374,
                 7-375,
                 7-376,
                 7-377,
                 7-378,
                 7-379,
                 7-380,
                 7-381,
                 7-382,
                 7-383,
                 7-384,
                 7-385,
                 7-386,
                 7-387,
                 7-388,
                 7-389,
                 7-390,
                 7-391,
                 7-392
25351-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25352-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25353-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25354-           Reappointing the Municipal Judges, Chief Judge and Deputy Chief Judge for a
03-    2-22-2022 two-year term beginning April 1, 2022 and ending March 31, 2024
2022
25355-
03-    2-22-2022 Establishing pay rate adjustment for six substitute Municipal Judges
2022
25356-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25357-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25358-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25359-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25360-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25361-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25362-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25363-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25364-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25365-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25366-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25367-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25368-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25369-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25370-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25371-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25372-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25373-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25374-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25375-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25376-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25377-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25378-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25379-
03-    2-22-2022 Approving 2022 Comprehensive Plan
2022
25380-
03-    2-22-2022 App. A, § 516.A
2022
25381-
03-    4-22-2022 Zoning
2022
                 7-46,
25382-           7-47,
03-    2-22-2022 7-48,
2022             7-49,
                 7-226,
                 20-358
25383-           7-61,
03-    2-22-2022 7-62,
2022             7-63,
                 7-64
25384-           7-166,
03-    2-22-2022 7-167,
2022             7-168,
                 7-169
25385-           26-1,
03-    2-22-2022 26-2,
2022             26-3,
                 26-4
25386-           7-431,
03-    2-22-2022 7-432,
2022             7-433,
                 7-434
25387-
03-    3-23-2022 7-1
2022
25388-           13-1,
03-    2-22-2022 13-2
2022
25389-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25390-
03-    2-22-2022 Appropriation
2022
25391-
03-    2-22-2022 12.5-841.2
2022
25392-
03-    2-22-2022 12.5-841.1
2022
25393-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25394-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25395-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25396-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25397-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25398-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25399-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25400-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25401-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25402-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25403-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25404-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25405-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25406-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25407-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25408-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25409-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25410-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25411-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25412-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25413-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25414-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25415-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25416-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25417-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25418-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25419-
03-    3-29-2022 Appropriation
2022
25420-
03-    3-29-2022 63rd Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ordinance
2022
25421-
03-    3-29-2022 64th Supplemental Concurrent Bond Ordinance
2022
25422-
03-    3-29-2022 Releasing ETJ - 1,175 acres on Parker County
2022
25423-           35-10,
03-    3-29-2022 35-63
2022
25424-
03-    3-29-2022 Adopting redistricting map and adding two new districts
2022
25425-
03-    3-29-2022 Annexation (60.07 acres in Parker County - Walsh Ranch 3E)
2022
25426-
03-    3-29-2022 Annexation (21.29 acres in Parker County - Walsh Ranch Village)
2022
25427-
03-    3-29-2022 Annexation (124.60 acres in Parker County - Walsh Ranch PA3 W)
2022
25428-
03-    3-29-2022 Annexation (0.675 acres in Tarrant County - HLS Strip)
2022
25429-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-6
2022
25430-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25431-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-7
2022
25432-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25433-
04-
2022
25434-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-12
2022
25435-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25436-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-19
2022
25437-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25438-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-20
2022
25439-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25440-           Increase estimated receipts and appropriations in the Dept. of Diversity and
04-    4-12-2022 Inclusion, Business Equity Division’s Revenue Fun for Funds received from the
2022             Business Assistance Center Education Foundation in the amount not to exceed
                 $19,900.00 and amend the FY22 Operating Budget
25441-           Vacation (portion of Lowe Street to be re-platted with an adjoining property
04-    4-12-2022 for a single-family residential lot)
2022
25442-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25443-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25444-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25445-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25446-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25447-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25448-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25449-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25450-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25451-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25452-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25453-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25454-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25455-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25456-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25457-
04-    4-12-2022 Amending FY22 Adopted Budget and 5-Year Service Plan for PID-14
2022
25458-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25459-           Releasing approximately 79 acres of land in Parker County along the western
04-    4-12-2022 edge of the Fort Worth ETJ
2022
25460-
04-    4-12-2022 Annexation (186.229 acres in Denton County known as Northpoint-186)
2022
25461-
04-    4-12-2022 Annexation (47.26 acres in the 11600-12000 blocks of Highway 114)
2022
25462-
04-    4-12-2022 Zoning
2022
25463-
04-    4-12-2022 2-61
2022
25464-
04-    4-12-2022 38th Supplemental authorizing water and sewer system revenue refunding bonds
2022
25465-
04-    4-12-2022 Amend and restate 32nd Supplemental Ordinance
2022
25466-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25467-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25468-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25469-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25470-           Authorizing issuance and sale of General Purpose Refunding bonds, Taxable
04-    4-12-2022 Series 2022
2022
25471-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25472-           Authorizing issuance and sale of General Purpose Refunding and Improvement
04-    4-12-2022 bonds, Series 2022
2022
25473-
04-    4-12-2022 Appropriation
2022
25474-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25475-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25476-
04-    4-26-2022 Establish a Water Main Capacity Charge
2022
25477-
04-    4-26-2022 Establish a Water Main Capacity Charge
2022
25478-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25479-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25480-
04-    4-26-2022 Vacation (portion of Mark IV Parkway)
2022
25481-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25482-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25483-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25484-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25485-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25486-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25487-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25488-
04-    4-26-2022 Levying Special Assessments on the Additional Hotel Property for FY 2021-2022
2022
25490-
04-    4-26-2022 Appropriation
2022
25491-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25492-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25493-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25494-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25495-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25496-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25497-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25498-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25499-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25500-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25501-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25502-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25503-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25504-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25505-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25506-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25507-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25508-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25509-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25510-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25511-
05-    5-10-2022 Appropriation
2022
25512-           Annexation (owner initiated -77.9231 acres -Wiggins Tract -east of Old Denton
05-    5-10-2022 Road and north of Westport Parkway)
2022
25513-
05-    5-10-2022 Zoning
2022
25514-
05-    5-18-2022 App. A, §§ 4.803, 5.108, 9.101
2022
25515-           Finding that the Special Election conducted on May 7, 2022, on the question of
05-    5-17-2022 issuance of public securities was duly and lawfully held; declaring the results
2022             of the election; and expressing official intent to reimburse expenditures with
                 proceeds of future debt
25516-           Establishing a Water Main Capacity Charge for 36" Northside III Water
05-    5-24-2022 Transmission Main to serve the Traditional Development and Surrounding Areas
2022
25517-           Vacation (a portion of Joe Carrigan Street and Wright Armstrong Street to be
05-    5-24-2022 re-platted with adjoining property)
2022
25518-           Vacation (an unnamed right-of-way, Peach Street, Plum Street and two alleys in
05-    5-24-2022 Block 2 and 5, Tarrant Main Addition to be re-platted with the adjoining
2022             property for an existing industrial storage yard
25519-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25520-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25521-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25522-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25523-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25524-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25525-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25526-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25527-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25528-
05-    5-24-2022 Appropriation
2022
25529-
05-    5-24-2022 Zoning
2022
25530-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25531-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25532-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25533-
06-    6-14-2022 2-14
2022
25534-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25535-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25536-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25537-
06-    6-14-2022 Annexation (55.305 acres of West Bods Ranch Road right-of-way)
2022
25538-
06-    6-14-2022 Vacation (Niles City Blvd)
2022
25539-           Vacation (a portion of Crawfod Street to be re-platted with the adjoining
06-    6-14-2022 property for a hospital expansion project)
2022
25540-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25541-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25542-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25543-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25544-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25545-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25546-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25547-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25548-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25549-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25550-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
                 Suspending the effective date of Oncor electric delivery company’s requested
                 rate change to permit the city time to study the request and to establish
                 reasonable rates; approving cooperation with the steering committee of cities
25551-           served by Oncor to hire legal and consulting services and to negotiate with the
06-    6-14-2022 company and direct any necessary litigation and appeals; directing
2022             reimbursement of the City’s reasonable rate case expenses; finding that the
                 meeting at which this resolution is passed is open to the public as required by
                 law; requiring notice of this Ordinance to the company and legal counsel for
                 the steering committee
25552-
06-    6-14-2022 Annexation (421.133 acres known as Rio Claro)
2022
25553-           Prohibiting the potable use of designated groundwater from beneath Sylvania
06-    6-14-2022 Industrial Park (3201 North Sylvania Ave)
2022
25554-
06-    6-14-2022 Zoning
2022
25555-           Appointing Carla Kelman as Municipal Judge for a two-year term commencing July
06-    6-14-2022 4, 2022 and ending July 3, 2023
2022
25556-
06-    6-15-2022 9-310, 9-310.1
2022
25557-
06-    6-14-2022 Appropriation
2022
25558-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25559-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25560-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25561-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25562-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25563-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25564-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25565-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25566-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25567-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25568-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25569-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25570-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25571-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25572-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25573-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25574-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25575-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25576-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25577-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25578-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25579-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25580-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25581-           Vacation (a portion of South Adams St. and an alley in Block 6, Terrell’s
06-    6-28-2022 Subdivision of Fields Welch Addition to be re-platted with the adjoining
2022             property for the TCU School of Medicine)
25582-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25583-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25584-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25585-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25586-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25587-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25588-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25589-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25590-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25591-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25592-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25593-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25594-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25595-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25596-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25597-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25598-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25599-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25600-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25601-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25602-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25603-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25604-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
                 Declaring certain findings; providing for the release of approximately 692
                 acres of land situated in the T. & P. R.R. Co. Survey Abstract No. 1432, the
25605-           H.J. Thompson Survey Abstract No. 2432, Stephen Newsom Survey Abstract No.
06-    6-28-2022 1001, the T. & P.R.R. Co. Survey Abstract No. 1427, the T. & P.R.R. Co. Survey
2022             Abstract No. 1422, the T. & P.R.R. Co. Survey Abstract 2130, and the Benjamin
                 J. White Survey Abstract 1647, in Parker County, Texas, generally bordered by
                 Farm-to-Market 73 along the western edge of the Fort Worth extraterritorial
                 jurisdiction
25606-           Declaring certain findings; providing for the release of approximately 87 acres
06-    6-28-2022 of land situated in the W.J. Cathey Survey, Abstract No. 187, the H. Sykes,
2022             Abstract No. 804, the E. Glasscock Survey, Abstract No. 323, Johnson County,
                 Texas along the western edge of the Fort Worth extraterritorial jurisdiction
25607-
06-    6-28-2022 Zoning
2022
25608-           Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in the Grants Operating
06-    6-28-2022 Federal Fund in the amount of $86,872,545.00 for allowable expenses related to
2022             the American Rescue Plan Act State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds
25609-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25610-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25611-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
25612-
06-    6-28-2022 Appropriation
2022
 
2022/07 - 2022/12
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
25613-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25614-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25615-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25616-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25617-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25618-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25619-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25620-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25621-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25622-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25623-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25624-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25625-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25626-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25627-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25628-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25629-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25630-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25631-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25632-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25633-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25634-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25635-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25636-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25637-08-2022 8-9-2022       Appropriation
25638-08-2022 8-9-2022       Zoning
25639-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25640-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25641-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25642-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25643-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25644-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25645-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25646-08-2022 8-23-2022      Vacation (portion of Hagler Ave. to be re-platted
                             with the adjoining property)
25647-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25648-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25649-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25650-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25651-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25652-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25653-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25654-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25655-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25656-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25657-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25658-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25659-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25660-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25661-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25662-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25663-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25664-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25665-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25666-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25667-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25668-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25669-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25670-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25671-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25672-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25673-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25674-08-2022 9-1-2022       34-177,
                             34-183
25675-08-2022
25676-08-2022
25677-08-2022 8-23-2022      Appropriation
25678-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25679-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25680-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25681-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25682-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25683-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25684-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             Approving negotiated settlement and establishing
                             maximum permitted rates and charges that Atmos
25685-09-2022 9-13-2022      Energy Corporation d/b/a Atmos Energy Corporation,
                             Mid-Tex Division, may assess customers in the City
                             of Fort Worth effective October 1, 2022
25686-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25687-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25688-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25689-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25690-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25691-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25692-09-2022 10-1-2022      35-56
25693-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25694-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25695-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25696-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25697-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25698-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25699-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25700-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25701-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25702-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25703-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25704-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25705-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25706-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25707-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25708-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             Extending the term of Tax Increment Reinvestment
25709-09-2022 9-13-2022      Zone Number Nine, City of Fort Worth, Texas and
                             approving amended project and financing plans for
                             the Trinity River Vision TIF
                             PID 1 -(1) approving and adopting the fiscal year
                             2022-2023 Budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2022 assessment
                             roll, and (2) levying special assessments for the
25710-09-2022 9-13-2022      2022 tax year at a rate of $0.13 per each $100.00
                             of property value; authorize execution of an
                             agreement with Downtown Fort Worth, Inc., in the
                             amount of $502,750.00 to manage the Public
                             Improvement District
25711-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 6 -(1) approving and adopting the fiscal year
                             2022-2023 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2022 assessment
                             roll, and (2) levying special assessments for the
                             2022 tax year at a rate of $0.155 per each $100.00
25712-09-2022 9-13-2022      of residential property value and $0.035 per each
                             $100.00 of commercial property value; authorize
                             execution of agreement with FirstService
                             Residential Texas PID, LLC, in the amount of
                             $136,041.00 to manage the Public Improvement
                             District
25713-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 7 -(1) approving and adopting the fiscal year
                             2022-2023 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2022 assessment
                             roll, and (2) levying special assessments for the
                             2022 tax year at the rate of $0.15 per each
25714-09-2022 9-13-2022      $100.00 of residential property value and $0.11
                             per each $100.00 of commercial property value;
                             authorize execution of agreement with FirstService
                             Residential Texas PID, LLC, in the amount of
                             $145,000.00 to manage the Public Improvement
                             District
25715-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 11 -(1) approving and adopting the fiscal year
                             2022-2023 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2022 assessment
                             roll, and (2) levying special assessments for the
25716-09-2022 9-13-2022      2022 tax year at the rate of $0.12 per each
                             $100.00 of property value; authorize execution of
                             agreement with Stockyards Preservation Foundation
                             of Fort Worth, Inc., in the amount of $18,458.00
                             to manage the Public Improvement District
25717-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 12 -(1) approving and adopting the fiscal year
                             2022-203 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2022 assessment
                             roll, and (2) levying special assessments for the
25718-09-2022 9-13-2022      2022 tax year at a rate of $0.18 for each $100.00
                             of property value; authorize execution of
                             agreement with FirstService Residential Texas PID,
                             LLC, in the amount of $13,702.00 to manage the
                             Public Improvement District
25719-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 14 -Trinity Bluff; (1) approving and adopting
                             the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-year
                             service plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2022
                             assessment roll, and (2) levying special
25720-09-2022 9-13-2022      assessments for the 2022 tax year at a rate of
                             $0.10 per each $100.00 of property value;
                             authorize execution of agreement with Downtown
                             Fort Worth, Inc., in the amount of $15,000.00 to
                             manage the Public Improvement District
25721-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 15 -Sun Valley; (1) approving and adopting the
                             fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-year service
                             plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2022
                             assessment roll, and (2) levying special
25722-09-2022 9-13-2022      assessments for the 2022 tax year at a rate of
                             $0.24 per each $100.00 of property value;
                             authorize execution of agreement with Orasi
                             Development, LLC, in the amount of $28,282.00 to
                             manage the Public Improvement District
25723-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 18 -Tourism; (1) approving and adopting the
                             fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-year service
25724-09-2022 9-13-2022      plan, assessment plan, and assessment roll, and
                             (2) levying special assessments for fiscal year
                             2022-2023
25725-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 19 -Historic Camp Bowie, (1) approving and
                             adopting the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-
                             year service plan, assessment plan, and tax year
                             2022 assessment roll, and (2) levying special
25726-09-2022 9-13-2022      assessments for the 2022 tax year at a rate of
                             $0.10 per each $100.00 of property value for
                             commercial property; authorize execution of an
                             agreement with Camp Bowie District, Inc., in the
                             amount of $95,466.00 to manage the Public
                             Improvement District
25727-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 20 -East Lancaster Avenue, (1) approving and
                             adopting the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-
                             year service plan, assessment plan, and tax year
                             2022 assessment roll, and (2) levying special
25728-09-2022 9-13-2022      assessments for the 2022 tax year at a rate of
                             $0.266 per each $100.00 of property value;
                             authorize execution of agreement with FirstService
                             Residential Texas PID, LLC, in the amount of
                             $17,800.00 to manage the Public Improvement
                             District
25729-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
                             PID 21 -Las Vegas Trail, (1) approving and
                             adopting the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget, five-
                             year service plan, assessment plan, and tax year
                             2022 assessment roll, and (2) levying special
25730-09-2022 9-13-2022      assessments for the 2022 tax year at a rate of
                             $0.10 per each $100.00 of property value,
                             authorize execution of an agreement with
                             FirstService Residential Texas PID, LLC, in the
                             amount of $25,500.00 to manage the Fort Worth
                             Public Improvement District 21 -Las Vegas Trail
25731-09-2022 9-13-2022      Appropriation
25732-09-2022 9-13-2022      Zoning
                             Temporarily increasing the number of authorized
25733-09-2022 9-13-2022      positions in the classification of firefighter in
                             the Fire Department by 11
                             Amending Fire Department staffing effective
25734-09-2022 9-27-2022      October 1, 2022, to increase the number of
                             authorized civil service positions in the
                             specified classifications by a total of six
25735-09-2022 9-27-2022      Prescribing salaries for the Fire Department
                             Amending Police Department staffing effective
25736-09-2022 9-27-2022      October 1, 2022, to increase the number of
                             authorized civil service positions in the
                             specified classifications by a total of 73
25737-09-2022 9-27-2022      Prescribing salaries for the Police Department
25738-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25739-09-2022
25740-09-2022
                             Joint ordinance and boundary agreement with the
25741-09-2022 9-27-2022      City of Fairview to adjust the extraterritorial
                             jurisdiction between the Cities of Fort Worth and
                             New Fairview in Denton County
25742-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25743-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25744-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25745-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25746-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25747-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25748-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25749-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25750-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25751-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25752-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25753-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25754-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25755-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25756-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25757-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25758-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25759-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25760-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25761-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25762-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25763-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25764-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25765-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25766-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25767-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25768-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25769-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25770-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
                             Approving Resolution Nos. 2022-06-121 and 20022-
                             08-174, adopted by the Dallas Fort Worth
                             International Airport Board on June 2, 2022,
25771-09-2022 9-27-2022      respectively, for the purpose of amending the
                             construction and fire prevention standards and
                             Chapters 2 and 8 of the Code of Rules and
                             Regulations of the Dallas Fort Worth International
                             Airport Board
                             2-321,
                             7-1,
                             7-402,
                             12.5-843, 12.5-881 (Repealed by Ord. 26964-06-
25772-09-2022 10-1-2022      2024) ,
                             15-51,
                             16-115,
                             16-142,
                             29-1
25773-09-2022 9-27-2022      Budget FY 23
25774-09-2022 9-27-2022      Setting property tax 2022
                             Levying of special assessments in the Improvement
                             Area No. 3 of Fort Worth Public Improvement
                             District No. 16 (Walsh Ranch/Quail Valley) and
                             adopt Ordinance (1) levying special assessments on
                             the property located in Improvement Area No. 3 of
25775-09-2022 9-27-2022      the Quail Valley Public Improvement District, (2)
                             approving service and assessment plan update for
                             the Quail Valley Public Improvement District, (3)
                             approving assessment roll for the Quail Valley
                             Public Improvement District, and (4) ordaining
                             other matters related thereto
25776-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25777-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25778-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25779-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25780-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25781-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25782-09-2022 9-27-2022      Appropriation
25783-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25784-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25785-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25786-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
                             Denying application of Oncor Electric Delivery
25787-10-2022 10-11-2022     Company LLC to increase system wide transmission
                             and distribution rates
25788-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25789-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25790-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
                             Vacation (portions of Ave D, Ave E, Nashville Ave
25791-10-2022 10-11-2022     and the alley in Block 15, Polytechnic Heights
                             Addition, to be re-platted with the adjoining
                             property for the Texas Wesleyan Athletic Complex)
25792-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25793-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25794-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25795-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25796-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25797-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25798-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
                             Annexation (owner-initiated, approximately 297.083
                             acres of land in Tarrant County, known as the
                             Sewell Tract, located at the northeast corner of
25799-10-2022 10-11-2022     West Cleburne Road and Longhorn Trail and is south
                             of Cleburne Crowley Road, and approximately 7.561
                             acres of right-of-way in the Far South Planning
                             Sector, AX-21-017)
25800-10-2022 10-11-2022     Zoning
25801-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25802-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25803-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25804-10-2022 10-11-2022     Appropriation
25805-10-2022 10-25-2022     Appropriation
25806-10-2022 10-25-2022     Appropriation
25807-10-2022 10-25-2022     Appropriation
25808-10-2022 10-25-2022     Appropriation
                             Adjusting appropriations for identified projects
25809-10-2022 10-25-2022     in the 2022 Bond Program Fund with no net change
                             to the total appropriation for the fund overall
                             30-151,
                             30-152,
                             30-153,
                             30-154,
                             30-155,
                             30-156,
                             30-157,
                             30-158,
                             30-159,
                             30-160,
                             30-161,
                             30-171,
                             30-172,
25810-10-2022 11-1-2022      30-173,
                             30-181,
                             30-182,
                             30-191,
                             30-192,
                             30-193,
                             30-194,
                             30-195,
                             30-196,
                             30-197,
                             30-201,
                             30-202,
                             30-203,
                             Ch. 30, App. B
25811-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25812-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25813-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25814-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25815-11-2022 11-8-2022      Establishing pay rate adjustments for municipal
                             court judges
25816-11-2022 11-8-2022      2-321,
                             7-1
25817-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25818-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25819-11-2022 11-8-2022
25820-11-2022 11-8-2022
25821-11-2022 11-8-2022
25822-11-2022 11-8-2022      Changing the name of the 5900 to 6100 blocks of
                             Columbus Trail to Sycamore School Road
25823-11-2022 11-8-2022
25824-11-2022 11-8-2022      31-81
                             Vacation (portions of Malvey Avenue, Littlepage
                             Street, and part of a 16-foot wide alley, situated
                             in the Joseph Turner Survey, Abstract No. 1500,
                             City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas; in the
                             Chamberlin Arlington and Chamberlin Arlington
25825-11-2022 11-8-2022      Heights Additions, additions to the City of Fort
                             Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, as recorded in
                             Volume 63, Page 71 and Volume 63, Page 21, Plat
                             Records, Tarrant County, Texas, and containing
                             approximately 124,164 square feet or 2.8504 acres
                             of land)
                             Vacation (Markers Way, situated in the I.&G.N.R.R.
                             Co. Survey, Abstract No. 1996, Parker County,
                             Texas; in the Walsh Ranch Quail Valley Addition,
25826-11-2022 11-8-2022      an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Parker
                             County, Texas, as recorded in Cabinet D, slide 24,
                             Official Records, Parker County, Texas, and
                             containing approximately 13,313 square feet or
                             0.3056 acres of land)
                             Vacation (12.5 foot-wide alley, located in the
                             Sarah Gray Jennings Survey, Abstract No. 884, in
                             Block 18, Jennings West Addition, an addition to
25827-11-2022 11-8-2022      the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, as
                             shown in the plat thereof recorded in Volume 106,
                             Page 29 of the plat records of Tarrant County,
                             Texas, containing approximately 1,250 square feet
                             or 0.087 acre of land more or less)
25828-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25829-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25830-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25831-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25832-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25833-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25834-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
25835-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
                             4-6,
25836-11-2022 11-16-2022     4-7,
                             Ch. 4, App. A
                             Extending the term of Tax Increment Reinvestment
25837-11-2022 11-8-2022      Zone Number Four, City of Fort Worth, Texas
                             (Southside TIF)
                             Annexation (249.981 acres of land, more or less,
                             out of the W.M. Cagle Survey, Abstract No. 2373,
                             and the G.E. & A.H. Tandy Survey, Abstract No.
                             2356, Parker County, Texas, recorded under Clerk's
                             File Number 202043651, of the Official Public
                             Records, Parker County, Texas (O.P.R.P.C.T.) and
                             approximately 11.946 acres of land more or less of
                             consisting of Old Weatherford Road and F.M. 3325
                             Rights-Of-Way out of F. Sanchez Survey, Abstract
                             No. 2347, the J. D. Morris Survey, Abstract No.
                             926, the P. J. McClary Survey, Abstract No. 907,
                             the W. Cagle Survey, Abstract No. 2373, the G. E.
                             & A. H. Tandy Survey, Abstract No. 2356, the J. D.
                             Kyle Survey, Abstract No. 792, And Being a portion
                             of that certain 9.449 Acre Tract described in
                             instrument to TXDOT, (Farmer Road (Aka F.M. 3325))
                             recorded in Volume 1707, page 612, of the Official
                             Public Records of Parker County, Texas,
25838-11-2022 11-8-2022      (O.P.R.P.C.T.), a portion of that certain called
                             8.302 acre tract described in Instrument to TXDOT,
                             (Farmer Road (AKA F.M.3325)), Recorded in Volume
                             1728, Page 828, O.P.R.P.C.T., a portion of that
                             certain called 598.949 Acre Tract described in
                             Instrument To FWFW Holdings, Inc., recorded under
                             Clerk's File Number 201410303, O.P.R.P.C.T., and
                             being all of a 40 Foot Wide Right-Of-Way
                             dedication as shown on plat of Lot 1, Block 93,
                             Morningstar Addition, recorded in Cabinet E, Slide
                             740, of the Plat Records of Parker County, Texas,
                             (P.R.P.C.T.), and all of a 40 Foot Wide Right-Of-
                             Way dedication as shown on Plat Of Morningstar,
                             Recorded In Cabinet D, Slide 559, P.R.P.C.T., and
                             portion of a Prescriptive Right-Of-Way locally
                             known as Old Weatherford Road, (Aka Mary's Creek
                             Road) (Aka County Road 1083), (Case No. Ax-22-006)
                             which said territory lies adjacent to and adjoins
                             the present corporate boundary limits of Fort
                             Worth, Texas)
                             Annexation (33.625 acres of land, more or less,
                             out of the J.D. Kyle Survey, Abstract No. 792, and
                             the C. Jackson Survey, Abstract No. 754, Parker
                             County, Texas, Recorded in Volume 2583, Page 1474,
                             of the Real Property Records of Parker County,
                             Texas, (R.P.R.P.C.T.) and approximately 0.915
25839-11-2022 11-8-2022      acres of land more or less of rights-of-way out of
                             J.D. Kyle Survey, Abstract No. 792, Parker County,
                             Texas, recorded Under Clerk's File Number
                             202148423, of the Real Property Records of Parker
                             County, Texas, (R.P.R.P.C.T.), (Case No. Ax-22-
                             007) which said territory lies adjacent to and
                             adjoins the present Corporate Boundary Limits of
                             Fort Worth, Texas)
                             Annexation (18.510 acres of land, more or less,
                             out of the A. Costello Survey, Abstract Number 271
                             and the A. Fernandes Survey, Abstract Number 506,
                             all of Tarrant County, Texas and being the
                             remainder of Tract 1 and all of Tract 2 described
25840-11-2022 11-8-2022      in Deed to the Sewell Family Partnership, Ltd., as
                             recorded in Correction Deed Recorded in County
                             Clerk's File Number D206044638, Official Public
                             Records, Tarrant County, Texas (Case No. Ax-22-
                             009) which said territory lies adjacent to and
                             adjoins the present Corporate Boundary Limits of
                             Fort Worth, Texas)
25841-11-2022 11-8-2022      Zoning
25842-11-2022 11-8-2022      Appropriation
                             Increasing the total number of authorized civil
25843-11-2022 11-8-2022      service positions in the Fire Department effective
                             November 19, 2022 by adding 20 positions in the
                             classification of firefighter
25844-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25845-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25846-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25847-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25848-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25849-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25850-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25851-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25852-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25853-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25854-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25855-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25856-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25857-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
                             Vacation (Mountain Brook Lane to be re-platted
25858-11-2022 11-29-2022     with the adjoining property for the cottages of
                             Summer Creek Multifamily Development in Chisholm
                             Trail Ranch)
                             Vacation (portions of Mahogany Court and Sequoia
25859-11-2022 11-29-2022     Drive to be re- platted with the adjoining
                             property for single family development in South
                             Oak Grove Estates)
25860-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25861-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25862-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25863-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25864-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25865-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25866-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25867-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25868-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25869-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25870-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25871-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25872-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25873-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25874-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25875-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25876-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25877-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25878-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25879-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25880-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25881-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25882-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25883-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25884-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
                             Approving Resolution No. 2022-10-263 Adopted by
                             the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Board
                             on October 13, 2022 for the purpose of amending
25885-11-2022 11-29-2022     Chapter 2 of the Code of Rules and Regulations of
                             the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Board
                             to Require International Symbol on Disabled
                             Veteran License Plates and Parking Placards
25886-11-2022 11-29-2022     Establishing Standards of Care for Youth Programs
                             in the City of Fort Worth for 2023
                             Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No.
                             104, City of Fort Worth, Texas, for property
25887-11-2022 11-29-2022     located at 5650 Alliance Gateway for the
                             development of a manufacturing facility for Beauty
                             Manufacturing Solutions Corp., or an affiliate
                             Increasing appropriations in Fort Worth Public
                             Improvement District No. 16 - Quail Valley Fund
25888-11-2022 11-29-2022     (Walsh Ranch) by $330,195.00, and reducing Fund
                             balance, for the purpose of reimbursing the
                             developer for eligible costs under Reimbursement
                             Agreements
                             30-171,
25889-11-2022 12-1-2022      30-173,
                             30-195,
                             Ch. 30, App. C
25890-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25891-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25892-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25893-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25894-11-2022 11-29-2022     Appropriation
25895-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25896-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25897-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25898-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25899-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
                             Appointing substitute Municipal Judges for a two-
25900-12-2022 12-13-2022     year term commencing December 13, 2022 and ending
                             December 12, 2024
25901-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25902-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25903-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25904-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25905-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25906-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25907-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25908-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25909-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25910-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25911-12-2022 1-4-2023       App.A §§ 4.1203,
                             4.1309
25912-12-2022 12-13-2022     Zoning
                             Temporarily increasing the number of authorized
25913-12-2022 12-13-2022     positions in the classification of firefighter in
                             the Fire Department by two
25914-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25915-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25916-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25917-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25918-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25919-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
25920-12-2022 12-13-2022     Appropriation
 
2023/01 - 2023/07
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
25921-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25922-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25923-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25924-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25925-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25926-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25927-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25928-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25929-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25930-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25931-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25932-           Establish the Sewer Per Acre Charge in the amount of $3,119.74 per acre for the
01-    1-10-2023 sanitary sewer main extension to serve Fire State 42 and surrounding areas and
2023             to establish the basin boundaries, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article III,
                 Division 3, Sections 35-81 through 35-86 of the City Code
25933-           Establish the Sewer Per Acre Charge in the amount of $1,126.27 per acre for a
01-    1-10-2023 sewer interceptor main extension to serve areas west of the City of Haslet and
2023             to establish the basin boundaries, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article III,
                 Division 3, Section 35-81 through 35-86 of the City Code.
25934-           Establish a Sewer Per Acre Charge in the amount of $2,173.35 per acre for sewer
01-    1-10-2023 interceptor improvements to serve the Hanna Ranch Development and Surrounding
2023             Areas and to establish the basin boundaries, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article
                 III, Division 3, Sections 35- 81 through 35-86 of the City Code.
                 Establish a Water main Capacity Charge in the amount of $121,831.16 per million
25935-           gallons per day for a 24-inch Westside V Water Transmission Approach Main to
01-    1-10-2023 serve the cities of Willow Park and Hudson Oaks and surrounding areas within
2023             Fort Worth’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article
                 III, Division 4, Sections 35-87 through 35-93 of the City Code.
25936-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25937-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25938-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25939-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25940-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25941-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25942-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25943-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25944-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25945-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25946-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25947-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25948-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25949-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25950-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25951-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 20-470,
                 20-471,
                 20-472,
                 20-473,
                 20-474,
                 20-475,
                 20-476,
                 20-477,
                 20-478,
                 20-479,
                 20-480,
                 20-481,
                 20-482,
25952-           20-483,
01-    4-15-2023 20-484,
2023             20-485,
                 20-486,
                 20-487,
                 20-488,
                 20-489,
                 20-490,
                 20-491,
                 20-492,
                 20-493,
                 20-494,
                 20-495,
                 20-496,
                 20-497,
                 20-498,
                 20-499
                 Providing for the release of approximately 212.843 acres of land situated in
25953-           the land situated in the Gilbert Woolsey Survey, Abstract No. 902 and Section
01-    1-10-2023 1, Houston and Texas Railway Company Survey, Abstract 399, in Johnson County,
2023             Texas, along the Southern Edge of the Fort Worth Extraterritorial Jurisdiction,
                 including certain right-of- way from the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
                 City of Fort Worth
25954-
01-    1-10-2023 Continue the curfew ordinance for minors
2023
25955-           App. A, §§ 4.803,
01-    1-20-2023 4.1203,
2023             5.152,
                 9.101
25956-
01-    1-10-2023 Zoning
2023
25957-
01-    1-10-2023 Appropriation
2023
25958-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25959-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25960-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25961-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25962-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25963-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25964-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25965-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25966-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25967-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25968-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25969-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25970-           Authorizing the extension and increase of the Callable Commercial Paper Program
02-    2-14-2023 for the Water Department
2023
25971-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25972-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25973-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25974-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25975-
02-    3-3-2023  22-86
2023
25976-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25977-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25978-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25979-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25980-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25981-
02-    2-14-2023 Establish a water main capacity charge
2023
25982-
02-    2-14-2023 Establish a water main capacity charge
2023
25983-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25984-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25985-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25986-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25987-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25988-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25989-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25990-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25991-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25992-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25993-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25994-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25995-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25996-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25997-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25998-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
25999-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26000-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26001-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26002-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26003-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26004-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 7-429.1,
                 7-450,
                 7-451,
                 7-452,
                 7-453,
                 7-454,
                 7-455,
                 7-456,
                 7-457,
                 7-458,
                 7-459,
26005-           7-460,
02-    2-28-2023 7-461,
2023             7-462,
                 7-463,
                 7-464,
                 7-465,
                 7-466,
                 7-467,
                 7-468,
                 7-469,
                 7-470,
                 7-471,
                 7-472,
                 7-473
26006-
02-    2-14-2023 Ordering 2023 election
2023
26007-
02-    2-14-2023 Zoning
2023
26008-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26009-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26010-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26011-           Directing publication of Notice of Intention to Issue Combination Tax and
02-    2-14-2023 Revenue Certificates of Obligation for improvements to Fort Worth Convention
2023             Center and City Hall
26012-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26013-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26014-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26015-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26016-
02-    2-14-2023 Appropriation
2023
26017-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26018-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26019-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26020-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26021-
02-    2-28-2023 Establish a water main capacity charge
2023
26022-
02-    3-7-2023  11A-30
2023
26023-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26024-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26025-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26026-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26027-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26028-
02-    2-28-2023 Zoning
2023
26029-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
26030-
02-    2-28-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Establish a Sewer Per Acre Charge in the amount of $2,144.68 per acre for the
26031-           Tradition Central Sewer Upsize and Offsite Parallel Sewer Main Extension to
03-    3-21-2023 Serve the Tradition Development and Surrounding Areas and to establish the
2023             Basin Boundaries, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article III, Division 3, Sections 35-
                 81 through 35-86 of the City Code
26032-           Establish the Sewer Per Acre Charge in the amount of $883.98 per acre for the
03-    3-21-2023 Sewer Extension to serve the LPC Bluestone Development and surrounding areas
2023             and to establish the Basin Boundaries, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article III,
                 Division 3, Sections 35-81 through 35-86 of the City Code
26033-           Establish a Water Main Capacity Charge in the amount of $38,840.24 per million
03-    3-21-2023 gallons per day for a 24-inch Northside III Water Transmission Main to Serve
2023             the LPC Bluestone Development and surrounding areas, pursuant to Chapter 35,
                 Article III, Division 4, Sections 35-87 through 35-93 of the City Code
26034-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26035-           Appointing the substitute Municipal Judges for a two-year term commencing April
03-    3-21-2023 1, 2023, and ending March 31, 2025
2023
26036-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26037-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26038-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26039-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26040-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26041-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26042-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26043-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26044-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26045-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26046-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26047-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26048-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26049-
03-    3-21-2023 Appropriation
2023
26050-
03-    3-21-2023 Approving the City of Fort Worth 2023 Comprehensive Plan as amended
2023
26051-
03-    3-21-2023 Zoning
2023
26052-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26053-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26054-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26055-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26056-           Establish a Water Main Capacity Charge in the amount of $112,162.11 per million
04-    4-11-2023 gallons per day for a 36-inch Eastside II Water Transmission Main as part of
2023             the Trinity Boulevard Reconstruction Project, pursuant to Chapter 35, Article
                 III, Division 4 Sections 35-87 through 35-93 of the City Code
26057-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26058-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26059-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26060-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26061-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26062-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26063-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26064-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26065-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26066-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26067-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26068-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26069-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26070-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26071-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26072-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26073-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26074-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26075-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26076-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26077-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26078-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26079-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26080-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26081-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26082-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26083-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26084-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26085-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26086-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26087-           Designating Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone No. 105, City of Fort Worth, Texas,
04-    4-11-2023 for property located at 16101 Wolff Crossing for development of a distribution
2023             center for Carhartt, Inc. or an affiliate
26088-
04-    5-4-2023  Zoning
2023
                 Authorizing issuance and sale of Series 2023 Combination Tax and Revenue
                 Certificates of Obligation in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
26089-           $94,000,000.00 for City Hall Upgrade and Phase I Convention Center
04-    4-11-2023 Improvements, establishing parameters with respect to sale of the certificates,
2023             delegating to designated city officials authority to effect sale of the
                 certificates by competitive bid or negotiated sale, and enacting other
                 provisions related to the subject
26090-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Authorizing issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas General Purpose
26091-           Bonds, Series 2023, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
04-    4-11-2023 $180,000,000.00; establishing parameters with respect to sale of the bonds;
2023             delegating authority to effect sale of the bonds by competitive bid or
                 negotiated sale; authorizing escrow and other related agreements; and enacting
                 related provisions
26092-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26093-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Authorizing issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Drainage Utility
26094-           System Revenue Bonds, Series 2023, in an aggregate principal amount not to
04-    4-11-2023 exceed $50,000,000.00, establishing parameters with respect to sale of the
2023             bonds, delegating to designated city officials authority to effect sale of the
                 bonds by competitive bid or negotiated sale, authorizing related agreements,
                 and enacting other provisions
26095-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Fortieth supplemental ordinance authorizing City of Fort Worth, Texas Water and
26096-           Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2023, in an aggregate principal amount not
04-    4-11-2023 to exceed $190,000,000.00, establishing parameters with respect to the sale of
2023             the bonds, delegating to designating city officials authority to effect the
                 sale of bonds by competitive bid or negotiated sale, authorizing related
                 agreements, and enacting other related provisions
26097-           Adopt amended and restated thirty-second supplemental ordinance to extend
04-    4-11-2023 period of delegated authority for Water and Sewer Refunding Bonds in support of
2023             the commercial paper program
26098-
04-    4-11-2023 Appropriation
2023
26099-           Adopt ordinance amending the collection rate for Assessed Transportation Impact
04-    4-25-2023 Fees to Update the Panther Island Service Area, to be effective June 1, 2023
2023
26100-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 1 - Downtown and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26101-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26102-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26103-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 adopted budget and five-year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 6 - Park Glen and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26104-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26105-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26106-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 7 - Heritage and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26107-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26108-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26109-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 15 - Sun Valley and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26110-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26111-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 18 - Tourism and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26112-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26113-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 19 - Historic Camp Bowie and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26114-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26115-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26116-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
04-    4-25-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 20 - East Lancaster and adopt
2023             appropriation ordinances
26117-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26118-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26119-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26120-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26121-           Vacation (a portion of an alley in Block 12, Ryan Place Addition to be
04-    4-25-2023 replatted with the adjoining property to privatize as a driveway and additional
2023             yard for the adjoining residential lot)
26122-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26123-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26124-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26125-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26126-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26127-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26128-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26129-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26130-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Adopt ordinance eliminating appropriations in the Public Events Capital Fund of
                 the WRMC Cattle Barn 4 Sprinklers Project in the amount of $300,000.00 and
26131-           authorize execution of a construction contract with Ranger Builders, LLC, in
04-    4-25-2023 the amount of $287,348.00, including 7.5% for the owner’s construction
2023             contingency allowance, for the installation of fire protection sprinklers in
                 the Will Rogers Memorial Canter, Cattle Barn 4, located at 3325 Burnett Tandy
                 Drive
26132-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26133-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26134-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26135-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26136-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26137-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26138-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26139-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26140-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26141-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26142-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26143-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26144-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26145-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 The sixth-fifth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing one or more
26146-           series of Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Joint Revenue Bonds, for
04-    4-25-2023 lawful purposes; providing the security therefore; providing for the sale,
2023             execution and delivery thereof subject to certain parameters; and providing
                 other terms, provisions and covenants with respect thereto
                 The sixth-sixth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance authorizing one or more
26147-           series of Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Joint Revenue Bonds, for
04-    4-25-2023 lawful purposes; providing the security therefore; providing for the sale,
2023             execution and delivery thereof subject to certain parameters; and providing
                 other terms, provisions and covenants with respect thereto
                 Conduct a public hearing and approve amendment to the fiscal year 2023 crime
26148-           control and prevention district budget to increase the budget in the recruiting
04-    4-25-2023 and training initiative by a total of $1,338,875.00 for an additional police
2023             recruit class, decrease the fund balance by the same amount, and adopt
                 ordinance amending the city’s fiscal year 2023 budget to reflect these changes
26149-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26150-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26151-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26152-
04-    4-25-2023 Appropriation
2023
26153-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
                 Vacation (public access easements located in the WM. McCowen Survey, Abstract
26154-           No. 999, Block A, Alliance Town Center Addition, an addition to the City of
05-    5-9-2023  Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, such portions of public access easements as
2023             recorded in County Clerks File Nos. D213300996, D209018951 and D213195182, real
                 property records, Tarrant County, Texas, and containing approximately 2.233
                 acres of land combined; providing for reversion of fee in said land)
26155-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26156-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26157-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26158-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26159-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26160-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26161-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26162-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26163-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26164-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26165-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26166-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26167-
05-    5-9-2023  Appropriation
2023
26168-
05-    5-30-2023 App. A, § 4.1307
2023
26169-
05-    5-9-2023  Zoning
2023
26170-           Adopt ordinance amending the fiscal year 2022-2023 budget and five- year
05-    5-23-2023 service plan for Public Improvement District 11 - Stockyards
2023
26171-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26172-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26173-           Adopting a per acre charge in accordance with Chapter 35, Article III, Division
05-    5-23-2023 3, sewer per acre charges, sections 35-81 through 35-86 of the City Code, for
2023             the 2,021 acres served by a Developer Sewer Main Project (“Chisholm Trail Ranch
                 Offside”“) located at 8001 Old Granbury Road
26174-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26175-           Adopting a per acre charge in accordance with Chapter 35, Article III, Division
05-    5-23-2023 3, sewer per acre charges, Sections 35-81 through 35-86 of the City Code, for
2023             the 2,021 acres served by a Developer Sewer Main Project (“Chisholm Trail Ranch
                 Offside”“) located at 8001 Old Granbury Road
26176-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Vacation (thirty foot unnamed right-of-way, situated in the Jesse B. Renfro
26177-           Survey, Abstract No. 1273, Tarrant County, Texas, as shown on the plat of
05-    5-23-2023 Charles Medical Plaza, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Texas, according
2023             to the plat recorded in Volume 388-172, page 88, of the plat records, Tarrant
                 County, Texas; containing approximately 7,601 square feet or 0.1745 acres of
                 land; providing that the city shall retain all existing utilities easements
                 Vacation (thirty foot unnamed right-of-way, situated in the Jesse B. Renfro
26178-           Survey, Abstract No. 1273, Tarrant County, Texas, as shown on the plat of
05-    5-23-2023 Charles Medical Plaza, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Texas, according
2023             to the plat recorded in Volume 388-172, page 88, of the plat records, Tarrant
                 County, Texas; containing approximately 7,601 square feet or 0.1745 acres of
                 land; providing that the city shall retain all existing utilities easements
26179-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26180-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26181-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26182-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26183-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26184-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26185-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26186-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26187-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26188-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26189-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26190-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26191-
05-    5-23-2023 Appropriation
2023
26192-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26193-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26194-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26195-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26196-
06-    6-23-2023 30-20
2023
26197-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26198-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26199-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26200-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26201-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26202-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26203-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26204-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26205-           12.5-336,
06-    6-13-2023 12.5-340,
2023             12.5-343
26206-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26207-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26208-           Vacation (a portion of N. Lamar Street, a 60 foot wide public right of way,
06-    6-13-2023 situated in the A. Robinson Survey, Abstract No. 1289, Tarrant County, Texas;
2023             containing approximately 12,210 square feet or 0.276 acres of land; providing
                 that the city shall retain all existing utilities easements)
26209-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26210-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26211-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26212-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26213-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26214-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26215-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26216-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26217-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26218-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26219-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26220-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26221-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26222-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26223-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26224-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26225-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26226-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26227-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26228-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26229-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26230-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26231-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26232-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26233-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26234-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26235-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26236-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26237-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26238-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26239-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26240-           Amending 12.5, Environmental Protection and Compliance, Article IV, Groundwater
06-    6-23-2023 and Surface Water Quality, by amending Appendix A, Municipal Setting
2023             Designation Sites in Fort Worth by the addition of Section 24 designating CFW-
                 MSD-0031
26241-
06-    6-13-2023 Zoning
2023
26242-
06-    7-11-2023 App. A, § 4.1305
2023
26243-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26244-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26245-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26246-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26247-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26248-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26249-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26250-
06-    6-13-2023 Appropriation
2023
26251-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26252-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26253-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26254-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26255-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26256-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26257-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26258-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26259-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26260-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26261-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26262-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26263-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26264-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26265-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26266-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Vacation (a 16 foot wide alley, located in Block 65, Chamberlain Arlington
26267-           Heights second filing, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County,
06-    6-27-2023 Texas according to the plat recorded in Volume 63, Page 40 of the deed records
2023             of Tarrant County, Texas, containing approximately 7,967 square feet of land;
                 providing that the city shall retain all existing utilities easements)
26268-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26269-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26270-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26271-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26272-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26273-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26274-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26275-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26276-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26277-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26278-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26279-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26280-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26281-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26282-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26283-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26284-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26285-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26286-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26287-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26288-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26289-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26290-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26291-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26292-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26293-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26294-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26295-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26296-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26297-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26298-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26299-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26300-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26301-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26302-
06-    6-27-2023 Joint boundary agreement with the City of Burleson
2023
26303-           Proving for the release of approximately 117.76 acres of land situated in the
06-    6-27-2023 William Gaffield Survey, Abstract No. 448, Denton County, Texas along the edge
2023             of the Fort Worth extraterritorial jurisdiction, including certain right-of-way
                 from the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fort Worth
26304-           Providing for the release of approximately 1,483 acres of land in Parker
06-    6-27-2023 County, Texas, generally bordered by Kelly Road and Bear Creek Road, including
2023             certain right-of-way, from the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of
                 Fort Worth
26305-           Increasing the residential homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes for
06-    6-27-2023 elderly and disabled persons
2023
                 Amending 12.5, Environmental Protection and Compliance, Article IV, Groundwater
26306-           and Surface Water Quality, by amending Appendix A, Municipal Setting
06-    7-6-2023  Designation Sites in Fort Worth by the addition of Section 24 designating CFW-
2023             MSD-0032, providing for the prohibition of the use of groundwater for potable
                 and irrigation purposes in CFW- MSD-0032
26307-
06-    10-6-2023 Zoning
2023
26308-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26309-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26310-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26311-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26312-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26313-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and authorizing the issuance by the City of Fort Worth, Texas of its
                 drainage utility system commercial paper notes, series ECP, in an aggregate
                 principal amount at any one time outstanding not to exceed $100,000,000 to
                 provide interim financing to pay project costs for eligible projects and to
                 refund obligations issued in connection with eligible projects; approving and
26314-           authorizing certain authorized officers and employees to act on behalf of the
06-    6-27-2023 city in the selling and delivery of such commercial paper notes, within the
2023             limitations and procedures specified herein; making certain covenants and
                 agreements in connection therewith; resolving other matters incident and
                 related to the issuance, sale, security and delivery of such commercial paper
                 notes, including the appointment of an issuing and paying agent, and a dealer
                 and approval of an issuing and paying agent agreement, and a dealer agreement;
                 approving the use of an offering memorandum in connection with the sale from
                 time to time of such commercial paper notes
                 Authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Drainage Utility
26315-           System Revenue Refunding Bonds, Refunding Bonds, in one or more series, in an
06-    6-27-2023 aggregate principal amount not to exceed $100,000,000; establishing parameters
2023             with respect to the sale of bonds; delegating to the designated city officials
                 the authority to effect the sale of bonds; enacting other provisions relating
                 to the subject
26316-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
26317-
06-    6-27-2023 Appropriation
2023
 
2023/08 - 2023/09
 
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
26318-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26319-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26320-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26321-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26322-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26323-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
                 35-94,
                 35-95,
26324-           35-96,
08-    8-8-2023  35-97,
2023             35-98,
                 35-99,
                 35-100
26325-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26326-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26327-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26328-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26329-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26330-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26331-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26332-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26333-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26334-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26335-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26336-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26337-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26338-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26339-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26340-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26341-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26342-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26343-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26344-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26345-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26346-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26347-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26348-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26349-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26350-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26351-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26352-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
                 2-46,
                 2-47,
                 2-62,
                 2-63,
                 2-64,
                 2-65,
                 2-66,
                 2-67,
                 2-68,
26353-           2-69,
08-    8-8-2023  2-70,
2023             2-71,
                 2-72,
                 2-80,
                 2-81,
                 2-83,
                 2-85,
                 3-20,
                 7-77,
                 19-22,
                 24-42,
                 31-2
26354-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26355-           Approving Chapter 4: Land Use and Appendix C: Future Land Use by Sector of the
08-    8-8-2023  City of Fort Worth 2023 Comprehensive Plan
2023
26356-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26357-
08-    8-8-2023  Zoning
2023
                 App. A §§ 4.603,
26358-           4.803,
08-    8-8-2023  4.1203,
2023             5.107A,
                 5.153,
                 9.101
                 App. A §§ 2.100,
26359-           2.101,
08-    8-8-2023  2.102,
2023             2.103,
                 2.104
26360-
08-    8-8-2023  Appropriation
2023
26361-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26362-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26363-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26364-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26365-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Suspending the September 1, 2023 effective date of Conserv Gas, Ltd.’s
                 requested rate change to permit the city time to study the request and to
26366-           establish reasonable rates; approving cooperation with other cities in the
08-    8-22-2023 Conserv service area, to hire legal and consulting services and to negotiate
2023             with the company and direct any necessary litigation and appeals; requiring
                 reimbursement of the Steering Committee of cities served by Conserv Gas’ rate
                 case expenses
26367-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26368-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26369-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26370-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26371-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26372-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26373-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26374-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26375-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26376-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26377-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26378-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26379-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26380-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26381-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26382-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26383-
08-    8-22-2023 7-100
2023
26384-
08-    8-22-2023 Zoning
2023
26385-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26386-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26387-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26388-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26389-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26390-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26391-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26392-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26393-
08-    8-22-2023 Appropriation
2023
26394-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26395-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26396-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26397-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26398-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26399-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26400-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26401-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving a negotiated settlement between the Atmos Cities Steering Committee
                 (“ACSC”) and Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding the company’s 2023
26402-           rate review mechanism filing; declaring rates to be unreasonable; adopting
09-    9-12-2023 tariffs that reflect rate adjustments consistent with the negotiated
2023             settlement; finding the rates to be set by the attached settlement tariffs to
                 be just and reasonable and in the public interest; approving an attachment
                 establishing a benchmark for pensions and retiree medical benefits; requiring
                 the company to reimburse ACSC’s reasonable ratemaking expenses
26403-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26404-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26405-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26406-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Vacation (portions of two 6' rights of way known as Jennings Avenue and Butler
                 Street and a portion of a 20' alley, each situated within the E. Parris Survey,
26407-           Abstract 1222, Block 17, South Fort Worth Addition, an addition to the City of
09-    9-12-2023 Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plats thereof, recorded in
2023             Volume 388-184, Page 17, Volume 388-144, Page 30, and Volume 204, Page 15 of
                 the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas containing approximately .523 acres
                 of land for the rights of way and approximately .069 acres of land for the
                 alley)
26408-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26409-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26410-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26411-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26412-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26413-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26414-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26415-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26416-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26417-           Designating a certain area in the City of Fort Worth as “tax abatement
09-    9-12-2023 reinvestment zone number one hundred and six, City of Fort Worth”, providing
2023             the effective and expiration dates for the zone and a mechanism for renewal of
                 the zone
26418-           Designating a certain area in the City of Fort Worth as “tax abatement
09-    9-12-2023 reinvestment zone number one hundred and seven, City of Fort Worth”, providing
2023             the effective and expiration dates for the zone and a mechanism for renewal of
                 the zone
26419-           Designating a certain area in the City of Fort Worth as “tax abatement
09-    9-12-2023 reinvestment zone number one hundred and eight, City of Fort Worth”, providing
2023             the effective and expiration dates for the zone and a mechanism for renewal of
                 the zone
                 Designating a certain geographic area within both the corporate limits and
26420-           extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fort Worth as “tax increment
09-    9-12-2023 reinvestment zone number sixteen, City of Fort Worth, Texas”; creating a board
2023             of directors for the zone; providing the effective and termination dates for
                 the zone; establishing a tax increment fund for the zone
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, service plan,
26421-           assessment plan, and assessment roll for Public Improvement District 18 -
09-    9-12-2023 Tourism; levying special assessments for the costs of certain improvements and
2023             services benefitting properties in Public Improvement District 18 - Tourism
                 during fiscal year 2023-2024
26422-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26423-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 1 - Downtown; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 1 during fiscal year 2023-2024
26424-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26425-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 6 - Park Glen; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 6 - Park Glen during fiscal year 2023- 2024
26426-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26427-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 7 - Heritage; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 7 - Heritage during fiscal year 2023- 2024
26428-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26429-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 11 - Stockyards; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 11 - Stockyards during fiscal year 2023-2024
26430-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26431-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 12 - Chapel Hill; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 12 during fiscal year 2023- 2024
26432-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26433-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 14 - Trinity Bluff; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 14 - Trinity Bluff during fiscal year 2023-2024
26434-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26435-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 15 - Sun Valley; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 15 during fiscal year 2023- 2024
26436-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26437-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 19 - Historic Camp Bowie; levying assessments for the cost of
2023             certain improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement
                 District No. 19 during fiscal year 2023-2024
26438-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26439-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 20 - East Lancaster Avenue; levying assessments for the cost of
2023             certain improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement
                 District No. 20 during fiscal year 2023-2024
26440-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
                 Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget, five-year service
26441-           plan, assessment plan, and tax year 2023 assessment roll for Public Improvement
09-    9-12-2023 District No. 21 - Las Vegas Trail; levying assessments for the cost of certain
2023             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth Public Improvement District
                 No. 21 during fiscal year 2023-2024
26442-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26443-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26444-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26445-           App. A. §§ 4.1203,
09-    9-26-2023 5.154
2023
26446-
09-    9-12-2023 Zoning
2023
26447-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26448-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26449-
09-    9-12-2023 Appropriation
2023
26450-
09-    10-1-2023 35-56
2023
26451-
09-    1-1-2024  35-56
2023
26452-           12.5-340,
09-    10-1-2023 12.5-844,
2023             35-57.4,
                 35-57.5
                 Appropriating funding for the operating budget of the City of Fort Worth for
26453-           the ensuing fiscal year, beginning October 1, 2023, and ending September 30,
09-    9-19-2023 2024, including an appropriation to pay debt service requirements on
2023             outstanding indebtedness; and appropriating funds for purposes of enacting the
                 fiscal year 2024 Capital Improvement Program, including capital plans,
                 projects, outlays, and community facility agreements
                 Levy and collection of an annual ad valorem tax on all property, real, personal
26454-           and mixed, situated within the territorial limits of the City of Fort Worth,
09-    9-19-2023 Texas, and all personal property owned in said City of Fort Worth, Texas, on
2023             January 1, 2023, except such property as may be exempt from taxation by the
                 constitution and laws of the State of Texas
                 Increasing the number of authorized civil service positions in the Fire
26455-           Department by a total of 47 effective October 1, 2023, by adding 3 positions in
09-    9-19-2023 the classification of battalion, 2 positions in the classification of captain,
2023             11 positions in the classification of engineer, and 20 positions in the
                 classification of firefighter
26456-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of fire protection personnel in
09-    9-19-2023 the fire department
2023
26457-           Increasing the total number of authorized sworn positions in the police
09-    9-19-2023 department by 63 by adding 4 positions in the classification of sergeant, 5
2023             positions in the classification of corporal/detective and 54 positions in the
                 classification of police officer, effective October 1, 2023
26458-           Prescribing the salary for each classification of peace officer in the police
09-    9-19-2023 department
2023
26459-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26460-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26461-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26462-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26463-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26464-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26465-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26466-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26467-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26468-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26469-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26470-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26471-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26472-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26473-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26474-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26475-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26476-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26477-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26478-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26479-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26480-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26481-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26482-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26483-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26484-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26485-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26486-
09-    9-26-2023 Zoning
2023
                 Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in the Special Tax Revenue
                 Bonds Series 2023A Capital Project Fund in the amount of $32,000,000.00, for
                 the purpose of paying (I) contractual obligations incurred or to be incurred
26487-           for the financing of Series 2023A improvements to Will Rogers Memorial Center,
09-    9-26-2023 and the payment of fiscal, engineering and legal fees, and (II) cost of
2023             issuance of the bonds, with appropriations subject to the sale of the bonds and
                 receipt of proceeds and all identified amounts being subject to reduction to
                 conform to final figures reflected in closing documents with any excess cost of
                 issuance funds remaining after closing being transferred to the Venue Debt
                 Service Fund
                 Increasing estimated receipts and appropriations in the Special Tax Revenue
                 Bonds Series 2023B Capital Project Fund in the amount of $44,000,000.00, for
                 the purpose of paying (I) contractual obligations incurred or to be incurred
26488-           for the financing of Series 2023B improvements at Will Rogers Memorial Center,
09-    9-26-2023 including to the Sheep and Swine Barn, and the payment of fiscal, engineering
2023             and legal fees, and (II) cost of issuance of the bonds, with appropriations
                 subject to the sale of the bonds and receipt of proceeds and all identified
                 amounts being subject to reduction to conform to final figures reflected in
                 closing documents with any excess cost of issuance funds remaining after
                 closing being transferred to the Venue Debt Service Fund
26489-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26490-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26491-           Forty-first supplemental ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of City of
09-    9-26-2023 Fort Worth, Texas Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2023A, in an
2023             aggregate principal amount not to exceed $90,000,000; establishing parameters
                 with respect to the sale of the bonds
26492-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26493-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26494-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26495-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
26496-
09-    9-26-2023 Appropriation
2023
 
2023/10 - 2023/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
26497-           Adjusting the total number of authorized sworn positions in the police
10-    10-17-    department by deleting one position in the classification of sergeant and
2023   2023      adding one position in the classification of police officer, effective October
                 1, 2023
26498- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26499- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26500- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26501- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26502- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26503- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26504- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26505- 10-17-    Adopting a water main capacity charge for a city-initiated 24-inch Northside IV
10-    2023      water transmission main extension from Park Drive through Northpointe along
2023             North Saginaw Boulevard to Bonds Ranch Road
26506- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26507- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26508- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26509- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26510- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26511- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26512- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26513- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26514- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26515- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26516- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26517- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26518- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26519- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26520- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26521- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26522- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26523- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26524- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26525- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26526- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26527- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26528- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26529- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26530- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26531- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26532- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26533- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26534- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26535- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26536- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26537- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26538- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26539- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26540- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26541- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26542- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26543- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26544- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26545- 10-17-
10-    2023      Zoning
2023
26546- 10-17-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Special Revenue
10-    2023      Bonds, Series 2023A, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $32,000,000
2023
26547- 10-17-    Authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Special Revenue
10-    2023      Bonds, Series 2023B, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $44,000,000
2023
26548- 10-17-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26549- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26550- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26551- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26552- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26553- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26554- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26555- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26556- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26557- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26558- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26559- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26560- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26561-
10-    1-1-2024  12.5-340
2023
26562- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26563- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26564- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26565- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26567- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26568- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26569- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26570- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26571- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26572- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26573- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26574- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26575- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26576- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26577- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26578- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26579- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26580- 10-31-
10-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26581- 11-14-    Approving the project and financing plan for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone
11-    2023      Number Sixteen, City of Fort Worth, Texas (Veale Ranch)
2023
26582- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26583- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26584- 11-14-    Vacation (a variable width alley, located within the William Bussell Survey,
11-    2023      Abstract No. 151, and being a portion of Block 10, K.M. Van Zandt’s 2nd
2023             Addition, containing approximately 5,525 square feet of land more or less)
26585- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26586- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26587- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26588- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26589- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26590- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26591- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26592- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26593- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26594- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26595-           Adopting the City of Fort Worth 2023 Comprehensive Plan; analyzing population,
11-    11-14-    economic and financial trends; describing implementation tools; dividing the
2023   2023      city into 16 planning sectors; providing maps describing proposed future land
                 uses and recommended land use policies for each sector
26596- 11-14-    Annexation (134.12 acres, more or less, out of land situated in Section 21 of
11-    2023      the Shelby County School Land Survey, Abstract Number 1375, Tarrant County,
2023             Texas (Case No. AX22-008))
26597-           Repealing and restating the Neighborhood and Community Park Dedication Policy
11-    11-14-    of the City of Fort Worth to comply with the requirements of House Bill 1526
2023   2023      relating to multifamily parkland dedications; providing for nonsubstantive
                 changes to the policy
26598- 11-14-
11-    2023      Zoning
2023
26599- 11-14-
11-    2023      App. A, § 6.101
2023
26600- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26601- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26602- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26603- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26604- 11-14-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26605- 11-28-
11-    2023      31-105
2023
26606- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26607- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26608- 11-28-    An ordinance finding that Conserv Gas, LTD.’s statement of intent to increase
11-    2023      rates within the city should be denied; finding that the city’s reasonable rate
2023             case expenses shall be reimbursed by the company
26609- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26610- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26611- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26612- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26613- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26614- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26615- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26616- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26617- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26618- 11-28-    Adopting the standards of care for 2024 for youth programs offered by the City
11-    2023      of Fort Worth
2023
26619- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26620- 11-28-
11-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26621- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26622- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26623-           35-58,
12-    1-1-2024  35-85,
2023             35-93,
                 35-100
                 Annexation (approximately 4.825 acres of land situated in parts of the
26624-           M.E.P&P.R.R. Co. Survey, Abstract No. 1111, the James Righley Survery, Abstract
12-    12-12-    No. 1268, the M.E.P&P.R.R. Co. Survey, Abstract No. 1110, and the Joseph
2023   2023      Highland Survey, Abstract No. 752; said tract being a portion of County Road
                 4109, commonly known as Willow Springs Road, being a variable width right-of-
                 way; Tarrant County, Texas (Case No. AX-23-004))
                 Annexation (approximately 0.395 acres of land situated in the John Korticky
                 Survey, Abstract No. 914, the William H. Coltharp Survey, Abstract No. 286 and
26625-           the Moses Walters Survey, Abstract No. 1598; said tract being a portion of
12-    12-12-    County Road 1035, commonly known as West Cleburne Road, being a variable width
2023   2023      right-of-way, said tract also being a portion of that certain 36.291 acre tract
                 of land conveyed to Crowley Independent School District, said tract also being
                 a portion of that certain 10.18 acre tract of land conveyed to Texas Electric
                 Service Company (Case No. AX23-006))
                 Vacation (a portion of a variable width right-of-way known as West Vickery
26626- 12-12-    Boulevard, situated in the Sarah Jennings Survey, Abstract 844, as dedicated by
12-    2023      Lot 1, Block 1, Jennings North Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth,
2023             Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plat thereof, containing approximately
                 .271 acres of land)
26627- 12-12-    Vacation (a portion of a 60 foot right-of-way known as Darcy Avenue, situated
12-    2023      in the John P. Montgomery Survery, Abstract 1030, as dedicated by Van Zandt’s
2023             Hillside Addition)
26628- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26629- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26630- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26631- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26632- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26633- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26634- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26635- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26636- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26637- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26638- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26639- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26640- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26641- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26642- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26643- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26644- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26645- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26646- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26647- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26648- 12-12-
12-    2023      Appropriation
2023
26649- 12-12-    Joint ordinance and boundary agreement between the City of Crowley and the City
12-    2023      of Fort Worth
2023
26650- 12-12-
12-    2023      Changing the name of “Energy Way” to “Fort Worth Trail”
2023
26651- 12-12-
12-    2023      Zoning
2023
26652- 12-12-    App. A §§ 4.603,
12-    2023      4.803,
2023             5.155
                 Annexation (approximately 2.595 acres of land situated in the Benjamin Thomas
26653- 12-12-    Survey, Abstract No. 1497, the John Wagley Survey, Abstract No. 1597, and the
12-    2023      James P. Alford Survey, Abstract No. 53, Tarrant County, Texas; said tract
2023             being a portion of County Road 4108, commonly known as Wagley Robertson Road,
                 being a variable-width right-of-way (Case No. AX-23-005))
 
2024/01 - 2024/03
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.       Effective Date Description
26654-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26655-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26656-01- 2024 1-23-2024ä    Appropriation
26657-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26658-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26659-01- 2024 1-23-2024      30-181,
                              30-192
26660-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26661-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26662-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26663-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26664-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26665-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26666-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26667-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26668-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26669-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26670-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26671-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26672-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26673-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26674-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26675-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26676-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26677-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26678-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26679-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26680-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26681-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26682-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26683-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26684-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26685-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26686-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26687-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26688-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26689-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26690-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26691-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
                              Sixty-seventh supplemental concurrent bond
                              ordinance establishing a commercial paper program
26692-01- 2024 1-23-2024      under which will be issued from time to time
                              subordinate lien obligations in an aggregate
                              principal amount not to exceed $600,000,000 at
                              any one time outstanding
                              Sixty-eighth supplemental concurrent bond
26693-01- 2024 1-23-2024      ordinance authorizing one or more series of
                              Dallas Fort Worth international airport joint
                              revenue bonds
                              Sixty-ninth supplemental concurrent bond
26694-01- 2024 1-23-2024      ordinance authorizing one or more series of
                              Dallas Fort Worth international airport joint
                              revenue bonds
                              Chapter 12.5, "Environmental Protection and
                              Compliance," Article IV "Groundwater and Surface
                              Water Quality," by amending Appendix "A"
26695-01- 2024 1-23-2024      "Municipal Setting Designation Sites in Fort
                              Worth," by the addition of section 24 designating
                              CFW-MSD0033, providing for the prohibition of the
                              use of groundwater for potable and irrigation
                              purposes in CFW-MSD-0033
                              Annexation (a certain 573.897 acres, more or
                              less, out of land situated in the Greenberry
                              Overton Survey, Abstract No. 972, City of Fort
26696-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Worth, Denton County, Texas, and being all of a
                              tract of land described to GRBK Edgewood LLC as
                              recorded in county clerks file no. 2021- 227988,
                              real property records, Denton County, Texas (case
                              no. AX-23- 003))
26697-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Zoning
26698-01- 2024 1-23-2024      Appropriation
26699-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26700-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26701-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26702-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26703-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26704-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26705-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
                              Increasing the number of authorized sworn
                              positions in the police department by adding six
26706-01- 2024 1-30-2024      positions in the classification of police officer
                              and one position in the classification of
                              sergeant effective January 23, 2024
26707-01- 2024 1-30-2024      Appropriation
26708-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26709-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26710-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26711-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26712-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26713-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26714-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26715-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26716-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26717-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26718-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
26719-02- 2024 2-13-2024      Appropriation
                              Ordering a special election by the qualified
                              voters of the city on May 4, 2024, on the
                              question of approving and implementing resolution
                              no. 5866-01-2024 authorizing the Fort Worth
26720-02- 2024 2-13-2024      convention center as a venue project in
                              accordance with chapter 334, Texas local
                              government code, and designating the method of
                              financing for the project and ordaining related
                              matters
                              11-1,
26721-02- 2024 3-1-2024       11-2,
                              11-3,
                              11-4
26722-02- 2024 5-8-2024       Zoning
26723-02- 2024 3-6-2024       7-47
26724-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26725-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26726-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26727-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26728-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26729-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26730-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26731-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26732-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26733-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26734-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26735-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26736-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26737-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26738-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26739-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26740-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26741-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26742-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26743-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26744-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26745-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26746-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26747-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26748-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26749-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26750-02- 2024 5-8-2024       Zoning
26751-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26752-02- 2024 2-27-2024      Appropriation
26753-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26754-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26755-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26756-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26757-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26758-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
                              Vacation (a portion of a fifty foot right of way
                              known as Karen Street, situated in the Broadmore
                              Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth,
26759-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plat
                              thereof, recorded in volume 388-e, page 20, of
                              the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                              containing approximately .282 acres of land)
                              Vacation (a portion of a 16 foot wide alley,
                              located in block 10, Polytechnic Heights
                              addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth,
26760-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Tarrant County, Texas according to the plat
                              recorded in volume 63, page 109 of the deed
                              records of Tarrant County, Texas, containing
                              approximately 1,600 square feet of land)
                              Vacation (portions of a fifty foot right of way
                              known as Wabash Avenue and a portion of a twelve
                              foot alley, each situated within the Wade H.
                              Hudson survey survey, abstract 717, Forest Park
                              addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth,
26761-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plats
                              thereof, recorded in volume 310, page 49, of the
                              plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, containing
                              approximately .059 acres of land for the right of
                              way and approximately .014 acres of land for the
                              alley)
26762-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26763-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26764-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26765-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26766-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26767-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26768-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26769-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26770-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26771-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26772-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26773-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26774-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26775-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26776-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26777-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26778-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26779-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26780-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26781-03- 2024 8-8-2024       Zoning
                              17-120,
26782-03- 2024 4-4-2024        17-121,
                              17-122
26783-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26784-03- 2024 3-19-2024      Appropriation
26785-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26786-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26787-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26788-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26789-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26790-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26791-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26792-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26793-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26794-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26795-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26796-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26797-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26798-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26799-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
26800-03- 2024 3-26-2024      Appropriation
                              Annexation (18.49 acres, more or less, out of
                              land situated in the Thomas S. Reyburn survey,
                              abstract number 1130 and the Rufus King survey,
                              abstract number 723, City of Roanoke, Denton
                              county, Texas, being all of that tract of land
26801-03- 2024 3-26-2024      described by deeds to ail investment, l.p.,
                              recorded in instrument number 2023-68836, real
                              property records, Denton county, Texas, (case no.
                              Ax-23-010) which said territory lies adjacent to
                              and adjoins the present corporate boundary limits
                              of Fort Worth, Texas)
26802-03- 2024 1-10-2025      Zoning
 
2024/04 - 2024/06
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord.   Effective Description
No.    Date
26803-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26804-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26805-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26806-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26807-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26808-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26809-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26810-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26811-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26812-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26813-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26814-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26815-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26816-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26817-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26818-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26819-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26820-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
                 Vacation (a portion of a 50' wide right of way known as ne 32nd street, situated
26821-           in the crest addition, an addition to the city of Fort Worth, Tarrant county,
04-    4-9-2024  Texas, according to the plat thereof, recorded in volume 388-58, page 342, of
2024             the plat records of Tarrant county, Texas, containing approximately 0.162 acres
                 of land and 0.150 acres of land, respectively, for a combined total of
                 approximately .312 acres of land)
26822-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26823-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26824-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26825-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26826-
04-    4-9-2024  Number not used
2024
26827-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26828-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26829-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26830-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26831-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26832-
04-    8-1-2024  Zoning
2024
26833-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26834-
04-    4-9-2024  Appropriation
2024
26835-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26836-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26837-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 1 - Downtown
2024
26838-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26839-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26840-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 11 - Stockyards
2024
26841-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26842-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 6 - Park Glen
2024
26843-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26844-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26845-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 7 - Heritage
2024
26846-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26847-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26848-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 12 - Chapel Hill
2024
26849-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26850-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 14 - Trinity Bluffs
2024
26851-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26852-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 15 - Sun Valley
2024
26853-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26854-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 19 - Historic Camp Bowie
2024
26855-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26856-           Amending the fiscal year 2023-2024 budget and five year service plan for public
04-    4-23-2024 improvement district no. 20 - East Lancaster Avenue
2024
26857-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26858-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26859-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26860-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26861-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26862-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26863-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26864-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26865-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26866-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26867-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26868-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26869-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26870-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26871-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26872-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26873-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26874-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26875-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26876-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26877-
04-    7-12-2024 App. A § 4.1304
2024
26878-           Providing for the issuance of city of Fort Worth, Texas general purpose bonds,
04-    4-23-2024 series 2024, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $185,000,000
2024
26879-           An ordinance considering all matters incident and related to the issuance, sale
04-    4-23-2024 and delivery of up to $300,000,000 in principal amount of "city of fort worth
2024             general purpose refunding bonds"
26880-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26881-           Ordinance authorizing issuance of tax notes of the city of Fort Worth, Texas in
04-    4-23-2024 an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $20,000,000
2024
26882-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26883-           Forty-second supplemental ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of City of
04-    4-23-2024 Fort Worth, Texas Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2024, in an
2024             aggregate principal amount not to exceed $195,000,000
26884-           Amended and restated thirty-second supplemental ordinance authorizing the
04-    4-23-2024 issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Water and Sewer System Revenue
2024             Refunding Bonds, in one or more series, in an aggregate principal amount not to
                 exceed $225,000,000
26885-
04-    4-23-2024 Appropriation
2024
26886-           Ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas
04-    4-23-2024 Drainage Utility System Revenue Refunding Bonds, refunding bonds, in one or more
2024             series, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $100,000,000
26887-
04-    5-3-2024  35-23
2024
26888-           12.5-600,
04-    5-3-2024  12.5-610
2024
26889-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26890-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26891-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26892-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26893-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26894-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26895-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26896-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26897-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26898-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26899-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
                 Annexation (approximately 0.447 acres of land situated in the A.H. Hawkins
                 Survey, Abstract No. 1906, and the S.T. Rhodes Survey, Abstract No. 1868,
26900-           Tarrant county, Texas; said tract being a portion of Haslet Roanoke Road, and an
05-    5-14-2024 approximately 1.748 acres of land situated in the Jose Chirino Survey, Abstract
2024             No. 265, the T&P RR Co. Survey, Abstract No. 1569, and the A.H. Hawkins Survey,
                 Abstract No. 1906, Tarrant County, Texas; said tract being a portion of Haslet
                 Roanoke Road, Tarrant County, Texas (Case No. ax-23-007))
26901-           Annexation (Approximately 8.331 acres of land situated in the James F. Elliott
05-    5-14-2024 Survey, Abstract Number 495, Tarrant County, Texas, being a portion of a tract
2024             of land described as Johnson Ranch Road, recorded in volume 6596, page 469, deed
                 records, Tarrant County, Texas (Case No. ax-23-008))
26902-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26903-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26904-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26905-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26906-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26907-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26908-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26909-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26910-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26911-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26912-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26913-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26914-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26915-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26916-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26917-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26918-           Establishing an exemption from ad valorem taxes for qualifying child- care
05-    5-14-2024 facility properties for the City of Fort Worth
2024
26919-
05-    5-14-2024 Zoning
2024
26920-           App. A §§ 4.1300,
05-    7-16-2024 4.1302
2024
26921-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26922-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26923-
05-    5-14-2024 Appropriation
2024
26924-
05-    5-21-2024 Appropriation
2024
26925-
05-    5-21-2024 Appropriation
2024
26926-
05-    5-21-2024 Appropriation
2024
26927-           Increasing the residential homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes for elderly
05-    5-21-2024 and disabled persons
2024
26928-           Levying special assessments for the costs of certain improvements and services
05-    5-21-2024 benefitting a certain additional hotel property in public improvement district
2024             18 - Tourism during the remainder of fiscal year 2023-2024
26929-
05-    9-6-2024  Zoning
2024
26930-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26931-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26932-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26933-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26934-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26935-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26936-           Vacation (A 30-foot wide right of way known as Baird Drive, situated in the
06-    6-11-2024 Camelot Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
2024             according to the plat thereof, recorded in volume 388-90, page 15, of the plat
                 records of Tarrant County, Texas, containing approximately 0.095 acres of land)
26937-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26938-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26939-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26940-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26941-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26942-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26943-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26944-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26945-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26946-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26947-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26948-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26949-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26950-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26951-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26952-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26953-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26954-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26955-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26956-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26957-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26958-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26959-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
                 32-30,
                 32-31,
26960-           32-32,
06-    8-1-2024  32-33,
2024             32-34,
                 32-35,
                 32-36,
                 32-37
26961-           Designating certain areas in the City of Fort Worth as "Neighborhood Empowerment
06-    6-11-2024 Reinvestment Zones No. 1r through 8r, city of Fort Worth, Texas"
2024
                 7-316,
                 7-392.1,
                 7-392.2,
26962-           7-392.3,
06-    7-15-2024 7-392.4,
2024             7-392.5,
                 7-392.6,
                 7-392.7,
                 7-392.8,
                 7-392.9
26963-
06-    6-11-2024 Adopting the 2024 stormwater criteria manual of the city
2024
                 12.5-111,
                 12.5-874,
                 12.5-875,
                 12.5-876,
26964-           12.5-877,
06-    7-15-2024 12.5-878,
2024             12.5-879,
                 12.5-880,
                 12.5-881,
                 12.5-882,
                 12.5-883
                 Amending
26965-           Chapter 12.5, “Environmental Protection and Compliance”, Article IV “Groundwater
06-    6-11-2024 and Surface Water Quality” by amending Appendix A, “Municipal Setting
2024             Designation Sites in Fort Worth” by the addition of Section 24 designating CFW-
                 MSD-0034, providing for the prohibition of the use of groundwater for potable
                 and irrigation purposes in CFW-MSD-0034
26966-
06-    7-31-2024 Zoning
2024
26967-           Providing for the issuance of the "City of Fort Worth, Texas, Special Assessment
06-    6-11-2024 Revenue Bonds, Series 2024 (Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 16 (Walsh
2024             Ranch/Quail Valley) Improvement Areas #1-3 project)"
26968-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26969-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26970-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26971-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26972-
06-    6-11-2024 Appropriation
2024
26973-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26974-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26975-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26976-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26977-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26978-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26979-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26980-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26981-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26982-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26983-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26984-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26985-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26986-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26987-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26988-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26989-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26990-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26991-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26992-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26993-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26994-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26995-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26996-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26997-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26998-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
26999-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27001-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27002-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27003-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27004-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27005-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27006-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27007-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27008-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27009-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27010-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27011-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27012-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27013-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27014-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27015-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27016-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27017-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27018-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27019-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27020-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27021-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27022-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27023-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27024-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27025-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27026-           Designating the Fort Worth community land trust as a community land trust to
06-    6-25-2024 operate within the city pursuant to section 373b.002 of the Tex. Local
2024             Government Code and adopting an exemption to taxation pursuant to section
                 11.1827 of the Tex. Tax Code
27027-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27028-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27029-
06-    6-25-2024 Appropriation
2024
27030-           App. A §§ 4.803,
06-    7-23-2024 4.1203,
2024             5.156
27031-
06-    6-25-2024 Zoning
2024
27032-           Designating a certain geographic area in the city as “project financing zone
06-    6-25-2024 number two, City of Fort Worth, Texas” and providing an expiration date for the
2024             zone
 
2024/08 - 2024/09
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.      Effective Date Description
27033-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27034-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27035-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27036-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27037-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27038-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27039-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27040-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27041-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27042-08-2024 8-13-2024      2-174, 2-175, 2-176
                             Vacation (a portion of a fifty-foot wide right of
                             way known as Berke Road, situated in the
                             Weisenberger Sunny Hill Garden Addition replat &
                             2nd filing, an addition to the city of Fort Worth,
27043-08-2024 8-13-2024      Tarrant county, Texas, according to the plat
                             thereof, recorded in Volume 388-b, page 192, of
                             the plat records of Tarrant county, Texas,
                             containing approximately 12,500 square feet or
                             0.2870 acres of land)
                             Vacation (a portion of a 10-foot wide alley,
                             located in Block 45, North Fort Worth Addition, an
                             addition to the city of Fort Worth, Tarrant
27044-08-2024 8-13-2024      county, Texas according to the plat recorded in
                             volume 63, page 149 of the deed records of Tarrant
                             county, Texas, containing approximately 1,500
                             square feet or 0.034 acres of land)
27045-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27046-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27047-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27048-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27049-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27050-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27051-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27052-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27053-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27054-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27055-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27056-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27057-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27058-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27059-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27060-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27061-08-2024 8-13-2024      Number not used
                             Annexation (3.36 acres, more or less, out of land
                             situated in the T. F. Rogers Survey, Abstract No.
                             1357 and the A.A. & M.G. R.R. Co. Survey, Abstract
                             No. 1903, Tarrant county, Texas, and being a
                             portion of tract of land described to TRT Land
27062-08-2024 8-13-2024      Investors LLC by deed recorded in county clerk
                             file no. d221245221 of the official public records
                             of Tarrant county, Texas, (case no. ax-24-003)
                             which said territory lies adjacent to and adjoins
                             the present corporate boundary limits of fort
                             worth, Texas)
                             An ordinance designating a certain area in the
27063-08-2024 8-13-2024      City of Fort Worth as "Tax Abatement Reinvestment
                             Zone Number One Hundred and Ten, City of Fort
                             Worth, Texas"
27064-08-2024 9-19-2024      App. A § 4.1309
27065-08-2024 9-26-2024      Zoning
27066-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27067-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27068-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27069-08-2024 8-13-2024      Appropriation
27070-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27071-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27072-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27073-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27074-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27075-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27076-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27077-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27078-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27079-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27080-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27081-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27082-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27083-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27084-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27085-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27086-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27087-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27088-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27089-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27090-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27091-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27092-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27093-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27094-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27095-08-2024 10-18-2024     Zoning
27096-08-2024 9-19-2024      App. A § 5.116
27097-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27098-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27099-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
                             Forty-third supplemental ordinance authorizing the
                             issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas
27100-08-2024 8-27-2024      Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds, Series 2024B
                             (CWSRF - Village Creek), in the aggregate
                             principal amount of $59,000,000
27101-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27102-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27103-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27104-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27105-08-2024 1-1-2025       35-36
27106-08-2024 8-27-2024      Appropriation
27107-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance providing for the levy and collection
                             of an annual Ad Valorem Tax on all property, real,
                             personal and mixed, situated within the
                             territorial limits of the City of Fort Worth,
27108-09-2024 9-17-2024      Texas, and all personal property owned in said
                             City of Fort Worth, Texas, on January 1, 2024,
                             except such property as may be exempt from
                             taxation by the constitution and laws of the State
                             of Texas
27109-09-2024 11-22-2024     Zoning
27110-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27111-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27112-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27113-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27114-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27115-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27116-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27117-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27118-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27119-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27120-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27121-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27122-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27123-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27124-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27125-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27126-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27127-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27128-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27129-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27130-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27131-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27132-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27133-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27134-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27135-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27136-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27137-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             Approving Resolution No. 2024-06-155 adopted by
                             the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Board
27138-09-2024 9-17-2024      on June 6, 2024 for purpose of amending Chapter 3,
                             Article iii, Chapter 8, and Appendix 1 of the code
                             of rules and regulations of the Dallas Fort Worth
                             International Airport Board.
27139-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             Vacation (a portion of a 10-foot wide alley,
                             located in Block 7, Nies and Rouse Addition, an
                             addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
27140-09-2024 9-17-2024      County, Texas according to the plat recorded in
                             volume 204-A, page 111 of the plat records of
                             Tarrant County, Texas, containing approximately
                             2,500 square feet of land)
27141-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27142-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27143-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27144-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27145-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27146-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27147-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27148-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27149-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27150-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27151-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27152-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27153-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27154-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27155-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 1 - Downtown;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27156-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 1 during fiscal
                             year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of such
                             assessments; reserving unto the city council the
                             right to allow credits reducing the amount of the
                             respective assessment to the extent of any credit
                             granted
27157-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 6 - Park Glen;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27158-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 6 - Park Glen
                             during fiscal year 2024-2025; setting charges and
                             liens against property in the district and against
                             the owners thereof; providing for the collection
                             of such assessments; reserving unto the city
                             council the right to allow credits reducing the
                             amount of the respective assessment to the extent
                             of any credit granted
27159-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 7 - Heritage;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27160-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 7 - Heritage
                             during fiscal year 2024-2025; setting charges and
                             liens against property in the district and against
                             the owners thereof; providing for the collection
                             of such assessments; reserving unto the city
                             council the right to allow credits reducing the
                             amount of the respective assessment to the extent
                             of any credit granted; and providing an effective
                             date
27161-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 11 - Stockyards;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27162-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 11 - Stockyards
                             during fiscal year 2024-2025; setting charges and
                             liens against property in the district and against
                             the owners thereof; providing for the collection
                             of such assessments; reserving unto the city
                             council the right to allow credits reducing the
                             amount of the respective assessment to the extent
                             of any credit granted; and providing an effective
                             date
27163-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 12 - Chapel Hill;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27164-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 12 during fiscal
                             year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of such
                             assessments; reserving unto the city council the
                             right to allow credits reducing the amount of the
                             respective assessment to the extent of any credit
                             granted; and providing an effective date
27165-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 14 - Trinity
                             Bluff; levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27166-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 14 - Trinity Bluff
                             during fiscal year 2024-2025; setting charges and
                             liens against property in the district and against
                             the owners thereof; providing for the collection
                             of such assessments; reserving unto the city
                             council the right to allow credits reducing the
                             amount of the respective assessment to the extent
                             of any credit granted; and providing an effective
                             date
27167-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 15 - Sun Valley;
                             levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27168-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 15 during fiscal
                             year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of such
                             assessments; reserving unto the city council the
                             right to allow credits reducing the amount of the
                             respective assessment to the extent of any credit
                             granted; and providing an effective date
27169-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 19 - Historic Camp
                             Bowie; levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in fort worth
27170-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 19 during fiscal
                             year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of such
                             assessments; reserving unto the city council the
                             right to allow credits reducing the amount of the
                             respective assessment to the extent of any credit
                             granted; and providing an effective date
27171-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 20 - East
                             Lancaster Avenue; levying assessments for the cost
                             of certain improvements and services provided in
27172-09-2024 9-17-2024      Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 20
                             during fiscal year 2024-2025; setting charges and
                             liens against property in the district and against
                             the owners thereof; providing for the collection
                             of such assessments; reserving unto the city
                             council the right to allow credits reducing the
                             amount of the respective assessment to the extent
                             of any credit granted; and providing an effective
                             date
27173-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024-2025 budget, five-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and tax year 2024 assessment roll
                             (to be kept on file with the city secretary) for
                             Public Improvement District No. 21 - Las Vegas
                             Trail; levying assessments for the cost of certain
                             improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
27174-09-2024 9-17-2024      Public Improvement District No. 21 during fiscal
                             year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of such
                             assessments; reserving unto the city council the
                             right to allow credits reducing the amount of the
                             respective assessment to the extent of any credit
                             granted; and providing an effective date
27175-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
                             An ordinance approving and adopting the fiscal
                             year 2024- 2025 budget, three-year service plan,
                             assessment plan, and assessment roll (to be kept
                             on file with the city secretary) for Public
                             Improvement District 18 - Tourism; levying special
                             assessments for the costs of certain improvements
                             and services benefitting properties in Public
                             Improvement District 18 - Tourism during fiscal
27176-09-2024 9-17-2024      year 2024-2025; setting charges and liens against
                             property in the district and against the owners
                             thereof; providing for the collection of the
                             special assessments; providing for due dates,
                             penalties, and interest; providing for reliance on
                             ordinance and recitals in event of a suit;
                             providing a severability clause; providing that
                             ordinance is cumulative of all non-conflicting
                             prior ordinances; and providing an effective date
                             Annexation (61.754 acres, more or less, out of
                             land situated in the John Korticky Survey,
                             Abstract No. 914, Tarrant County, Texas, being a
                             portion of tract 1 and tract 2, as described in
                             deed to Crowley Independent School District
                             (Crowley ISD), according to the deed filed in
27177-09-2024 9-17-2024      instrument #d2074 i 6955, deed records of Tarrant
                             County, Texas (D.R.T.C.T.), being a portion of a
                             tract of land described in deed to Texas Electric
                             Service Company (Tesco), recorded in volume 3564,
                             page 577, D.R.T.C.T., also being a portion of West
                             Cleburne Road (County Road 1035), a variable width
                             right-of-way, public records of Tarrant County,
                             Texas, (case no. ax-24-004))
                             Annexation (2.263 acres, more or less, out of land
                             situated in the Charles Martin Survey, Abstract
                             No. 1022, Tarrant County, Texas; said tract being
                             all of a tract of land described as tract i in
                             independent executor's warranty deed to Judy A.
                             Baumgardner recorded in instrument number
                             d224016924, official public records, Tarrant
                             County, Texas (O.P.R.T.C.T.) and a portion of a
27178-09-2024 9-17-2024      tract of land described in special warranty deed
                             to City of Fort Worth recorded in instrument
                             number d216044405, O.P.R.T.C.T.; of the official
                             public records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
                             approximately 0.3796 acres of land more or less of
                             rights-of-way out of the Charles Martin Survey,
                             Abstract No. 1022, Tarrant County, Texas, being a
                             portion of Cleburne-Crowley road (variable r-o-w),
                             (case no. ax-24-005))
                             Annexation (4.039 acres, more or less, out of land
                             situated in the P. M. Smith Survey, Abstract No.
                             1170, Denton County, Texas, as conveyed to
                             corporation of the presiding bishop of the Church
                             of Jesus Christ Latter-Day Saints, a Utah
                             Corporation sole (church), in the deed recorded in
                             county clerk's file number (CC#) CC# 2019-1360,
                             deed records, Denton County, Texas (DRDCT) and a
                             portion of a tract of land described and
27179-09-2024 9-17-2024      approximately 1.912 acres of land more or less of
                             rights-of-way out of the P. M. Smith Survey,
                             Abstract No. 1170, and the R. Matany Survey,
                             Abstract No. 878, both in Denton County, Texas, as
                             conveyed to the State of Texas, in the deed
                             recorded under county clerk's document no. (CC#)
                             2014-102745, deed records, Denton County, Texas
                             (DRDCT), and a portion of a tract of land conveyed
                             to the State of Texas, in the deed recorded under
                             volume 279, page 205, DRDCT, (case no. ax-24-007))
                             Annexation (261.168 acres, more or less, out of
                             land situated in the G.H. & H. RR. Co. Survey,
                             Abstract No. 623, S.F. Co. Survey, Abstract No.
                             1844, D. T. Finley Survey, Abstract No. 1900 and
                             the S.A. & M.G. RR. Co. Surveys, Abstract No. 1479
                             and 1903, Tarrant County, Texas, and being a
                             portion of those tracts of land described to TRT
27180-09-2024 9-17-2024      land investors, LLC by deeds recorded in county
                             clerks file no. d221245220 and county clerk file
                             no. d221245221, official public records of Tarrant
                             County, Texas, and a portion of that tract of land
                             described to PMB Veale Land Investors 1 LP by deed
                             recorded in county clerk file no. d221245180 of
                             said official public records of Tarrant County,
                             Texas, (case no. ax-24-009))
                             Annexation (0.806 acres of land situated in the
                             Jacob Wilcox survey, Abstract No. 1743, City of
                             Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, said 0.806 acre
                             tract of land being a portion of a 6.26 acre tract
                             of land (by deed) described as tract one deeded to
                             2201 Risinger, L.L.C. (50% undivided interest) as
                             recorded in county clerk's file no. d209049450 of
27181-09-2024 9-17-2024      the deed records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
                             being deeded to Pamela L. Anderson, trustee of the
                             Anderson Marital Trust (50% undivided interest) as
                             recorded in volume 9931, page 1980 of said deed
                             records of Tarrant County, Texas and being further
                             described in county clerk's file no. d208403925 of
                             said deed records of Tarrant County, Texas (case
                             no. ax-24-010))
                             Annexation (9.079 acres of land situated in the
                             H.W. Cooke Survey, Abstract No. 310, Denton
27182-09-2024 9-17-2024      County, Texas; said tract being a portion of Dale
                             Earnhardt Way, being a variable-width public
                             access easement; Denton County, Texas (case no.
                             ax24-006))
27183-09-2024 9-17-2024      Prescribing the salary for each classification of
                             fire protection personnel in the fire department
27184-09-2024 9-17-2024      Prescribing the salary for each classification of
                             peace officer in the police department
                             Increasing the total number of authorized sworn
                             positions in the police department by 12 by adding
27185-09-2024 9-17-2024      9 positions in the classification of police
                             officer, and 3 positions in the classification of
                             Sargent, effective October 1, 2024
27186-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27187-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27188-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27189-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
27190-09-2024 9-17-2024      Appropriation
 
2024/10 - 2024/12
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.  Effective  Description
          Date
                     2-321,
                     7-1,
                     12.5-414,
27191-09-            12.5-844,
2024      10-1-2024  12.5-865,
                     13-2,
                     20-271,
                     29-1,
                     30-32
27192-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27193-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27194-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27195-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27196-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27197-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27198-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27199-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27200-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27201-10- 10-25-2024 22-86
2024
27202-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27203-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27204-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27205-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27206-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27207-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27208-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27209-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27210-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27211-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27212-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27213-10- 10-1-2024  35-56
2024
27214-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27215-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27216-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27217-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27218-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27219-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27220-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27221-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27222-10-            23-22, Repealing 20-105, 20-106, 20-107, 20-108, 20-109,
2024      10-15-2024 20-110, 20-111, 20- 112, 20-113, 20-114, 20-115, 20-116,
                     20-117, 20-118, 20-119, 20-120
27223-10-            Designating a certain area in the city as “tax abatement
2024      10-15-2024 reinvestment zone number one hundred and twelve, City of
                     Fort Worth, Texas”
27224-10-            Designating a certain area in the city as “tax abatement
2024      10-15-2024 reinvestment zone number one hundred and eleven, City of
                     Fort Worth, Texas”
27225-10-            Extending the term of, and approving an amended project
2024      10-15-2024 and financing plan for, tax increment reinvestment zone
                     number three, City of Fort Worth, Texas (downtown TIF)
27226-10- 12-13-2024 Zoning
2024
                     Forty-fourth supplemental ordinance authorizing the
                     issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth, Texas Water and
27227-10- 10-15-2024 Sewer System Revenue Bonds, series 2024C Swift (Eagle
2024                 Mountain), in the aggregate principal amount of
                     $125,000,000; approving the sale of the bonds to the Texas
                     Water Development Board
27228-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27229-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27230-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27231-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     Adjusting the number of authorized sworn positions in the
27232-10-            police department effective October 1, 2024, by adding two
2024      10-15-2024 positions that will mirror the classifications of
                     individuals designated by the Fort Worth police officers
                     association to serve as representative of the association
27233-10- 10-15-2024 Prescribing the salary for each classification of peace
2024                 officer in the police department
27234-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27235-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27236-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27237-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27238-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27239-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27240-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27241-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27242-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27243-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27244-10- 10-15-2024 Appropriation
2024
27245-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27246-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27247-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27248-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27249-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27250-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27251-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27252-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27253-10- 10-29-2024 Changing the name of West Cleburne Road between 10250 to
2024                 10505 blocks to South Hulen Street between the same blocks
27254-10-            Changing the name of and renumbering the 9000 block of Old
2024      10-29-2024 Granbury Road to the 6900 to 7199 blocks of McPherson
                     Boulevard
                     24-7,
                     24-8,
27255-10-            24-13,
2024      11-6-2024  24-15,
                     24-16,
                     24-17,
                     24-18
27256-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     Vacation (A portion of a variable width right of way known
                     as Cockrell Avenue and a portion of a twelve foot wide
                     alley, each situated in the Wade H. Hudson Survey,
                     Abstract Number 717, in the Forest Park Addition, an
27257-10- 10-29-2024 addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
2024                 according to the plat thereof, recorded in volume 310,
                     page 49 of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                     containing approximately 19,634 square feet or 0.4507
                     acres of land for the right of way, and 6,099 square feet
                     or 0.1400 acres of land for the alley)
27258-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27259-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27260-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27262-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27263-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
27264-10- 10-29-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     Annexation (78.34 acres, more or less, out of land
                     situated in section 6, G.E. and A.H. Tandy Survey,
                     Abstract No. 2356 and in section 5, Houston Tap & Brazoria
                     Railroad Company Survey, Abstract No. 647, Parker County,
                     Texas and being a portion of tract of land described in
                     deed to Walsh Ranches limited partnership, as recorded in
                     volume 1699, page 1765, deed records, Parker County, Texas
                     (D.R.P.C.T.) and volume 12624, page 92, deed records,
                     Tarrant County, Texas (D.R.T.C.T.) and a portion of a
                     called 98.21 acre tract of land described in deed to
                     ATH1187, LTD., as recorded in volume 2399, page 1194,
27265-10-            D.R.P.C.T., and approximately 31.77 acres of land more or
2024      10-29-2024 less of rights-of-way out situated in section 6, G.E. and
                     A.H. Tandy Survey, Abstract No. 2356, the J.D. Morris
                     Survey, Abstract No. 926, the Francisco Sanchez Survey,
                     Abstract No. 2346 and in section 5, Houston TAP & Brazoria
                     Railroad company survey, Abstract No. 647, Parker County,
                     Texas and being a portion of farm to Market Road No. 3325
                     (FM 3325) (variable width right-of-way), as recorded in
                     volume 1707, page 606, volume 1712, page 1432 and volume
                     1712, page 1425, deed records, Parker County, Texas
                     (D.R.P.C.T.) and a portion of interstate highway 20 (IH
                     20) (variable width right-of-way), (Case No. AX-24-008)
                     which said territory lies adjacent to and adjoins the
                     present corporate boundary limits of Fort Worth, Texas)
27266-10-            Extending the term of, and approving an amended project
2024      10-29-2024 and financing plan for, Tax Increment Zone number eight,
                     City of Fort Worth, Texas (Lancaster TIF)
27267-10- 10-29-2024 12.5-340
2024
27268-10- 12-13-2024 Zoning
2024
27269-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27270-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27271-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27273-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27274-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27275-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27276-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27277-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27278-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27279-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27280-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27281-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27282-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27283-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27284-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27285-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27286-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27287-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27288-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27289-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27290-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27291-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27292-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27293-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27294-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27295-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27296-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27297-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27298-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27299-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27300-11- 12-28-2024 Zoning
2024
27301-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
27302-11- 11-2-2024  Appropriation
2024
                     Approving Resolution No. 2024-10-269 adopted by the Dallas
                     Fort Worth International Airport Board on October 3, 2024
27303-11- 11-19-2024 for purpose of amending chapter 6, wastewater pretreatment
2024                 and discharge rules and regulations, of the code of rules
                     and regulations of the Dallas Fort Worth International
                     Airport Board
27304-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27305-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27306-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27307-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     12.5-103,
                     12.5-610,
                     12.5-610.1,
                     12.5-610.2,
27308-11- 11-29-2024 12.5-654,
2024                 12.5-654.1,
                     12.5-654.2,
                     12.5-671,
                     12.5-671.1,
                     12.5-671.2
27309-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27310-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27311-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27312-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27313-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27314-11- 12-20-2024 Zoning
2024
27315-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27316-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27317-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27318-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27319-11- 11-19-2024 Appropriation
2024
27320-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27321-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27322-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27323-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27324-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27325-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27326-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27327-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27328-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27329-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27330-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27331-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27332-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     Appointing Karen Williams, Jo Ann Reyes, and Leslie
27333-12-            Lenckus as substitute municipal judges for the remainder
2024      12-10-2024 of a two-year term commencing December 10, 2024 and ending
                     March 31, 2025 or until a successor is qualified and
                     appointed in accordance with state law
27334-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27335-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     Vacation (an approximately 60-foot wide right-of-way
                     reservation for Pleasant Oaks Street, located between lots
27336-12-            9 and 10 in block 6, Draughon Height Addition, an addition
2024      12-10-2024 to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas according
                     to the plat recorded in volume 388-u, page 69 of the plat
                     records of Tarrant County, Texas, containing approximately
                     34,011 square feet or 0.7808 acres of land)
                     Vacation (excess portions of East Altamesa Blvd right of
                     way situated in the Shelby County school land survey,
                     Abstract Number 1375, a portion being in the night train
                     compressor site, an addition to the City of Fort Worth
                     according to the plat thererof recorded in document number
27337-12-            d212014810 in the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
2024      12-10-2024 containing approximately 18,229 square feet or 0.418 acres
                     of land, and two portions of a certain tract of land
                     described by deed to the City of Fort Worth as recorded in
                     volume 10038, page 745, deed records, Tarrant County,
                     Texas, containing approximately 13,487 square feet or
                     0.309 acres of land, and 10,728 square feet or 0.246 acres
                     of land)
                     Vacation (a portion of a 10-foot wide alley, located
                     between lot 9-R, block 15, Frisco Heights Addition, an
                     addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas
                     according to the plat recorded in volume 388-79, page 57
                     of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, lot 1-R,
                     block 3, Prospect Heights Addition, an addition to the
27338-12- 12-10-2024 City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas according to the
2024                 plat recorded in volume 388-4, page 397 of the plat
                     records of Tarrant County, Texas, and lots 10-A and 11-B,
                     block 15, Prospect Heights Addition, an addition to the
                     City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas according to the
                     plat recorded in volume 388-16, page 107 of the plat
                     records of Tarrant County, Texas, containing approximately
                     1,611 square feet or 0.037 acres of land)
                     Vacation (a portion of Chapin Road an apparent
                     prescriptive right-of-way situated in the L. B. Creswell
                     Survey, Abstract No. 367 and the Hrs. H. Covington Survey,
                     Abstract No. 256 in the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
27339-12-            County, Texas, being a portion of a tract of land
2024      12-10-2024 described in a deed to Andrews 440 Ranch LP recorded in
                     County Clerk's File No. D214282388, official public
                     records, Tarrant County, Texas and containing
                     approximately 22,682 square feet or 0.521 acres of land
                     more or less; providing for vacation of the easements in
                     the land and reversion to the adjacent property owner)
                     Vacation (excess portions of East Altamesa Blvd right of
                     way situated in the Shelby County school land survey,
                     Abstract Number 1375, a portion being in the night train
                     compressor site, an addition to the City of Fort Worth
                     according to the plat thererof recorded in document number
27340-12-            D212014810 in the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
2024      12-10-2024 containing approximately 18,229 square feet or 0.418 acres
                     of land, and two portions of a certain tract of land
                     described by deed to the City of Fort Worth as recorded in
                     volume 10038, page 745, deed records, Tarrant County,
                     Texas, containing approximately 13,487 square feet or
                     0.309 acres of land, and 10,728 square feet or 0.246 acres
                     of land, respectively)
                     Vacation (two portions of right of way known as South
                     Jennings Avenue, situated in the Fields-Welch Addition, an
                     addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
27341-12- 12-10-2024 according to the plat thereof, recorded in cabinet B,
2024                 slide 1458, of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                     containing approximately 22,888 square feet or 0.525 acres
                     of land, and 112 square feet or 0.0026 acres of land,
                     respectively)
                     Vacation (a portion of Merida Avenue a sixty-foot wide
                     right-of-way situated between block 19 Prospect Heights
                     Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                     County, Texas according to the plat filed in volume 63,
                     page 59 of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
                     block 20r, TCU Addition, an addition to the City of Fort
                     Worth, Tarrant County Texas, according to the plat filed
                     in instrument number D220018642 in the plat records of
                     Tarrant County, Texas, and containing approximately 36,100
                     square feet or 0.829 acres of land more or less; and
27342-12- 12-10-2024 vacating and extinguishing a portion of a sixteen-foot
2024                 wide alley situated between block 19, Prospect Heights
                     Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                     County, Texas as filed in volume 63, page 59 of the plat
                     records of Tarrant County, Texas, and block 13, tcu
                     addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                     County, Texas according to the plat filed in cabinet A,
                     slide 5473 of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                     and containing approximately 9,600 square feet or 0.220
                     aces of land more or less; providing for vacation of the
                     easements in the land and reversion to the adjacent
                     property owner)
                     Vacation (a public access easement situated in the John
                     Van Lent Survey, Abstract No. 1871, in the City of Fort
                     Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, being a portion of lot 11,
                     block 13, Summer Creek Station, an addition to the City of
                     Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plat
27343-12-            recorded in Instrument No. D218196478 of the official
2024      12-10-2024 public records of Tarrant County, Texas, said tract being
                     all of a temporary turnaround easement recorded in
                     instrument no. D215212129 of the official public records
                     of Tarrant County, Texas and containing approximately
                     7,113 square feet or 0.1633 acres of land more or less;
                     providing for vacation of the easements in the land and
                     reversion to the adjacent property owner)
27344-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27345-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27346-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27347-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27348-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27349-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27350-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27351-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27352-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27353-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27354-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27355-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27356-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27357-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27358-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27359-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27360-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27361-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27362-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27363-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27364-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27365-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27366-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27367-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27368-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27369-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27370-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27371-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
27372-12-            2-177,
2024      12-10-2024 2-177.1,
                     2-177.2
27373-12-            Designating a certain area in the city as “Tax Abatement
2024      12-10-2024 Reinvestment Zone Number one hundred and nine City of Fort
                     Worth, Texas”
                     Designating and recognizing the area within the municipal,
27374-12- 12-10-2024 or corporate, boundaries of the city, as Media Production
2024                 Development Zone Number One pursuant to Chapter 485A,
                     Texas Government Code
27375-12-            Nominating the real property at 2701 Spirit Dr., for
2024      12-10-2024 designation as a Qualified Media Production Location
                     pursuant to Chapter 485A, Texas Government Code
27376-12-            Approving an amended project and financing plan for Tax
2024      12-10-2024 Increment Reinvestment Zone number three, City of Fort
                     Worth, Texas (Downtown TIF)
27377-12-            Approving an amended and restated service and assessment
2024      12-10-2024 plan for the Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 17
                     (Rock Creek Ranch)
27378-12- 12-10-2024 Adopting the standards of care for 2025 for youth programs
2024                 offered by the city
                     Appointing Laura Ganoza as a municipal judge for an
27379-12- 12-10-2024 unexpired term commencing December 10, 2024 and ending
2024                 March 31, 2026 or until a successor is qualified and
                     appointed in accordance with state law
27380-12- 12-10-2024 Appropriation
2024
                     App. A §§ 4.305,
27381-12-            4.803,
2024      12-20-2024 4.1203,
                     5.105,
                     9.101
27382-12- 1-17-2025  Zoning
2024
 
2025/01 - 2025/03
 
 
Ord. No. Effective Date Description
Ord. No.       Effective Date Description
27383-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27384-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27385-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27386-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27387-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27388-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27389-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27390-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27391-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27392-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
                              Appointing Cynthia Fitch as a substitute
                              municipal judge for the remainder of a two-year
27393-01-2025  1-14-2025      term commencing January 25, 2025 and ending March
                              31, 2025 or until a successor is qualified and
                              appointed in accordance with state law
27394-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (a portion of a 20-foot wide alley,
                              located in Block 8, Edwards Heirs Addition, an
                              addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
27395-01-2025  1-14-2025      County, Texas according to the plat recorded in
                              Volume 63, page 2 of the plat records of Tarrant
                              County, Texas, containing approximately 4,012
                              square feet or 0.092 acres of land more or less)
27396-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27397-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27398-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27399-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27400-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27401-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27402-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27403-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27404-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27405-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27406-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27407-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27408-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27409-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27410-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27411-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27412-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27413-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27414-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27415-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27416-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27417-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27418-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27419-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27420-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
27421-01-2025  1-14-2025      Appropriation
                              Annexation (108.610 acres, more or less, out of
                              land situated in J.F. Health Survey, Abstract
                              Number 641, the G. Shields Survey, Abstract
                              Number 1436, the J. Burnett Survey, Abstract
                              number 1923, and the J. Wilcox Survey, Abstract
                              Number 1742, Tarrant County, Texas, being a
                              portion of two tracts of land described by deed
                              to Southwest Pasture LTD., recorded in
                              instruction number D212318326 (tract 1 remainder
                              and tract 2) and being a portion of that tract of
                              land described by deed to Texas Electric Service
                              Company, recorded in volume 2974, page 298 (tract
                              1), both of the county records, Tarrant County,
                              Texas and approximately 44.368 acres of land more
27422-01-2025  1-14-2025      or less of rights-of-way out of the J.F. Health
                              Survey, Abstract Number 641, the I & G.N.
                              Railroad Company Survey, Abstract Number 832,
                              J.H. Shultz Survey, Abstract Number 1941, and the
                              J. Wilcox Survey, Abstract Number 1742, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, being all of those tracts of land
                              described by deed to City of Fort Worth (parcel
                              98-pt1 and 98-pt2), recorded in instrument number
                              D205118476 and D207140864, both of the County
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas, being of portion
                              of State Highway 121 (Chisholm Trail Parkway, a
                              variable width right-of-way), (Case No. AX-24-
                              013) which said territory lies adjacent to and
                              adjoins the present corporate boundary limits of
                              Fort Worth, Texas)
27423-01-2025  2-14-2025      Zoning
27424-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
                              36-1,
                              36-2,
                              36-3,
                              36-4,
                              36-5,
                              36-6,
                              36-7,
                              36-8,
                              36-9,
27425-01-2025  2-7-2025       36-10,
                              36-11,
                              36-12,
                              36-13,
                              36-14,
                              36-15,
                              36-16,
                              36-17,
                              36-18,
                              36-19
27426-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27427-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27428-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27429-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27430-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27431-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27432-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27433-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27434-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27435-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27436-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27437-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27438-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
27439-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation
                              Ordering a general election by the qualified
                              voters of the City of Fort Worth, Texas, on May
27440-01-2025  1-28-2025      3, 2025, for the purpose of electing the Mayor
                              and City Council members for the City of Fort
                              Worth and ordering a runoff election, if needed
                              Terminating tax increment reinvestment zone
                              number 10, City of Fort Worth, Texas, as
27441-01-2025  1-28-2025      designated by Ordinance No. 16002, dissolving the
                              Board of Directors and tax increment fund for the
                              zone
27442-01-2025  1-28-2025      Appropriation amendment
27443-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27444-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27445-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27446-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27447-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27448-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27449-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27450-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27451-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27452-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27453-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27454-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27455-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27456-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27457-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27458-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27459-02-2025  3-19-2025      Zoning
27460-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27461-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27462-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27463-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
27464-02-2025  2-11-2025      Appropriation
                              Authorizing and approving the extension of the
                              maximum maturity date of the city s water and
                              sewer system commercial paper notes, Callable CP
                              Series, as established in Ordinance No. 23028-12-
27465-02-2025  2-25-2025      2017 and supplemented by Ordinance No. 25970-02-
                              2023; approving an increase in the aggregate
                              principal amount at any one time outstanding of
                              such commercial paper notes from $225,000,000 to
                              $700,000,000; amending and supplementing
                              Ordinance No. 25970-02-2023 and this ordinance
                              Amended and restated thirty-second supplemental
                              ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of
27466-02-2025  2-25-2025      City of Fort Worth, Texas, Water and Sewer System
                              Revenue Refunding Bonds, in one or more series,
                              in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
                              $700,000,000
27467-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27468-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27469-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27470-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27471-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving Resolution No. 2024-11-294 adopted by
                              the Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Board
27472-02-2025  2-25-2025      on November 14, 2024 for purpose of amending
                              Chapter 3, Article III of the Code of Rules and
                              Regulations of the Dallas Fort Worth
                              International Airport Board
27473-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27474-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27475-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27476-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27477-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27478-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27479-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27480-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27481-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27482-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27483-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27484-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27485-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27486-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27487-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27488-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27489-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27490-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27491-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27492-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27493-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27494-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27495-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27496-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27497-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27498-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27499-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27500-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
27501-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
                              Seventieth supplemental concurrent bond ordinance
27502-02-2025  2-25-2025      authorizing one or more series of Dallas For
                              Worth International Airport Joint Revenue Bonds
                              Seventy-first supplemental concurrent bond
27503-02-2025  2-25-2025      ordinance authorizing one or more series of
                              Dallas Fort Worth International Airport Joint
                              Revenue Bonds
27504-02-2025  2-25-2025      Appropriation
                              Terminating tax increment reinvestment zone
                              number six, City of Fort Worth (Riverfront TIF);
27505-02-2025  2-25-2025      authorizing the distribution of tax increment
                              funds of the zone to taxing units participating
                              in the zone in accordance with the Texas Tax Code
27506-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27507-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27508-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27509-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27510-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27511-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27512-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27513-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27514-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27515-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27516-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27517-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27518-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27519-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27520-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27521-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27522-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
                              16-101,
                              16-102,
                              16-103,
                              16-104,
                              16-105,
                              16-111,
                              16-112,
                              16-113,
                              16-114,
                              16-115,
                              16-116,
                              16-121,
                              16-122,
                              16-123,
                              16-124,
                              16-125,
                              16-131,
                              16-133,
                              16-134,
                              16-135,
                              16-140,
                              16-141,
                              16-146,
                              16-147,
27523-03-2025  4-18-2025      16-148,
                              16-149,
                              16-150,
                              16-151,
                              16-152,
                              16-153,
                              16-171,
                              16-172,
                              16-173,
                              16-174,
                              16-175,
                              16-176,
                              16-177,
                              16-178,
                              16-179,
                              16-180,
                              16-181,
                              16-182,
                              16-183,
                              16-184,
                              16-185,
                              16-186,
                              16-187,
                              16-188,
                              16-189
                              16-420,
                              16-421,
                              16-422,
                              16-423,
                              16-424,
                              16-425,
                              16-426,
                              16-427,
                              16-428,
                              16-429,
27524-03-2025  3-11-2025      16-430,
                              16-431,
                              16-432,
                              16-433,
                              16-434,
                              16-435,
                              16-436,
                              16-437,
                              16-438,
                              16-439,
                              16-440
                              Vacation (public right-of-way situated in the
                              John Askew Survey, Abstract No. 16, in the City
                              of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, said tract
                              being all of a right-of-way easement recorded in
27525-03-2025  3-11-2025      Instrument no. D223087115 of the official public
                              records of Tarrant County, Texas and containing
                              approximately 7,802 square feet or 0.179 acres of
                              land more or less; providing for vacation of the
                              easements in the land and revision to the
                              adjacent property owner)
27526-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27527-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27528-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27529-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27530-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27531-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27532-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27533-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27534-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27535-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27536-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27537-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27538-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27539-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27540-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27541-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27542-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27543-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
27544-03-2025  3-11-2025      Appropriation
                              4.103,
                              4.306,
                              4.708,
                              4.709,
                              4.1100,
27545-03-2025  3-11-2025      4.1101,
                              5.305,
                              6.100,
                              6.201,
                              6.202,
                              6.301,
                              9.101
27546-03-2025  3-11-2025      Zoning
                              Directing publication and posting of notice of
27547-03-2025  3-11-2025      intention to issue combination tax and revenue
                              certificates of obligation; and ordaining other
                              matters relating to the subject
27548-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27549-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27550-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27551-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27552-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27553-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27554-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27555-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27556-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27557-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27558-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27559-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27560-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27561-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27562-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27563-03-2025  3-25-2025      Appropriation
27564-03-2025  4-30-2025      Zoning
27565-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
27566-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
27567-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
27568-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
27569-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
                              Changing the name of the entirety of Worth Creek
27570-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Parkway between Brewer Boulevard and Summer Creek
                              Drive to Tarleton State Parkway between the same
                              streets
                              Vacation (A portion of Milano Avenue a fifty-foot
                              wide right-of-way situated between block 25 and
                              block 26 Lake View Addition, an addition to the
27571-04- 2025 4-8-2025       City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas
                              according to the plat filed in volume 204, page 5
                              of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
                              containing approximately 8,695 square feet or
                              0.199 acres of land more or less)
27572-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
27573-04- 2025 4-8-2025       Appropriation
                              Vacation (a portion of W. Cannon Street, a fifty-
                              foot wide right-of-way situated between lot 2,
                              block 7, Edwards Heirs Addition, an addition to
                              the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              according to the plat filed in volume 63, page 2
                              of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
27574-04- 2025 4-8-2025       lot 1r, block 6 Edwards Heirs Addition, an
                              addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County Texas according to the plat filed as
                              instrument number d213072947 of the plat records
                              of Tarrant County, Texas, and containing
                              approximately 7,050 square feet or 0.161 acres of
                              land more or less)
27575-04- 2025 5-30-2025      Zoning
                              Appointing Kim Marie Catalano, Cindy Fitch, Faye
                              R. Harden, Joseph Henderson, Leslie Lenckus,
                              Terry Reeves, Joann Reyes, and Karen Boyd
27576-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Williams as substitute municipal judges for a
                              two-year term commencing April 1, 2025 and ending
                              March 31, 2027 or until a successor is qualified
                              and appointed in accordance with state law
27577-04- 2025 4-22-2025      6-75
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27578-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 1 - downtown
27579-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27580-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27581-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27582-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 6 - Park Glen
27583-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27584-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27585-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 7 - Heritage
27586-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27587-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27588-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 11 - Stockyards
27589-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27590-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27591-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 12 - Chapel Hill
27592-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27593-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27594-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27595-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 19 - Historic Camp Bowie
27596-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27597-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fiscal year 2024-2025 budget and
27598-04- 2025 4-22-2025      five year service plan for Public Improvement
                              District No. 20 - East Lancaster Avenue
27599-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27600-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27601-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27602-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27603-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27604-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27605-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27606-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27607-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27608-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27609-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27610-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
27611-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Appropriation
                              Annexation (Providing for full-purpose annexation
                              of a certain 238.8 acres, more or less, out of
                              land situated in the Houston Tap and Brazoria
                              Railroad Company Survey, Abstract No. 647, the
                              G.E. & AH Tandy Survey, Abstract No. 2356, the I
                              & G.N. Railroad Company Survey, Abstract No. 1995
                              and the I & G.N. Railroad Company Survey,
                              Abstract No. 1996, and being a portion of that
                              certain tract of land described by special
                              warranty deed to Walsh Ranches limited
                              partnership, recorded in volume 1699, page 1765
27612-04- 2025 4-22-2025      of the deed records of Parker County, Texas
                              (D.R.P.C.T.) and volume 12624, page 92 of the
                              deed records of Tarrant County, Texas, and
                              approximately 24.85 acreas of road in the Houston
                              Tap & Brazoria Railroad Company Survey, Abstract
                              No. 647 and the I & G.N. Railroad Company Survey,
                              Abstract No. 1995, and being portions of those
                              certain tracts of land described by deed to the
                              State of Texas, recorded in volume 172, page 560,
                              volume 1113, page 924 and volume 1152, page 1055
                              of the deed records of Parker County, Texas,
                              (Case No. ax-23-009))
                              Annexation (138.8 acres, more or less, out of
                              land situated in the Houston Tap & Brazoria
                              Railroad Company Survey, Abstract No. 654, the I
                              & G.N. Railroad Company Survey, Abstract No.
                              1995, the I & G.N. Railroad Company Survey,
                              Abstract No. 1996 and the heirs of C.H. Higbee
27613-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Survey, Abstract No. 2740 and being a portion of
                              that certain tract of land described by special
                              warranty deed to Walsh Ranches limited
                              partnership, recorded in volume 1699, page 1765
                              of the deed records of Parker County, Texas
                              (D.R.P.C.T.) and volume 12624, page 92 of the
                              deed records of Tarrant County, Texas
                              (D.R.T.C.T.) (case no. ax-24-001))
27614-04- 2025 6-6-2025       Zoning
                              App. A
27615-04- 2025 5-9-2025       6.302,
                              9.101
27616-04- 2025 8-22-2025      2-322
                              Vacation (A portion of Anderson Boulevard, an
                              unimproved fifty-foot wide right-of-way located
                              west of Morrison Drive, and vacating a twenty-
                              foot-wide portion of an un-named public right-of-
                              way along the western boundary of lot 17-r,
                              Burton Place Addition, located in the A.J. Knapp
27617-04- 2025 4-22-2025      Survey, Abstract No. 922, City of Fort Worth,
                              Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plat of
                              Burton Place Addition, being an addition to City
                              of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas filed in
                              volume 388-c, page 122, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and collectively containing
                              approximately 45,706 square feet or 1.0493 acres
                              of land more or less)
27618-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Adopting a per acre charge in accordance with
                              chapter 35, article III, division 3, sewer per
                              acre charges, sections
27619-05- 2025 5-13-2025      35-81 through
                              35-86 of the city code, for the 2461.33 acres
                              served by developer sewer main project ("Laprelle
                              Offsite sewer line") located near 544 blue Mound
                              Rd
27620-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Adopting a water main capacity charge pursuant to
                              section
27621-05- 2025 5-13-2025      35-90 of the city code for a city initiated 24-
                              inch westside III water transmission main,
                              located near Markum Ranch Rd and interstate
                              highway 20
27622-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27623-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27624-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27625-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27626-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27627-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27628-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27629-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27630-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (Three portions of Commerce Street, a
                              variable width public right of way between E. 9th
                              Street and E. 14th Street, situated in Tarrant
                              County Convention Center, an addition to the City
                              of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, according
27631-05- 2025 5-13-2025      to the plat recorded in volume 388-155, page 47
                              of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                              containing approximately 5,358 square feet or
                              0.123 acres of land, 53,820 square feet or 1.235
                              acres of land, and 3,136 square feet or 0.071
                              acres of land respectively, more or less)
27632-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27633-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27634-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27635-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27636-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27637-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27638-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27639-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27640-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27641-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27642-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27643-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27644-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27645-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27646-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Levying special assessments for the costs of
                              certain improvements and services benefitting a
27647-05- 2025 5-13-2025      certain additional hotel property in Public
                              Improvement District 18 - tourism during the
                              remainder of fiscal year 2024-2025
27648-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Annexation (A certain 4.537 acres, more or less,
                              out of land situated in the J.J. Albirado Survey,
                              Abstract Number 4, City of Fort Worth E.T.J.,
27649-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Tarrant County, Texas, being all of two tracts of
                              land described by deed to Old Granbury Holdings,
                              LLC, recorded in instrument number d224199629
                              (tract 1 and tract 2), county records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas (case no. ax-25-001))
27650-05- 2025 8-7-2025       Zoning
                              Providing for the issuance of City of Fort Worth,
27651-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Texas General Purpose Bonds, Series 2025, in an
                              aggregate principal amount not to exceed
                              $115,000,000
                              An ordinance considering all matters incident and
27652-05- 2025 5-13-2025      related to the issuance, sale and delivery of up
                              to $300,000,000 in principal amount of "City of
                              Fort Worth General Purpose Refunding Bonds"
27653-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort
                              Worth, Texas Special Tax Revenue and Refunding
27654-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Bonds (Multipurpose Arena Venue Project), Series
                              2025, in an aggregate principal amount not to
                              exceed $90,605,000
27655-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
27656-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Authorizing the issuance and sale of City of Fort
                              Worth, Texas Special Tax Revenue Bonds
27657-05- 2025 5-13-2025      (Convention Center Venue Project), Series 2025,
                              in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
                              $65,730,000
27658-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Authorizing issuance of tax notes of the City of
27659-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Fort Worth, Texas in an aggregate principal
                              amount not to exceed $65,000,000
27660-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Forty-fifth supplemental ordinance authorizing
                              the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth,
27661-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Texas Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds,
                              series 2025, in an aggregate principal amount not
                              to exceed $190,000,000
                              Amended and restated thirty-second supplemental
                              ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of
27662-05- 2025 5-13-2025      City of Fort Worth, Texas Water and Sewer System
                              Revenue Refunding Bonds, in one or more series,
                              in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
                              $700,000,000
27663-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (A portion of a variable width alley,
                              being a portion of block 5, Grandview Addition,
                              an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 63, page 29 of the plat records of Tarrant
27664-05- 2025 5-13-2025      County, Texas, and a part of lot 7-R-L-R, block
                              4r, Grandview Addition, an addition to the City
                              of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, according
                              to the plat recorded in county clerk's document
                              number d210172187, plat records, Tarrant County,
                              Texas, containing approximately 2,000 square feet
                              or 0.045 acres of land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion of a variable width alley,
                              being a portion of block 9, Grandview Addition,
                              an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 63, page 29 of the plat records of Tarrant
27665-05- 2025 5-13-2025      County, Texas, and a part of lot 17r, block 9,
                              Grandview Addition, an addition to the City of
                              Fort Worth, according to the plat recorded in
                              county clerk's document number d211238238, plat
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas, containing
                              approximately 3,125 square feet or 0.071 acres of
                              land more or less)
                              Vacation (A 6.67-foot-wide alley, as shown on
                              plat for southland subdivision of block 10,
                              Field's Welch Addition, an addition to the City
27666-05- 2025 5-13-2025      of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas according to
                              the plat recorded in volume 310, page 5, plat
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas, containing
                              approximately 907 square feet or 0.020 acres of
                              land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion of Cooper Street, a variable
                              width public right of way between 8th Avenue and
                              7th Avenue and a portion of 7th Avenue, a
                              variable width public right of way between Cooper
                              Street and W. Terrell Avenue, each situated in
                              the S. Jennings Survey, Abstract No. 844, City of
                              Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, according to
                              the plat of Grandview Addition, an addition to
27667-05- 2025 5-13-2025      the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas
                              filed for record in volume 63, page 29, plat
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas and according to
                              plat of Cook Children's Medical Center Addition,
                              an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, according to the plat recorded in
                              county clerk's document number d211238238, plat
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas, together
                              containing approximately 58,921 square feet or
                              1.353 acres of land more or less
                              Vacation (A portion a variable width public right
                              of way known as of Southland Avenue, situated in
                              the W. Welch Survey, Abstract No. 1644, City of
                              Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, between W.
                              Terrell Avenue and lot 14r1, according to the
                              plat of southland subdivision of block 10,
                              Field's Welch Addition, an addition to the City
                              of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 310, page 5, plat records, Tarrant County,
                              Texas, as shown on the plat for lot 14r1,
27668-05- 2025 5-13-2025      southland subdivision of block 10, Field's Welch
                              Addition, an addition to the City of Fort Worth
                              according to the plat recorded in county clerk's
                              document number d213087375, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and as shown on plat for lot 25r,
                              block 10, southland subdivision, an addition to
                              the City of Fort Worth according to the plat
                              recorded in county clerk's document number
                              d201039003, plat records, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              containing approximately 28,743 square feet or
                              0.659 acres of land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion a of W. Terrell Avenue, a
                              variable width public right of way between 8th
                              Avenue and 6th Avenue, situated in the W. Welch
                              Survey, abstract no. 1644, City of Fort Worth,
27669-05- 2025 5-13-2025      Tarrant County, Texas, according to the plat of
                              Grandview Addition, an addition to the City of
                              Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 63, page 29, plat records, Tarrant County,
                              Texas, containing approximately 64,865 square
                              feet or 1.489 acres of land more or less)
                              An ordinance designating and recognizing the area
                              within the municipal, or corporate, boundaries of
27670-05- 2025 5-20-2025      the City of Fort Worth, Texas, as Media
                              Production Development Zone Number One pursuant
                              to chapter 485a, texas government code.
                              Vacation (A portion of North Commerce Street, a
                              seventy-foot wide public right-of-way situated in
27671-05- 2025 5-20-2025      the Fexlix Mulliken Survey, Abstract No. 1045,
                              Tarranty County, Texas, and containing
                              approximately 2,800 square feet or 0.0643 acres
                              of land more or less)
                              Vacation (Portions of North Commerce Street, a
                              seventy-foot wide public right-of-way, North
                              Calhoun Street, a seventy-foot wide public right-
                              of-way, northeast 9th Street, a sixty-foot wide
                              public right-of-way, and a ten-foot wide alley
27672-05- 2025 5-20-2025      adjacent to lots 1-10, and lots 11-20, block 40,
                              North Fort Worth Addition, an addition to the
                              City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded
                              in volume 63, page 149, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and together containing
                              approximately 155,963 square feet or 3.5804 acres
                              of land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion of a twenty-foot wide alley
                              situated in the Felix Mulliken Survey, Abstract
                              No. 1045, Tarrant County, Texas, being a portion
                              of a 20-foot alley as shown on the plat of North
27673-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Fort Worth Addition, an addition to the City of
                              Fort Worth according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 63, page 149, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and containing approximately 2,030
                              square feet or 0.0466 acres of land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion of a twenty-foot wide alley
                              situated in the Felix Mulliken Survey, Abstract
                              No. 1045, Tarrant County, Texas, being a portion
                              of a 20-foot wide alley as shown on the plat of
27674-05- 2025 5-20-2025      North Fort Worth Addition, an addition to the
                              City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded
                              in volume 63, page 149, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and containing approximately 2,029
                              square feet or 0.0466 acres of land more or less)
27675-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27676-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27677-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27678-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27679-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27680-05- 2025 8-20-2025      Zoning
27681-05- 2025 5-20-2025      Appropriation
27682-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27683-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27684-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27685-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27686-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27687-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27688-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27689-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27690-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27691-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27692-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27693-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27694-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27695-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27696-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
                              An ordinance changing the name of the entirety of
27697-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Graben Lane between Rancho Canyon Way and State
                              Highway 114 to Alpha Ranch Parkway between the
                              same streets
27698-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27699-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27700-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27701-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27702-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27703-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27704-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27705-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27706-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27707-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27708-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27709-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27710-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27711-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27712-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27713-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27714-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (A twenty-five foot-wide portion of
                              Northeast 12th Street, a one hundred-foot-wide
                              right-of-way situated in the Felix G. Mulliken
                              Survey, Abstract No. 1045, City of Fort Worth,
                              Tarrant County, Texas, and being a portion of the
27715-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Riverside Gardens Addition, an addition to the
                              City of Fort Worth according to the map or plat
                              thereof recorded in volume 388-b, page 19 of the
                              official public records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                              and containing approximately 3,209 square feet or
                              0.074 acres of land more or less)
                              Vacation (A portion of a twenty-foot wide alley
                              situated in the T. Taylor Survey, Abstract No.
                              1539, Tarrant County, Texas, being a portion of
                              block 32, Westcliff Addition, an addition to the
27716-06- 2025 6-10-2025      City of Fort Worth according to the plat recorded
                              in volume 388-n, page 49, plat records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and containing approximately
                              12,785 square feet or 0.293 acres of land more or
                              less)
                              Vacation (A portion of Lubbock Avenue, a sixty-
                              foot-wide public right-of-way, and a portion of a
                              sixteen-foot-wide alley in block 20, each
                              situated in the M.J. Arocha Survey, Abstract
                              Number 2, City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County,
27717-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Texas, as shown on the plat for prospect heights,
                              an addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, according to the plat recorded in
                              volume 63, page 59, plat records of Tarrant
                              County Texas, and each containing approximately
                              3,026 square feet or 0.69 acres of land and 800
                              square feet or 0.018 acres of land respectively)
                              Vacation (A portion of East 4th Street, a sixty-
                              four-foot wide public right-of-way, and a portion
                              of Elliot Avenue, a sixty-one-foot wide public
                              right-of-way, situated in the R. Cross Survey,
                              Abstract Number 304, City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
27718-06- 2025 6-10-2025      County, Texas, according to the final plat of the
                              Page Company's East Side Addition, an addition to
                              the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              recorded in volume 309, page 3, county records,
                              Tarrant County, Texas, and together containing
                              approximately 0.698 acres of land, more or less)
27719-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27720-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27721-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27722-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27723-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27724-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27725-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27726-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27727-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27728-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27729-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27730-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27731-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27732-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27733-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27734-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27735-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27736-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27737-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27738-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
27740-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Appropriation
                              2-177.5,
                              2-177.6,
                              2-177.7,
27741-06- 2025 6-10-2025      2-177.8,
                              2-177.9,
                              2-177.10,
                              2-177.11,
                              11.5-5
                              Annexation (A certain 35.832 acres, more or less,
                              out of land situated in the A. Robinson Survey,
                              Abstract No. 1119, and the M.E.P. & P. R.R. Co.
                              Survey. section 95, denton county, texas,
27742-06- 2025 6-10-2025      containing the remainder of a tract of land
                              conveyed to Whigham family limited partnership,
                              according to the deed filed in instrument #1996-
                              82877, deed records of Denton County, Texas,
                              (case no. ax-24-014))
                              Designating a certain contiguous geographic area
27743-06- 2025 6-10-2025      in the City of Fort Worth as "Tax Increment
                              Reinvestment Zone Number Seventeen, City of Fort
                              Worth, Texas"
27744-06- 2025 8-22-2025      Zoning
                              35-70.2,
                              35-70.3,
                              35-71,
27745-06- 2025 10-1-2025      35-72,
                              35-73,
                              35-76,
                              35-77,
                              35-78
                              Ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of
                              City of Fort Worth, Texas Drainage Utility System
27746-06- 2025 6-10-2025      Revenue Refunding Bonds, refunding bonds, in one
                              or more series, in an aggregate principal amount
                              not to exceed $100,000,000
27747-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27748-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27749-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27750-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              Directing publication and posting of notice of
27751-06- 2025 6-24-2025      intention to issue combination tax and revenue
                              certificates of obligation; and ordaining other
                              matters relating to the subject
27752-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27753-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27754-06- 2025 8-20-2025      22-86
27755-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27756-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27757-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27758-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27759-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27760-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27761-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27762-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27763-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27764-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27765-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27766-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              Amending the fee schedule for the environmental
                              services department to eliminate fees for
                              farmer's markets permits, seasonal health
                              permits, food manager certificates, additional
                              days for temporary health permits, late fees for
27767-06- 2025 6-24-2025      temporary health permits, and fees for special
                              event invitation only temporary health permits
                              and amending the fee schedule to reflect changes
                              in annual permitting fees for fixed food
                              establishments, mobile food units, temporary
                              events, pre-permit requests for services, change
                              of ownership for permits, and re-inspections
                              Amending the fee schedule to reflect changes in
                              plan review and permitting fees for hotels,
27768-06- 2025 6-24-2025      motels, swimming pools, spas, splash pads, fixed
                              food and childcare facilities, mobile vendor
                              units, and pool operators
27769-06- 2025 6-24-2025      App. B, 11A-52
27770-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27771-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27772-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27773-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27774-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27775-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27776-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27777-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27778-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27779-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27780-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge pursuant to
                              section 35-90 of the city code for a city
27781-06- 2025 6-24-2025      initiated 36-inch Westside IV water transmission
                              main located near Aledo Rd and Markum Ranch Rd
                              ("Westside IV transmission main")
                              Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge pursuant to
27782-06- 2025 6-24-2025      section 35-90 of the city code for a city
                              initiated 36-inch Westside V water transmission
                              main ("Westside V transmission main")
                              Adopting a Water Main Capacity Charge pursuant to
27783-06- 2025 6-24-2025      section 35-90 of the city code for a city
                              initiated 42-inch Westside III water transmission
                              main ("Westside III transmission main")
27784-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27785-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27786-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27787-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27788-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27789-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27790-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27791-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27792-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27793-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27794-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27795-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27796-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27797-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27798-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27799-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27800-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27801-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27802-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27803-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27804-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27805-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27806-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27807-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27808-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27809-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27810-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27811-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27812-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27813-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27814-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              Annexation (A certain 169.243 acres, more or
                              less, out of land situated in the G H & H R RR Co
                              Survey, Abstract No. 623, the Dan H Dixon Survey,
                              Abstract No. 442, and the heirs of Nathan Proctor
                              Survey, Abstract No. 1229, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              and being a portion of a 516.831-acre tract of
                              land being comprised of a portion of those tracts
                              of land described to PMB i-20 land lp by deed
                              recorded in county clerk file no. d221321297, and
27815-06- 2025 6-24-2025      to PMB team ranch Devco LLC by deed recorded in
                              county clerk file no. d221321298, and to Wal-mart
                              stores east, LP by deeds recorded in county clerk
                              file no. d223062320 and d223062321 of the
                              official public records, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              and approximately 20.764 acreas of road and
                              railway rights-of-way in the Dan H Dixon Survey,
                              Abstract No. 442 and the heirs of Nathan Proctor
                              Survey, Abstract No. 1229; G H & H R RR Co
                              Survey, Abstract No. 623; Tarrant County, Texas,
                              (Case No. ax-23-011))
                              Annexation (A certain 186.090 acres, more or
                              less, out of land situated in the G H & H R RR Co
                              Survey, Abstract No. 623, the James F. Elliott
                              Survey, Abstract No. 495, and the Mckinney &
                              Williams Survey, Abstract No. 1117, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and being a portion of the
                              remainder of a tract of land described as tract 4
                              to PMB I-20 land LP by deed recorded in county
                              clerk file no. d221321297 of the official public
27816-06- 2025 6-24-2025      records, Tarrant County, Texas, and approximately
                              69.067 acres of roads and rights-of-way in G H &
                              H R RR Co Survey, Abstract No. 623, the James F.E
                              lliott Survey, Abstract No. 495, and the Robert
                              Bissett Survey, Abstract No. 192, Tarrant County,
                              Texas, and being a portion of R.M. Highway No.
                              2871 and a portion of Interstate Highway 20 as
                              shown by right-of-way maps on file with the texas
                              department of transportation, (case no. ax-24-
                              017))
                              Annexation (A certain 14.927 acres, more or less,
                              out of land situated in the Josiah Walker Survey,
                              Abstract Number 1603, situated in Tarrant County,
                              Texas, and being all of that certain tract of
                              land described in a deed to alliance community
                              fellowship as recorded in instrument number
                              d207081140, deed records, Tarrant County, Texas
                              and all of that certain tract of land described
                              in deed to Terrapact Wirelessg, LLC, recorded in
                              instrument number d223009125, deed records,
                              Tarrant County, Texas the deed records of Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and approximately 0.105 acreas of
                              road in the Josiah Walker Survey, Abstract Number
27817-06- 2025 6-24-2025      1603, situated in Tarrant County, Texas, and
                              being a portion of those certain tracts of land
                              described in deed to Terrapact Wirelessg, LLC,
                              recorded in instrument number d223009125, deed
                              records, Tarrant County, Texas (D.R.T.C.T.),
                              Alliance Community Fellowship, recorded in
                              instrument number d207081140, D.R.T.C.T., the
                              Steve T. Wong family trust, recorded in
                              instrument number d224188749, D.R.T.C.T., Kromer
                              family properties, LLC and Tank Builders Inc,
                              recorded in instrument number d222086083,
                              D.R.T.C.T., and Ron Sturgeon real estate L.P.,
                              recorded in instrument number d217047501,
                              D.R.T.C.T., the deed records of Tarrant County,
                              Texas, (case no. ax-24-016))
                              Designating a certain area in the City of Fort
27818-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Worth as "Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number
                              One Hundred and Thirteen, City of Fort Worth,
                              Texas"
                              Designating a certain area in the City of Fort
27819-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Worth as "Tax Abatement Reinvestment Zone Number
                              One Hundred and Fourteen, City of Fort Worth,
                              Texas"
27820-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27821-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27822-06- 2025 8-20-2025      App A, 4.1203
27823-06- 2025 9-12-2025      Zoning
27824-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27825-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
27826-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              Revising the total number of authorized sworn
                              positions in the fire department by 543,
27827-06- 2025 6-24-2025      effective June 28, 2025, by adding positions in
                              various specified classifications related to
                              provision of emergency medical services
                              Revising the total number of authorized sworn
                              positions in the fire department by 543,
27828-06- 2025 6-24-2025      effective June 28, 2025, by adding positions in
                              various specified classifications related to
                              provision of emergency medical services
27829-06- 2025 6-28-2025      13-24.1,
                              13-25
                              Prescribing the salary for each classification of
27830-06- 2025 6-24-2025      emergency medical services personnel in the fire
                              department
27831-06- 2025 6-24-2025      Appropriation
                              21-1,
                              21-2,
                              21-3,
27832-08- 2025 9-1-2025       21-4,
                              21-5,
                              21-6,
                              21-7
27833-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27834-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27835-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27836-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27837-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27838-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
                              Changing a portion of West Freeway Service Road
                              west bound between Ballinger Street and Henderson
27839-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Street to Rio Grande Avenue and changing the name
                              of West Freeway Service Road west bound between
                              Ballinger Street and Henderson Street to Rio
                              Grande Avenue
                              Suspending the July 31, 2025 effective date of
                              Oncor Electric Delivery Company's requested rate
                              change to permit the city time to study the
                              request and to establish reasonable rates;
27840-08- 2025 8-12-2025      approving cooperation with the Steering Committee
                              of Cities served by Oncor to hire legal and
                              consulting services and to negotiate with the
                              company and direct any necessary litigation and
                              appeals
27841-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27842-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27843-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27844-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
                              Prescribing the salary for each classification of
27845-08- 2025 8-12-2025      emergency medical services personnel in the fire
                              department
27846-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27847-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27848-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
                              Adopting a water main capacity charge pursuant to
27849-08- 2025 8-12-2025      35-90 for a developer initiated 24-inch Southside
                              III Water Transmission Main ("Brewer Boulevard 24
                              inch water main"), located at Brewer Blvd
                              Repealing Ordinance No. 25934-01-2023 and
                              adopting a sewer per acre charge in accordance
                              with Chapter 35, Article III, Division 3, sewer
                              per acre charges,
27850-08- 2025 8-12-2025      35-81 through
                              35-86, for the 3,708 acres served by developer
                              sewer main project ("Hanna Ranch M-295 and M-329
                              sanitary sewer interceptor improvements") located
                              near 7819 Anglin Drive
27851-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (a portion of E. 14th Street, a 60-foot
                              wide right-of-way situated between Jones Street,
                              a 60-foot wide right-of-way, and Calhoun Street,
                              a 60-foot wide right-of-way, in John Childress
27852-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Survey, Abstract No. 250, City of Fort Worth,
                              Tarrant county, Texas, as dedicated by an
                              unrecorded plat of Daggett's Addition, an
                              addition to the City of Fort Worth, Texas, and
                              containing approximately 12,000 square feet or
                              0.275 acres of land more or less)
27853-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27854-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27855-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27856-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27857-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27858-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27859-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27860-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27861-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27862-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27863-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27864-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27865-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27866-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27867-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27868-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27869-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27870-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27871-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27872-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27873-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27874-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27875-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27876-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27877-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27878-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27879-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27880-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27881-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27882-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27883-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27884-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27885-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27886-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27887-08- 2025 10-29-25       Zoning
27888-08- 2025 10-22-2025     App. A 4.1307
27889-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27890-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27891-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27892-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27893-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27894-08- 2025 8-12-2025      Appropriation
27895-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27896-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27897-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27898-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27899-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
                              2-83,
27900-08- 2025 8-26-2025      30-154,
                              30-159,
                              30-173
27901-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
                              16-456,
                              16-457,
                              16-458,
                              16-459,
                              16-460,
                              16-461,
                              16-462,
                              16-463,
                              16-464,
27902-08- 2025 9-12-2025      16-465,
                              16-466,
                              16-467,
                              16-468,
                              16-469,
                              16-470,
                              16-471,
                              16-472,
                              16-473,
                              16-474
                              16-500,
                              16-501,
                              16-502,
                              16-503,
                              16-504,
                              16-505,
                              16-506,
                              16-507,
                              16-508,
27903-08- 2025 9-12-2025      16-509,
                              16-510,
                              16-511,
                              16-512,
                              16-513,
                              16-514,
                              16-515,
                              16-516,
                              16-517,
                              16-518
27904-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27905-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27906-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27907-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27908-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27909-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27910-08- 2025 10-17-2025     3-122
                              2-83,
27911-08- 2025 8-26-2025      35-69,
                              35-69.1
27912-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
                              Vacation (a portion of a 19-foot wide alley
                              situated between NE 29th Street and NE 30th
                              Street in the W. Gray Survey, Abstract No. 635
                              and the M. Jobe Survey, Abstract No. 886, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, and being a part of Block 66, M.G.
27913-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Ellis Addition, an addition to the City of Fort
                              Worth, Tarrant County, Texas according to the
                              plat recorded in volume 63, page 18 & 19, plat
                              records, Tarrant county, Texas, containing
                              approximately 11,499 square feet or 0.264 acres
                              of land more or less)
                              Vacation (a portion of N. Commerce Street, a 58-
                              foot wide right-of-way situated between NE 29th
                              Street and NE 31st Street in the W. Gray Survey,
                              Abstract No. 635 and the M. Jobe Survey, Abstract
                              No. 886, Tarrant County, Texas, according to the
27914-08- 2025 8-26-2025      plat of M.G. Ellis Addition, an addition to the
                              City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              recorded in volume 63, page 18 & 19, plat
                              records, Tarrant county, Texas, and containing
                              approximately 60,713 square feet or 1.3938 acres
                              of land more or less)
                              Vacation (a portion of a 19-foot wide alley
                              situated in the W. Gray Survey, Abstract No. 635,
                              Tarrant County, Texas, between lots 8-12 and lots
                              13-17, Block 83, M.G. Ellis Addition, an addition
27915-08- 2025 8-26-2025      to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas
                              according to the plat recorded in volume 63, page
                              18 & 19, plat records, Tarrant County, Texas,
                              containing approximately 4,792 square feet or
                              0.11 acres of land more or less)
27916-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27917-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27918-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27919-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27920-08- 2025 10-1-2025      35-56
27921-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27922-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
27923-08- 2025 10-21-2025     Zoning
27924-08- 2025 1-1-2026       35-56
27925-08- 2025 8-26-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving the total number of authorized civil
27926-09- 2025 9-16-2025      service positions in the fire department
                              effective October 1, 2025
                              An ordinance prescribing the salary for each
27927-09- 2025 9-16-2025      classification of civil service personnel in the
                              fire department
27928-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27929-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27930-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27931-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27932-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27933-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27934-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27935-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27936-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27937-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27938-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27939-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27940-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27941-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27942-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27943-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27944-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27945-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving a negotiated settlement between the
                              Atmos Cities Steering Committee ("ACSC") and
                              Atmos Energy Corp., Mid-Tex Division regarding
                              the company's 2025 rate review mechanism filing;
                              declaring existing rates to be unreasonable;
                              adopting tariffs that reflect rate adjustments
27946-09- 2025 9-16-2025      consistent with the negotiated settlement;
                              finding the rates to be set by the attached
                              settlement tariffs to be just and reasonable and
                              in the public interest; approving an attachment
                              establishing a benchmark for pensions and retiree
                              medical benefits; requiring the company to
                              reimburse ACSC's reasonable ratemaking expenses
27947-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27948-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27949-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27950-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27951-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27952-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27953-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27954-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27955-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27956-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27957-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27958-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27959-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27960-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27961-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27962-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27963-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27964-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27965-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              12.5-103,
27966-09- 2025 10-1-2025      12.5-610.2,
                              12.5-671.1,
                              12-5-671.2
27967-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27968-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27969-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27970-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27971-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27972-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27973-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27974-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27975-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27976-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              12.5-841.1,
                              12-5.841.2,
27977-09- 2025 10-1-2025      12.5-843,
                              12.5-844,
                              20-271
27978-09- 2025 10-1-2025      2-11
                              Appropriating funding for the operating budget
27979-09- 2025 9-16-2025      for the ensuing fiscal year, beginning October 1,
                              2025, and ending September 30, 2026
                              Providing for the levy and collection of an
                              annual ad valorem tax on all property, real,
27980-09- 2025 9-16-2025      personal, and mixed, situated within the
                              territorial limits of the City of Fort Worth,
                              Texas, and all personal property owned in said
                              city on January 1, 2025
27981-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27982-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 1 - Downtown; levying
                              assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                              and services provided in Fort Worth Public
                              Improvement District No. 1 during fiscal year
                              2025-2026
27983-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27984-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 6 - Park Glen; levying
                              assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                              and services provided in Fort Worth Public
                              Improvement District No. 6 - Park Glen during
                              fiscal year 2025-2026
27985-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27986-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 7 - Heritage; levying
                              assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                              and services provided in Fort Worth Public
                              Improvement District No. 7 - Heritage during
                              fiscal year 2025-2026
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27987-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 11 - Stockyards; levying
                              assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                              and services provided in Fort Worth Public
                              Improvement District No. 11 - Stockyards during
                              fiscal year 2025-2026
27988-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
27989-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27990-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 12 - Chapel Hill;
                              levying assessments for the cost of certain
                              improvements and services provided in fort worth
                              Public Improvement District No. 12 during fiscal
                              year 2025-2026
27991-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27992-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 14 - Trinity Bluff;
                              levying assessments for the cost of certain
                              improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
                              Public Improvement District No. 14 - Trinity
                              Bluff during fiscal year 2025-2026
27993-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27994-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 15 - Sun Valley; levying
                              assessments for the cost of certain improvements
                              and services provided in Fort Worth Public
                              Improvement District No. 15 during fiscal year
                              2025-2026
27995-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025- 2026
                              budget, three-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and assessment roll (to be kept on file with the
                              city secretary) for Public Improvement District
27996-09- 2025 9-16-2025      18 - Tourism; levying special assessments for the
                              costs of certain improvements and services
                              benefitting properties in Public Improvement
                              District 18 - Tourism during fiscal year 2025-
                              2026
27997-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
27998-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 19 - Historic Camp
                              Bowie; levying assessments for the cost of
                              certain improvements and services provided in
                              Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 19
                              during fiscal year 2025-2026
27999-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
28000-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 20 - East Lancaster
                              Avenue; levying assessments for the cost of
                              certain improvements and services provided in
                              Fort Worth Public Improvement District No. 20
                              during fiscal year 2025-2026
28001-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Appropriation
                              Approving and adopting the fiscal year 2025-2026
                              budget, five-year service plan, assessment plan,
                              and tax year 2025 assessment roll (to be kept on
                              file with the city secretary) for Public
28002-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Improvement District No. 21 - Las Vegas Trail;
                              levying assessments for the cost of certain
                              improvements and services provided in Fort Worth
                              Public Improvement District No. 21 during fiscal
                              year 2025-2026
28003-09- 2025 1-1-2026       12.5-340
28004-09- 2025 9-16-2025      Zoning
                              Adjusting the number of authorized sworn
28005-09- 2025 9-16-2025      positions in the police department by adding ten
                              positions in the classification of police officer
                              effective October 1, 2025
                              An ordinance prescribing the salary for each
28006-09- 2025 9-16-2025      classification of peace officer in the police
                              department
28007-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28008-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28009-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28010-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28011-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28012-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28013-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28014-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28015-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28016-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28017-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28018-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28019-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28020-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Prescribing the salary for each classification of
                              civil service personnel in the fire department
28021-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28022-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28023-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28024-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28025-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28026-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28027-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28028-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28029-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28030-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28031-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28032-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28033-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28034-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28035-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28036-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28037-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28038-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28039-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28040-09- 2025 12-5-2025      App. A 4.1305
28041-09- 2025 12-5-2025      Zoning
28042-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
                              An ordinance considering all matters incident and
                              related to the issuance, sale and delivery of
28043-09- 2025 9-30-2025      $6,500,000 in principal amount of "City of Fort
                              Worth, Texas Combination Tax and Surplus Revenue
                              Certificates of Obligation, Taxable Series 2025"
28044-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28045-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28046-09- 2025 9-30-2025      Appropriation
28047-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
                              Appointing Stewart Milner as substitute municipal
                              judge for a two-year term commencing October 18,
28048-10- 2025 10-21-2025     2025, and ending March 31, 2027, or until a
                              successor is qualified and appointed in
                              accordance with state law
                              Appointing Joseph F. Henderson as a municipal
                              judge for an unexpired term commencing October
28049-10- 2025 10-21-2025     18, 2025, and ending March 31, 2026, or until a
                              successor is qualified and appointed in
                              accordance with state law
                              An ordinance of the City of Fort Worth finding
28050-10- 2025 10-21-2025     that Oncor Electric Delivery Company LLC's
                              application to change rates within the city
                              should be denied
28051-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
                              Changing the name of a portion of "White
28052-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Settlement Road" between University Drive and N
                              Henderson Street to "Westside Drive"
28053-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
                              Vacation (All of Coronado Drive, Retama Road, and
                              Alta Loma Road, and portions of Rio Vista Road,
                              Raton Drive, and Shenandoah Road, all being 50-
                              foot wide unimproved public rights-of-way
                              generally located between Calmont Avenue and
                              Slocum Avenue, dedicated by the plat of Coronado
28054-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Hills Addition, an addition to the City of Fort
                              Worth, Tarrant County, Texas, recorded in volume
                              388-17, page 1 of the plat records of Tarrant
                              County, Texas, containing approximately 100,626
                              square feet of land, 15,404 square feet of land,
                              22,597 square feet of land, 80,136 square feet of
                              land, 38,197 square feet of land, and 12,718
                              square feet of land respectively, more or less)
28055-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28056-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28057-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28058-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28059-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28060-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28061-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28062-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28063-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28064-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28065-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28066-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28067-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28068-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28069-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28070-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28071-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28072-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
                              Annexation (A certain 61.283 acres, more or less,
                              out of land situated in the Hiram Little Survey,
                              Abstract Number 930, City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, said tract of land being a portion
                              of that certain tract of land described by deed
                              to Pulte Homes of Texas, LP., as recorded in
                              instrument number D224108322, official public
28073-10- 2025 10-21-2025     records, Tarrant County, Texas, and approximately
                              2.119 acres of road in the Hiram Little Survey,
                              Abstract Number 930, City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, said tract of land being a portion
                              of Redbird Lane (a variable width right-of-way),
                              the deed records of Tarrant County, Texas, (Case
                              No. AX-25-002) which said territory lies adjacent
                              to and adjoins the present corporate boundary
                              limits of Fort Worth, Texas)
                              Annexation (A certain 50.3121 acres, more or
                              less, out of land situated in P.M. Smith Survey,
                              Abstract No. 1170, City of Fort Worth
                              Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ), Denton
                              County, Texas; said tract being all of that tract
                              of land described in special warranty deed to
                              Double Eagle TH LLC recorded in instrument no.
                              2022-76698 of the official public records of
                              Denton County, Texas, and approximately 16.9502
28074-10- 2025 10-21-2025     acres of street and railway right-of-way in the
                              Pleasant M. Smith Survey, Abstract No. 1170, and
                              the R. Matany Survey, Abstract No. 878, City of
                              Fort Worth ETJ, Denton County, Texas; said tract
                              being a portion of those tracts of land described
                              as tract 1 and tract 2 in deed without warranty
                              to WPRR, L.P. recorded in instrument number 2017-
                              121722, official public records, Denton County,
                              Texas, (Case No. AX-25-004) which said territory
                              lies adjacent to and adjoins the present
                              corporate boundary limits of Fort Worth, Texas)
28075-10- 2025 10-21-2025      
28076-10- 2025 10-21-2025      
28077-10- 2025 12-5-2025      App. A 4.1304
28078-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Zoning Ordinance
                              Forty-sixth supplemental ordinance authorizing
                              the issuance and sale of City of Fort Worth,
                              Texas Water and Sewer System Revenue Bonds,
28079-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Series 2025B Swift (Eagle Mountain), in the
                              aggregate principal amount of $180,000,000;
                              approving the sale of the bonds to the Texas
                              Water Development Board
28080-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28081-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
28082-10- 2025 10-21-2025     Appropriation
                              Annexation (An approximately 4.272 acres of land
                              situated in the J. Highland Survey, Abstract No.
                              752, and the Henry Robertson Survey, Abstract No.
                              1259, Tarrant County, Texas, and being the area
                              dedicated as right-of-way for Wagley-Robertson
                              Road and West Bonds Ranch Road, according to the
                              plats of Van Zandt Farms at Fossil Creek,
                              recorded in county clerk's file numbers
28083-10- 2025 10-21-2025     D201034051 (cabinet A, slide 6460), D198116317
                              (cabinet A, slide 4269), D201034049 (cabinet A,
                              slide 6459), official public records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, Matyastik Daycare Addition No. 2,
                              recorded under county clerk's file no.
                              D210209977, official public records, Tarrant
                              County, Texas (Case No. AX25-003) which said
                              territory lies adjacent to and adjoins the
                              present corporate boundary limits of Fort Worth,
                              Texas)
28084-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
                              Adopting a sewer main capacity charge pursuant to
                              section 35-97 of the city code for a developer
28085-10- 2025 10-28-2025     initiated lift station ("Ventana Lift Station and
                              sewer mains"), located near the intersection of
                              Veale Pkwy and Longvue Ave
28086-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28087-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28088-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28089-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28090-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28091-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28092-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28093-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28094-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28095-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
                              Providing for the issuance of City of Fort Worth,
28096-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Texas General Purpose Refunding Bonds, Series
                              2025, in an aggregate principal amount not to
                              exceed $106,150,000
28097-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
                              Authorizing issuance of tax notes of the City of
28098-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Fort Worth, Texas in an aggregate principal
                              amount not to exceed $25,000,000
28099-10- 2025 10-28-2025     Appropriation
28100-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Number not used
28101-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28102-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28103-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28104-11- 2025 11-11-2025      
                              Adopting a water main capacity charge pursuant to
                              section 35-90 of the city code for a developer
28105-11- 2025 11-11-2025     initiated 16- inch Northside IV Water
                              Transmission Main ("EMS ISD high school #4"),
                              located at Brewer Blvd
28106-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28107-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28108-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28109-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28110-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28111-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
                              Establishing the city's share of the costs for
                              participating in a Community Facilities Agreement
28112-11- 2025 11-11-2025     with SRPF D/HYDE Ranch Phase I, L.P. for the Hyde
                              Ranch Project to construct a twenty-four inch
                              sanitary sewer force main
28113-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28114-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28115-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28116-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28117-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28118-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
28119-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Appropriation
                              Designating a certain geographic area within both
                              the extraterritorial jurisdiction and corporate
                              limits of the City of Fort Worth as "Tax
                              Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Eighteen, City
28120-11- 2025 11-11-2025     of Fort Worth, Texas"; creating a board of
                              directors for the zone; providing the effective
                              and termination dates for the zone; establishing
                              a tax increment fund for the zone; and ordaining
                              related matters.
                              App. A
28121-11- 2025 12-5-2025      2.101,
                              3.402,
                              3.403
28122-11- 2025 11-11-2025     Zoning
28123-11- 2025 11-11-2025      
                              Vacation (A portion of Bourine Street, a 50-foot
                              wide public right-of-way between Byers Avenue and
                              Westover Court, as shown on Westover Hills, an
28124-11- 2025 11-18-2025     addition to the City of Fort Worth, Tarrant
                              County, Texas, recorded in volume 1178, page 603
                              of the plat records of Tarrant County, Texas,
                              containing approximately 2,332 square feet of
                              land or 0.054 acres, more or less)
28125-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28126-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28127-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28128-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28129-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28130-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28131-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28132-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28133-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28134-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28135-11- 2025 11-18-2025     Appropriation
28136-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28137-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28138-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28139-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28140-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
                              An ordinance approving project and financing
28141-12- 2025 12-9-2025      plans for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number
                              Seventeen, City of Fort Worth, Texas (near West
                              Side TIF)
28142-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28143-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28144-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
                              Adopting a per acre charge in accordance with
                              chapter 35, article III, division 3, sewer per
                              acre charges, sections 35-81 through 35- 86 of
28145-12- 2025 12-9-2025      the city code, for the 2461.33 acres served by
                              Developer sewer main project ("Morningstar
                              Westpoint Parkway Offsite Sewer") located near
                              544 Blue Mound Rd
28146-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28147-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28148-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28149-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28150-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28151-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28152-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28153-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28154-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28155-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28156-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28157-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28158-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28159-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28160-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28161-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28162-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28163-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28164-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28165-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28166-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28167-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28168-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28169-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28170-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28171-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28172-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28173-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28174-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28175-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28176-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28177-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28178-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28179-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28180-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28181-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28182-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28183-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28184-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28185-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28186-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28187-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28188-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
                              Designating certain areas of the City of Fort
28189-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Worth's extraterritorial jurisdiction as
                              industrial districts as authorized by section
                              42.044 of the Texas Local Government Code
28190-12- 2025 12-9-2025       
28191-12- 2025 12-9-2025       
28192-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Adopting the standards of care for 2025 for youth
                              programs offered by the City of Fort Worth
28193-12- 2025 12-9-2025       
28194-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Zoning
28195-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
28196-12- 2025 12-9-2025      Appropriation
 
