LAKEPORT, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OF LAKEPORT
COUNTY OF GREGG, TEXAS
OFFICIALS
Elected Officials
Mayor Johnny Sammons
      
2025 Council
Ardis Wright
D. Keith Marhsall
Regina Wayne
Glen Nobles
Gary DeBoer
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Altering or tampering with code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Lakeport, Texas,
shall be designated as the “Code of Lakeport” and may be so cited.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 53
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The construction of all ordinances of the municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires and act to
be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (B)   Except as provided above, or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Lakeport, Texas.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Lakeport, Texas.
      COUNTY. Gregg County, Texas.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including, but not limited to, the following types of ordinances:
      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of money for
the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the municipality
or any evidence of the municipality’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual
budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;
      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to municipal
depositories;
      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right;
      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates
to be charged by private utility companies;
      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract or agreement;
      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or otherwise relating
to any easement; and
      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning designation of
land.
   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) above are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section.
      Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
      Example: (Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.001) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980;
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 552.001
et seq.
§ 10.18 ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:
      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal
ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation;
      (2)   A fine not to exceed $4,000 for violation of laws or city
ordinances regulating dumping of refuse; or
      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases; provided, however,
that, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the nuisance may be
summarily abated in accordance with state and local law.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal penalties, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.001
   Nuisance abatement, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 217.002
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Changing name of city
   
11.02   Changing designation from “town” to “city”
§ 11.01 CHANGING NAME OF CITY.
   In accordance with the provisions of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State
of Texas, the name of the corporate entity known as the “City of Elderville”
shall here and now be changed to “Lakeport, Texas”, and from hence on said
corporate entity shall be “Lakeport”.
(Ord. 65-1214-2, passed 12-14-1965)
§ 11.02 CHANGING DESIGNATION FROM “TOWN” TO “CITY”.
   Pursuant to the authority given by Tex. Local Gov’t Code Title 2, Chapter 5,
§ 5.902, the designation of the “Town of Lakeport, Texas”, be and same is
hereby changed to “City of Lakeport, Texas”, and that said municipal
corporation shall henceforth be known as such. It is provided, however, that,
the aforementioned change in designation of said town shall in no wise affect
its corporate existence and powers.
(Ord. 68-02-05-1, passed 2-5-1968)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
31.   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
34.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
30.01   Citizen complaint procedure
   
30.02   Council meetings
   
30.03   Smoking in public municipal buildings
   
30.04   Excessive force
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.01 CITIZEN COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   To file a complaint toward and officer, excluding the traffic violation
itself, any employee or any elected official, of the city, the following steps
will be taken in filing a formal complaint.
   (A)   A complaint must be filed with the City Secretary written in the
complainant’s own handwriting. The complaint will be signed and notarized in
the presence of the City Secretary.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such complaint, the City Secretary will turn the
complaint over to the appropriate authority or supervisor for review.
   (C)   The Mayor will be notified of all complaints and if needed will
present the complaint to the City Council at which time all charges will be
investigated and the appropriate actions taken.
(Res. passed 8-14-2007)
§ 30.02 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The regular monthly meeting of the City Council shall be the first Tuesday
of each month with the meeting place being the City Hall and the time shall be
6:00 p.m. The first Tuesday of each month will be the regularly scheduled time
for a work session and the time shall be 6:00 p.m.
(Res. 95-06-15, passed 6-15-1995)
§ 30.03 SMOKING IN PUBLIC MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   SMOKE or SMOKING includes the carrying or holding of lighted pipe,
cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or
device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar,
cigarette or electronic cigarette or vape of any kind.
   (B)   (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she smokes or possesses a
burning tobacco, weed or other plant product or any lighted or burning pipe,
cigar, cigarette of any kind, or smoking equipment or device, or electronic
cigarette or vape, in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas: any area
within the enclosed municipal building.
      (2)   The City Council shall post a sign, conspicuous to ordinary public
view, at or near each public entrance. The sign shall contain the words “No
Smoking” and have the universal symbol for no smoking or other language that
clearly prohibits smoking.
   (C)   This section does not require any employee of the establishment to
report a violation or take any action against any individual violating this
section.
(Res. 98-12-08, passed 12-8-1998) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.04 EXCESSIVE FORCE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to prohibit the use of excessive force by
the law enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individual
engaged in nonviolent civil rights demonstrations. The city also prohibits the
physical barring of any entrance to, or exit from, such a facility within its
jurisdiction.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to enforce this policy to the full extent
allowed by law.
(Res. passed 8-14-2007)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person thereof who violates any of the provisions of §
30.03 of this chapter shall be fined an amount not less than $25, nor more than
$200; provided, however, in the event a defendant has previously been convicted
under §
30.03 of this chapter, said defendant shall be fined an amount not less than
$50, nor more than $500, for a second conviction hereunder, and shall be fined
an amount not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, for a third conviction
hereunder and for each conviction thereafter. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Res. 98-12-08, passed 12-8-1998)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Signing contractual documents
   
31.02   Personnel policies
Officials and Organizations
   
31.15   Court Clerk
   
31.16   Health Inspector
 
   
31.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 SIGNING CONTRACTUAL DOCUMENTS.
   The following individuals will also be designated to sign:
   (A)   State purchase vouchers:
      (1)   Mayor;
      (2)   City Secretary;
      (3)   Council member; and
      (4)   Council member.
   (B)   Requests for advance or reimbursement:
      (1)   Mayor;
      (2)   City Secretary;
      (3)   Council member; and
      (4)   Council member.
(Res. 13-01-15-2, passed 1-15-2013)
§ 31.02 PERSONNEL POLICIES.
   The city’s personnel policies, and any and all amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Res. 93-06-07, passed 6-7-1993)
OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.15 COURT CLERK.
   The duties of said office are conferred upon the City Secretary along with
present duties.
(Ord. 01-06-12, passed 6-12-2001)
§ 31.16 HEALTH INSPECTOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created and established the office of City Health
Inspector.
   (B)   The City Health Inspector shall be appointed by the City Council.
   (C)   (1)   The City Health Inspector shall have the power to enter, without
permission, any place or premises when in the discharge of his or her official
duties.
      (2)   The City Health Inspector shall have the authority to stop, examine
and detain any and all persons affected with or suspected of being affected
with, or coming from a place affected with or suspected of being affected with,
any contagious or infectious disease.
      (3)   The City Health Inspector shall have authority to prevent any such
person from entering the city and shall have the authority to move any such
person outside the city.
   (D)   (1)   The City Health Inspector shall inspect all houses, places of
business and other premises and places in the city and, upon finding any
unsanitary or unhealthful condition or conditions, shall give the owner, owners
or occupants of such place or premises not less than seven days’ written notice
to abate such condition or conditions.
      (2)   In the event such condition or conditions have not been abated or
corrected at the end of such time, the City Health Officer may:
         (a)   Abate or correct such condition or conditions himself or
herself;
         (b)   Cause such condition or condition or conditions to be corrected;
and
         (c)   Require the owner, owners or occupants of such place or premises
to connect the plumbing of such building to the city’s sanitary sewer system
within eight days from the receipt of notice by the City Health Inspector to
make such connection.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person receiving notice to abate or
correct a condition or conditions to fail to abate such condition or conditions
and for any person receiving notice to make a connection to the city sanitary
sewer system, fail to make such connection within the time specified.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to resist or interfere with the City Health
Inspector in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Ord. 72-0807-3, passed 8-7-1972) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The violation of any provision of §
31.16 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200; provided,
however, that, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided
for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any
violation of §
31.16 of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 72-0807-3, passed 8-7-1972)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   County Hazard Mitigation Plan adopted
Emergency Management
   
32.15   Organization; officers and employees
   
32.16   Emergency Management Director; powers and duties
   
32.17   Emergency Management Plan
   
32.18   Interjurisdictional program
   
32.19   Overriding other provisions
   
32.20   Liability
   
32.21   Commitment of funds
   
32.22   Offenses
 
   
32.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 COUNTY HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN ADOPTED.
   The city hereby:
   (A)   Adopts the revised and updated 2018 Gregg County Hazard Mitigation
Action Plan;
   (B)   Vests the Mayor of the city with the responsibility, authority and
means to:
      (1)   Inform all concerned parties of this action; and
      (2)   Develop an addendum to this hazard mitigation action plan if the
city’s unique situation warrants such an addendum.
   (C)   Agrees to take such other official action as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out the objectives of the hazard mitigation action plan.
(Res. 19-05-13, passed 5-13-2019)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 32.15 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city, which
shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law.
   (A)   An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure, of the Director.
   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive
emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth herein. He or she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for
such execution shall remain with the Director.
   (C)   The operational emergency management organization of the city shall
consist of such officers and employees of the city so designated by the
Director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of the organization shall be ...ILLEGIBLE
TEXT... of the emergency management plan.
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.17 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.18 INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.19 OVERRIDING OTHER PROVISIONS.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.20 LIABILITY.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.21 COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.22 OFFENSES.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of §§
32.15 through
32.22 of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 041591, passed 4-15-1991)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
   
33.01   Collection fee
   
33.02   Warrant for arrest charge
   
33.03   Investment policy and strategies adopted by reference
   
33.04   Fund balance policy adopted by reference
   
33.05   Capitalization policy adopted by reference
§ 33.01 COLLECTION FEE.
   This section authorizes collection fee in the amount of 30% of debts and
accounts receivable such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds
and restitution ordered paid by the Municipal Court serving the city, and
amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear: as promised under
Subchapter A, Chapter 543, Transportation Code, or other law; in compliance
with a lawful written notice to appear Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Art.
14.06(b), or other law; in compliance with a lawful summons issued under Tex.
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 15.03(b); in compliance with a lawful order of
a court serving the city; or as specified in a citation, summons or other
notice authorized by Tex. Transportation Code § 682.002, that charges the
accused with a parking or stopping offense, when such debts, accounts
receivable and amounts are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to
an attorney or other vendor for collection.
(Res. 11-10-11, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 33.02 WARRANT FOR ARREST CHARGE.
   (A)   The special expense or charge of $25 shall be due and payable to the
city from each person arrested pursuant to a warrant of arrest which is issued
and served for a complaint pending before the Municipal Court.
   (B)   The funds collected for the issuance and service of warrants hereunder
shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
(Ord. 87-03-02, passed 3-2-1987)
§ 33.03 INVESTMENT POLICY AND STRATEGIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s investment policies and strategies are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full herein.
(Res. 21-07-13, passed 7-15-2021)
§ 33.04 FUND BALANCE POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s fund balance policies are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full herein.
(Res. 2011-09-13, passed 9-13-2011)
§ 33.05 CAPITALIZATION POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s capitalization policies are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full herein.
(Res. 05-10-05-1, passed 10-5-2005)
CHAPTER 34: RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Definitions
   
34.02   Municipal records declared public property
   
34.03   Policy and intent
   
34.04   Records Management Officer
   
34.05   Records management plan
   
34.06   Department heads; duties and responsibilities
   
34.07   Records control schedules; approval; filing
   
34.08   Destruction of unscheduled record
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who, by ordinance or administrative policy, is
in charge of an officer of the city that creates or receives records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORDS. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation
of its legal and financial status or to the protection and fulfillment of
obligations to the people of the state.
   MUNICIPAL RECORDS. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs,
sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, of other
information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the
laws of the state, create or received by the city or any of its officers or
employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods and other records disposition information that the
records management program may require.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for
the purpose of reducing the cost and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping.
The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management
of filing and information retrieval system, the protection of essential and
permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive
records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and
correspondence and the management of micrographics and electronic and other
records storage systems.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in §
34.04(A) of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under §
34.05 of this chapter.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a record or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.02 MUNICIPAL RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   All municipal records, as defined in §
34.01 of this chapter, are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any
personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have
developed or compiled them.
   (B)   The unauthorized destruction, removal from the files or use of such
records is prohibited.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.03 POLICY AND INTENT.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient,
economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through
a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from
creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the
state’s Local Government Records Act, being Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 201.001 et
seq., and accepted records management practice.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.04 RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall
serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As provided by state law,
each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the
Director and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the other duties assigned in this chapter, the
Records Management Officer shall:
         (a)   Administer the records management program and provide assistance
to department heads in its implementation;
         (b)   Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies,
system, standards and procedures;
         (c)   In cooperation with department heads identify essential records
and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to
ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations
quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
         (d)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;
         (e)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for
recordkeeping supplies;
         (f)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a
uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;
         (g)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules
issued by the State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records
management program and the municipality’s records control schedules are in
compliance with state regulations;
         (h)   Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information
concerning state laws and administration rules relating to local government
records;
         (i)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
destruction or other disposition of the records of the city are carried out in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
and the requirements or state law;
         (j)   Maintain records on the volume destroyed under approved records
destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such
disposal or disposition;
         (k)   Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the
records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of
the statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (B)(1)(j) above; and
         (l)   Bring to the attention of the City Council non-compliance by the
department heads or other municipal personal with the policies and procedures
of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act, being
Tex. Local Gov’t Code Title 6, Chapter 200.
      (2)   The wording of divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(c), (B)(1)(d), (B)(1)(h)
and (B)(1)(i) above are derived directly from the duties and responsibilities
of record management officers set out in Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 203.023. The
other duties prescribed are standard features in the centralized direction of
records management programs. These duties fall well within the scope of the
definition of “records management” in §
34.01 of this chapter, the wording of which is taken directly from the
definition of “records management” offered in the state’s Local Government
Records Act, Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 201.003(13).
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.05 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the City Council. The plan must
contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the cost and improve the
efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the
municipality and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that
are of historical value.
      (2)   The plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer
to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this chapter
effectively.
   (B)   Once approved by the City Council the records management plan shall be
binding on all offices, department, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus,
boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall be
created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the
plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or
recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head’s care from the application of this
chapter and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by
the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records
management program of the city.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.06 DEPARTMENT HEADS; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the economical management
of records and in carrying out the requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs and duties for which department head and his or her staff
are responsible; and
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city
and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.07 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; APPROVAL; FILING.
   (A)   (1)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department
heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department basis listing
all records series created or received by the department and the retention
period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records
management plan may require.
      (2)   Each record control schedules shall be monitored and amended as
needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it
is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that
it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the
department and the records management program of the city.
      (3)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department head and the City Council.
      (4)   Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as provided by state law.
If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make
it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the
records control schedules to the Director and Librarian.
   (B)   (1)   A records control schedule for a department that has been
approved and adopted under division (A) above shall be implemented by
department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
      (2)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request in pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that
the record be retained for an additional period.
      (3)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records
control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
Records Management Officer from the City Council.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 34.08 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORD.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 94-05-09-2, passed 5-9-1994)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Grease management for food establishments, residences
   
50.02   Sewer rates
   
50.03   Connection to sanitary sewer system
   
50.04   Private sewer lines
Industrial Wastes
   
50.15   Definitions
   
50.16   Admission of industrial wastes into public sewer
   
50.17   Prohibited discharges
   
50.18   Protection from damage
   
50.19   Authority to disconnect service
   
50.20   Industrial waste surcharge
   
50.21   Billing
   
50.22   Industrial cost recovery
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 GREASE MANAGEMENT FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RESIDENCES.
   (A)   This section sets forth requirements to aid in the prevention of
sanitary sewer blockages, obstructions and overflows due to the contribution
and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into said sewer system from
commercial, industrial and institutional food service establishments. The
objective is to reduce or eliminate sanitary sewer overflows onto streets,
waterways and onto residential and commercial properties and buildings that
could result in liabilities to the city.
   (B)   (1)   All new and existing food service establishments are required to
have grease control equipment (GCE) installed, maintained and operating
properly, in accordance with fats, oils and grease maintenance.
      (2)   To ensure proper disposal of the fat, oil and grease waste, all
grease waste haulers must operate trucks that are marked with a company name,
phone number, waste hauler permit, number, city and state of legible size and
color. All grease haulers are required to keep manifest records of all
transport and have copies for the city upon requests.
(Ord. 18-03-13, passed 3-13-2018)
§ 50.02 SEWER RATES.
   (A)   The rates or charges for services furnished by the city’s sanitary
sewer system shall be as follows:
      (1)   Schedule of monthly rates.
 
Rate A Residential                                $20.25
Rate B Small commercial                           $75.25
Rate C Large commercial                           $134.37
Rate D County Airport                             $1,350
Rate E Commercial outside incorporate city limits $100/month
 
      (2)   Tapping fee. Applicable to all customers, the sum of $750;
provided, however, if the actual cost for said connection, as computed by the
city, exceeds said sum, the charge shall equal the actual cost of connection.
      (3)   Reconnection fee. The reconnection fee shall be $150.
   (B)   Bills for sewer services furnished each month shall become due and
payable on or before the tenth day of the month, at the office of Elderville
Water Supply Corporation.
   (C)   In the event payment is not made for the service supplied any user or
customer of the city’s sanitary sewer system, within ten days from the date
that the same becomes due and payable, a 10% penalty shall be added to the
amount past due and unpaid.
   (D)   In the event any user or customer of the sewer system shall fail to
pay for service within 30 days from the date charges become due and payable, it
is hereby made the duty of the City Secretary to disconnect and discontinue
sewer service. Whenever the amount past due and delinquent, together with all
penalty amounts, has been paid sewer services shall be resumed upon payment by
said delinquent user or customer of the sum of $150 for reconnection.
   (E)   No free service shall be allowed and to the extent the city and its
various departments avail themselves of the services afforded by the sewer
system, they shall pay, therefore, the same rates charged other customers.
(Ord. 04-12-14-01, passed 12-14-2004)
§ 50.03 CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Except in instances where the slope of the surface makes connection to
a sanitary sewer line or lateral impossible without the aid of a sewer lift
station, it shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any premises
to:
      (1)   Maintain a septic tank on such premises when any portion of such
premises are adjacent to a city sanitary sewer line or lateral; or
      (2)   Occupy a building on such premises when any portion of such
premises are adjacent to a city sanitary sewer line or lateral, without
connecting same to a city sanitary sewer line or lateral.
   (B)   No person shall make any connection with, or opening into, any sewer
of the city without obtaining a permit from the city.
   (C)   Upon the issuance of a permit therefor, the city shall connect or
cause to be connected private sanitary sewer service laterals to the city’s
sanitary sewer line or lateral. The charge for each such connection shall be
$750; provided, however, if the actual cost for said connection, as computed by
the city, exceeds said sum, the charge shall equal the actual cost of
connection.
(Ord. 83-09-12, passed 9-12-1983) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 PRIVATE SEWER LINES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all property owners or agents or occupants of
buildings to keep and maintain water closets and other connections to the
sewer, including all laterals therefrom which connect to the city sewer, in
perfect condition and free from any obstruction.
   (B)   Any such blockage or breakage shall be corrected by the owner, agent
or occupant within five days of receipt of notice by the city to correct same.
Such repairs shall be at the sole expense of the owner, agent or occupant.
   (C)   If it is determined that the blockage or breakage exists on a city
line, then said owner, agent or occupant shall notify the city immediately so
that the city can make appropriate repairs to the city line.
(Ord. 84-08-06-E(5), passed 8-6-1984) Penalty, see §
50.99
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
§ 50.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS. Any office referred to in this subchapter by
title (i.e., City Manager, City Attorney, City Secretary, City Engineer, Water
and Sewer Superintendent and the like) shall be the person so retained in this
position by the city or duly authorized representative.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Water and Sewer Superintendent (or other
official designated by the City Manager) of the city or his or her duly
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
      B.O.D. (Denotes BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.) The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million. The
laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys to the building sewer beginning
three feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the sewer or
other place for disposal.
      CITY. The City of Lakeport, Texas, together with all its governing and
operating bodies.
      CITY COUNCIL. The duly elected governing body of the City of Lakeport.
      DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Water-borne wastes normally discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including factories and institutions free
from storm surface water and industrial wastes).
      ENGINEER. The City Engineer, the city’s Consulting Engineer or their duly
authorized representatives.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products
and produce.
      HAZARDOUS METAL. Includes each of the following metals in its elemental
state and any of its compounds expressed as that metal: arsenic, barium,
cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver
and zinc.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. All water-borne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes
resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or
process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of
these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Normal sewage for the city in which concentration
of suspended materials and five-day 20°C B.O.D. is established at a level not
greater than 250 parts per million each, by weight, on the basis of the normal
daily contribution of 0.20 pounds per capita, per 100 gallons.
      PARTS PER MILLION. A weight-to-weight ration; the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
      PERMITTEE. The person applying for a permit to construct a sanitary sewer
main or to connect to an existing sanitary sewer, and who shall be responsible
for total compliance regarding any ordinance or requirements as may be
effective.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company,
industry, municipal or private corporation, association, society, governmental
agency or other entente and agents, servants or employees.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures
outlines in Standard Methods.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall
have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
      SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried waste from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
      SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.
      SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
      SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge made on all users of the public sewerage
system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal sewage.
      SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
      SHALL. Wherever used in this subchapter, will be interpreted in its
mandatory sense; MAY is permissive.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24
hours’ concentration or flows during the normal operation.
      STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in
the latest edition, at the time of analysis of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
      STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
      STORM WATER RUN-OFF. The portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
storm sewers.
      SURCHARGE. The charge in addition to the published water and sewer rates.
The basis for surcharges on industrial wastes shall be the total additional
costs, both capital and operating, incurred by the city which are caused by the
acceptance and treatment of discharged wastes exceeding the “normal” sewage
criteria of 250 ppm B.O.D. content, 250 ppm suspended solids content, five ppm
chlorine demand or any such additional cost to the city incurred because of the
need for special or unique processes or actions required in the acceptance and/
or treatment of said wastes.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE. Any water or waste containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or other
substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic poisonous sub-
stances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous
gases. It shall contain not more than ten parts per million each of suspended
solids and B.O.D. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per million.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   (B)   Technical terms used herein, but not defined in this section, shall
have meanings as given in the latest edition of Glossary of Water and Sewage
Control Engineering, prepared jointly by the American Public Health
Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works
Association and Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 50.16 ADMISSION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   Approval for discharge of industrial wastes into any public sewer
shall be evidenced by a permit. Any person now so discharging industrial wastes
shall file an application for a permit, within 120 days from the date of
passage of this subchapter. Any person desiring to commence discharging
industrial wastes after this subchapter becomes effective, shall obtain a
permit prior to commencing the discharge of such wastes into any public sewer.
   (B)   The disposal into public sewers of industrial wastes which can cause
damage to sewage works, impair treatment processes or by-products cause
treatment costs exceeding those of normal sewage, render the sewage treatment
plant effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use, exact an average
biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 parts per million, exhibit an
average suspended solids content greater than 250 parts per million, constitute
an average daily volume of 1% or more than the average daily sewage flow of the
city, have a chlorine demand greater than five parts per million, or contain
any of the prohibited wastes described in §
50.17 of this chapter shall be subject to review and approval of the approving
authority prior to the issuance of a disposal permit.
   (C)   Where necessary in the opinion of the city, the owner of premises from
which industrial wastes are originated, issued or discharged shall provide, at
his or her own expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 250 parts per million (and the
suspended solids to 250 parts per million) or reduce the objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided in §
50.17 of this chapter.
   (D)   Where industrial wastes discharging to the sanitary sewers are not
properly pretreated or otherwise corrected, the city may reject the wastes or
terminate the service of water and/or sanitary sewer, require control of the
quantities and rates of discharge of such wastes, or require payment of
surcharges for excessive cost for treatment; provided, such wastes are amenable
to treatment by sewage plant facilities operated by the city.
   (E)   Within 120 days from the date of receipt of written notice from the
city, the owner of any property or premises from which industrial wastes are
originated, issued or discharged shall install a suitable control manhole in
the drain which delivers his or her wastes into the public sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and the measurement of the wastes. Such a manhole shall
be a prerequisite to granting a permit in the case of future connections
involving industrial wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense,
near the point where his or her drain is connected to the public sewer, and
shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (F)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided for in division (E) above, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
   (G)   Tests upon which service surcharges, described in §
50.20 of this chapter are based, shall be performed twice annually, with costs
incurred to the account of the city. Costs for tests performed at more frequent
intervals, or for purposes other than surcharge computations, shall be paid
according to an agreement between the owner involved and the city, with said
costs normally being equally divided between the two parties.
   (H)   The volume of industrial waste flows shall be taken as a portion of
the metered water consumption, with due allowance for evaporation, inclusion of
products and the like, agreed upon by the owner involved and the city. The
metered water consumption shall be that volume recorded by the city, where
public water supply is used, together with authentic records of consumption
from any private sources used. Measurement of water from private sources used.
Measurement of water from private sources shall be done at the expense of the
owner in a manner approved by the city.
   (I)   At the discretion of the owner, industrial waste flows may be measured
directly by a suitable device, provided and maintained by the owner and
approved by the city.
   (J)   Duly authorized representatives of the city, bearing proper
identification and credentials, shall be permitted access to control manholes
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (K)   Prior to filing an industrial sewer application, the permittee shall
consult with the approving authority or his or her duly authorized
representative concerning the types, concentration and volumes of industrial
wastes proposed for discharge.
   (L)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed industrial waste pretreatment or processing facilities shall be
prepared by a professional engineer and his or her seal affixed to the plans
and specifications for the approval of the city. No construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
This provision shall not constitute a responsibility of the city for designing
or warranting the performance of such systems.
   (M)   The industrial sewer connection application shall be fully completed
and submitted to the approving authority. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to file an amendment for approval to the permit 30 days prior to the
change of any item of information on the permit.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any
sanitary sewer any of the following described substances, material, water or
wastes:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C),
or any discharge which causes the temperature of any total treatment plant
influent to increase at a rate of 10°F or more per hour or a combined total
increase to a plant influent temperature of 110°F;
      (2)   Any water or wastes which contain wax, grease or oil, plastic or
other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between 32° to 150°F;
      (3)   Flammable or explosive liquid, solids or gas, such as gasoline,
kerosene, benzine, naptha and the like;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops,
chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids;
      (5)   Any garbage not within definition of properly shredded garbage, as
defined in §
50.15 of this chapter;
      (6)   Any noxious or malodorous substance and which can form a gas, which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing
objectionable odors; or hazard to life; or forms solids in concentration
exceeding limits established in division (B) below; or creates any other
condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual
provisions, attention or expense to handle such materials;
      (7)   Any hazardous metal that exceeds the following concentrations in
parts per million:
Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Metal     Average Daily Composite Grab Sample
Arsenic   0.1     0.2             0.3
Barium    1.0     2.0             4.0
Cadmium   0.05    0.1             0.2
Chromium  0.5     1.0             5.0
Copper    0.5     1.0             2.0
Lead      0.5     1.0             1.5
Manganese 1.0     2.0             3.0
Mercury   0.005   0.005           0.01
Nickel    1.0     2.0             3.0
Selenium  0.05    0.1             0.2
Silver    0.05    0.1             0.2
Zinc      1.0     2.0             6.0
 
      (8)   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharge, any storm
water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
down spouts, yard drains, yard fountain and ponds or lawn sprays into any
sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharge to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the approving authority.
         (b)   Unpolluted processed water may be discharged upon prior written
approval of the approving authority to a storm sewer or natural outlet or into
the sanitary sewer system by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is
cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess
of three gallons per minute; provided, the waste does not contain materials or
substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by
this section.
      (9)   In cases where and, in the opinion of, the approving authority, the
character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant building or
other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated
satisfactorily in the system, the approving authority shall have the right to
require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it from
entering the system.
   (B)   Except as specifically provided in this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person, corporation or individual to discharge water or wastes
to the sanitary sewer containing:
      (1)   Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average
of 100 parts per million (833 points per million gallons) of either or both or
combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion of the
approving authority, it appears probable that such wastes:
         (a)   Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as
to clog the sewers;
         (b)   Can over-load skimming and grease handling equipment;
         (c)   Are not amenable to bacterial action and will, therefore, pass
to the receiving waters without being affected by normal sewage treatment
processed; or
         (d)   Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the
excessive quantities.
      (2)   Acids or alkalies which attack or corrode sewers or disposal
structures or have a pH value lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0;
      (3)   Cyanide or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas
on acidification in excess of one-half parts per million in weight as CN in the
wastes from any outlet into the public sewers;
      (4)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of solids or composition; as for example,
total suspended solids of greater than 250 parts per million of inert nature
(such as Fuller’s earth) and/or total dissolved solids such as sodium chloride,
or sodium sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration;
         (c)   Biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand greater
than 250 parts per million; and/or
         (d)   High hydrogen sulfide content;
      (5)   Flow of unusual volume or concentration shall be pretreated to a
concentration acceptable to the city’s water and sewer system if such wastes
can cause damage to collection facilities, impair the processes, incur
treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage or render the water unfit for
stream disposal or industrial use.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.19 AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.
   The city shall retain the right to disconnect waste disposal service in the
following circumstances:
   (A)   Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment
processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the city is
authorized immediately to terminate service by such measures as are necessary
to protect the facilities;
   (B)   Where any governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from
the treatment plant is no longer of a standard permitted for surface runoff and
it is found that the owner is delivering waste water to the city’s system that
cannot be sufficiently diluted by mixing with the city’s waste or requires
treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. In
this instance, the city shall immediately supply the owner with the
governmental agencies report and provide the owner with all pertinent
information. The owner’s waste line will then be disconnected when the city is
informed that it can no longer continue to release their effluent for surface
runoff. The owner’s waste treatment service shall remain disconnected until
such time that the owner has provided additional pretreatment facilities
designed to remove the objectionable cause from the owner’s industrial wastes;
and
   (C)   Where the owner delivers his or her waste water at an uncontrolled,
variable rate in sufficient quantity that it causes an imbalance in the sewage
treating system.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 50.20 INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Persons discharging industrial wastes which exhibit none of the
characteristics of wastes prohibited previously other than excessive B.O.D. or
suspended solids but having a concentration for a duration of 15 minutes
greater than four times that of “normal” sewage as measured by suspended solids
and B.O.D. and/or an average concentration during a normal working day of the
permittee’s industry of suspended solids or B.O.D. content in excess of
“normal” sewage, as defined in §
50.15 of this chapter, as “normal” domestic sewage shall be required to
pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the requirements of “normal” sewage;
however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if the following
requirements are met:
      (1)   The waste will not cause damage to the collection and treatment
facilities;
      (2)   The waste will not impair the treatment process; and
      (3)   The donor of the waste enters into an industrial sewer connection
application and agrees to pay the basic sewer service charge and industrial
waste surcharge.
   (B)   The donor of the wastes shall enter into an industrial sewer
connection application with the city providing for a surcharge over and above
the basic sewer service charge of $150 per million gallons. The basis for
surcharge on industrial wastes is a capital and opera-ting costs of $0.15 per
milligram per liter per million gallons for the B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen
demand) exceeding 250 milligrams per liter and a capital and operating costs of
$0.15 per milligram per liter per million gallons for the suspended solids
exceeding 250 milligrams per liter. The cost of any additional treatment
requirements such as nutrient addition and pH adjustment shall be charged to
the contributing industry.
   (C)   The charges for industrial waste treatment shall be calculated for
billing purposes with the following formulas:
B.C. = basic sewer service charge = jV = $150 x V
S.C. = surcharge for B.O.D. and suspended solids + additional chemical
requirements = V [0.15 (B.O.D. - 250) + 0.15 (S.S. - 250)] + C
T.C. = B.C. + S.C. = $150 (V) + V [0.15(B.O.D. - 250) + 0.15 (S.S. - 250)] + C
Where:
   j =   basic sewer service charge (in dollars) per MG
   V =   volume in million gallons
   B.O.D. =   B.O.D. -5 day at 20°C of industrial waste (mg/l)
   c =   costs of chemical treatment requirements of wastes of contributing
industry
   (D)   Any person who refuses to comply with or who resists or willfully
discharges wastes prohibited from discharge into public sewers, or who refuses
to comply with the provisions of this section, shall be served by the approving
authority with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. Any
person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty
of violation of his or her industrial sewer connection application and shall be
summarily disconnected from the sanitary and/or water service, such
disconnection and reconnection to be of total expense to the customer. Where
acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to
the sewer and cause rapid deterioration of these structures or interferes with
the proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to
immediately terminate service by such measures as are necessary to protect the
facilities.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 50.21 BILLING.
   Industrial waste surcharge provided for in this subchapter shall be included
as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges and shall be
paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges shall be
paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the
person become due and payment for water and sanitation services shall not be
accepted without payment also of the sewer service charges and industrial waste
surcharges.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 50.22 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the city from the industrial users
of the sewer system of the federal grant amount allocable to the treatment of
wastes for such users.
      INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD. The industrial cost recovery period
shall be equal to 30 years from the date of completion of the facilities.
      INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   Industries identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented
under the following divisions:
            1.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B - Mining;
            3.   Division D - Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
            5.   Division I - Services.
         (b)   Exempt from these requirements are industrial users that
discharge 25,000 gpd or less of sanitary waste or process waste or combined
equivalent waste, providing such waste does not contain pollutants which
interfere, or are incompatible with, or contaminate or reduce the utility of
sludge.
      SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. All facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
      NEW INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user which connects to an improvement
for which the city has received a federal grant under Pub. Law No. 92-500 after
the date when such improvement has been put into service.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL WASTE USER OR DISCHARGER. An industrial waste user
that contributes greater than 10% of the design flow or design pollutant
loading of the sewer system.
   (B)   After the city has made application to the Environmental Protection
Agency for federal assistance under Pub. Law No. 92-500, being the Clean Water
Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., for the construction of improvements to the
sewer system, the city will then request that all significant waste dischargers
who are contributing to the sanitary sewer system affected by the improvements
to sign a letter of intent to pay that portion of the federal grant amount
allocable to its industrial waste discharge. Such significant waste dischargers
shall submit their signed letter of intent within 30 days after receipt of the
city’s request for such letter. Such letters of intent shall also include a
statement of the period of the industrial user’s intended use of the proposed
improvements.
   (C)   An industrial user may make a written request for reserve capacity for
anticipated increases in either volume or strength. If the approving authority
determines that such capacity can be reserved, he or she will so notify the
industrial user in writing within 30 days after receipt of the request. If such
reserve capacity is granted by the city, this value will be used in the
following formula to ascertain the industrial user’s annual share. Such
reservations are valid unless:
      (1)   The industrial user notifies the city in writing that it no longer
desires such reservation or capacity; or
      (2)   The industrial user fails or refuses to make annual payment for
reservation of such capacity, and in either of these event, the industrial user
is not entitled to any refund of payments made for such reserved capacity.
   (D)   All industrial users discharging industrial waste to the sanitary
sewer system affected by improvements for which the city received a federal
grant under Pub. Law No. 92-500 shall make annual payments to the city during
the industrial cost recovery period, paying its individual share of the grant
amount received by the city divided by the industrial cost recovery period.
Each industrial user’s annual share shall be calculated from the following
formula, and the values for volume, BOD and SS shall be the same as its values
used by the city during the previous year for calculation of user charges to
industrial users:
G =  T  (I)
D
   Where:
   G =   Annual payment by industrial user
   T =   Amount of federal grant
   D =   Peak design volume provided for in the project in million gallons per
day (MGD)
   I =   Peak design volume reserved by the industrial user in thousand gallons
per day
   (E)   Industrial cost recovery by a new industrial user shall begin on the
date use of the facilities is initiated and shall continue for the unexpired
portion of the industrial cost recovery period or until such new industrial
user ceases ,use of the facility, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   Within 15 days from the date the approving authority issues an order
or makes a determination regarding allocations and industrial cost recovery
assessments affecting an industrial user, such industrial user may appeal to
the City Council by giving written notice to the City Secretary of its
intention to appeal. A hearing date shall be set by the City Council and notice
given to the appealing industrial user, which shall have the right to present
testimony, evidence and argument in support of its position. The City Council
shall, not later than 30 days from the date of such hearing, enter its order
either modifying or upholding the approving authority’s determination and such
determination by the City Council shall be final.
   (G)   The city will bill each industrial user and new industrial user
annually on a date to be determined by the city. Payments shall become due not
later than 15 days from the date of such billing.
   (H)   (1)   The city may terminate water and wastewater industrial user’s
services from the system when:
         (a)   Any significant waste discharger fails to submit the required
letter of intent required by division (A) above within 45 days after written
notice from the city that the same is required is received; and/or
         (b)   Any industrial user fails to make annual payments as required by
this section after receipt of bill from the city.
      (2)   In addition, such industrial users are subject to penalties
established in §
50.99(D) of this chapter.
   (I)   Annual payments made hereunder are not in lieu of any sanitary sewer
connection charges established by other city ordinances or user charges or
surcharges established in other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
50.03 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $200, for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §
50.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication
of guilt, a fine not to exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator.
Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense for which a
separate fine may be assessed.
   (D)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
50.15 through
50.22 of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The time interval shall take into account,
among other factors, the nature and magnitude of corrective measures indicated,
and shall normally be between 30 days and one year. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated inn such notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in §
50.22(A) of this chapter shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary
sewer and/or water service, such disconnection and reconnection to be at total
expense to the customer.
      (3)   Any person failing to pay sewage or industrial waste surcharge
bills, when due, shall be in violation of §§
50.15 through
50.22 of this chapter, and shall be so notified in writing and be given 30 days
to make payment.
      (4)   Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment
processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the city is
authorized to immediately terminate service by such measures as are necessary
to protect the facilities.
      (5)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
50.15 through
50.22 of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
      (6)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
50.15 through
50.22 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $200. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue or be permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 82-04-05-1, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 83-09-12, passed 9-12-1983; Ord. 84-08-
06-E(5), passed 8-6-1984)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
Street Location/Type of Street Speed Limit Ord./Res. Date Passed Penalty
Street    Location/Type Speed Limit Ord./Res.  Date Passed    Penalty
          of Street
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Astronaut Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Jet       Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Lakewood  Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Liner     Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Rocket    Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
          From north
          city limits               10-6-1969; 10-6-1969; 6-  Misdemeanor;
S.H. 149  to a point    50 mph      960213     11-1996        $500
          0.370 mile
          south
          From a point
S.H. 149  0.370 mile to 55 mph      10-6-1969; 10-6-1969; 6-  Misdemeanor;
          south city                960213     11-1996        $500
          limits
          From the                                            Misdemeanor;
          intersection                                        $10/first
          of S.H. 149               69-0106-1; 1-6-1969; 1-6- offense; $20/
S.H. 322  to a point    50 mph      69-01-09   1969           second,
          1.422 miles                                         subsequent
          south (south                                        offense
          city limits)
                                                              Misdemeanor;
                                                              $30/first
Walter    Residential   20 mph      83-05-02-1 5-2-1983       offense; $200/
                                                              second,
                                                              subsequent
                                                              offense
 
SCHEDULE II. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      DEVIATING TRUCK. A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route
while traveling inside the city.
      TRUCK. Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of goods
or property, and which has more than two axles.
      TRUCK ROUTE. A way over certain streets as designated herein, over and
along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate.
   (B)   Application of regulation.
      (1)   All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along
truck routes herein established and on the other designated streets over which
truck travel is permitted.
      (2)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit:
         (a)   The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the
conduct of business at a destination point; provided, streets upon which such
traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the
destination point;
         (b)   The operation of any emergency vehicles upon any street in the
city;
         (c)   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, by public
utilities or by any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets street improvements or street utilities
within the city; and/or
         (d)   The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour
in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for
which such detour is established.
   (C)   Designated streets for truck use. In addition to those streets in the
city constituting a part of the truck route, as established herein, the
following streets and no others, running in both directions, shall be used for
truck traffic:
      (1)   Estes Parkway, from the south city limits to north city limits;
      (2)   Gardiner Mitchell Parkway (S.H. 322), from S.H. 149 to south city
limit; and
      (3)   FM 349, from east city limit to west city limit.
   (D)   Truck traffic in the city.
      (1)   Outside origin.
         (a)   All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city
shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at
the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest
the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck
shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.
         (b)   All trucks entering the city from multiple destination points
shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the
intersection with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to
the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a
deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest
direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon
leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck
route by the shortest permissible route.
         (c)   In addition, all roads and drives providing vehicular ingress
and egress to the locations at which the vehicle is traveling shall be
maintained in such a manner as to prevent dirt, dust or other similar materials
from such roads.
      (2)   Inside origin.
         (a)   All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in
the city for a destination point outside the city, shall proceed by the
shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck
route as herein established.
         (b)   All trucks, on a trip originating in the city, and traveling in
the city for a destination point in the city, shall proceed only over streets
upon which such traffic is permitted.
         (c)   In addition, all roads and drives providing vehicular ingress
and egress to the locations at which the vehicle is traveling shall be
maintained in such a manner as to prevent dirt, dust or other similar materials
from such roads.
   (E)   Violation and penalty. Any person who shall drive or any person, firm,
partnership or corporation that owns or operates a truck which permits the same
to be driven on any public street in the city in violation of this schedule is
guilty of a misdemeanor and the penalty for violation of this schedule shall be
a fine not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 121305, passed 12-13-2005)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Dogs
   
90.02   Fowl, game and other non-domesticated animals
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DOGS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) or any person(s) having
custody of a dog(s) to permit such dog(s) to run at large in the city, unless
such dog(s) be at all times under the control of the said owner(s) or person(s)
having custody of such dog(s) or a member of the said owner’s immediate family
or said owner’s servant or agent, by means of a leash, rope or chain of
sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such dog(s). At all
other times, said dog(s) shall be confined to the premises of said owner(s) or
person(s) having custody of such dog(s) by a substantial fence of sufficient
strength and height to prevent said dog(s) from escaping therefrom, confined
inside the house or secure on said premises by a leash, rope or chain of
sufficient strength to prevent said dog(s) from escaping from said premises and
so arranged that said dog(s) will remain upon said premises when the leash,
rope or chain is stretched full length.
      (2)   The City Council has undertaken to establish this section to
protect the public health and safety of its citizens and to promote the general
welfare of the citizens and animals residing in the city. Strong emphasis is
placed on responsible ownership of animals. Animal owners are encouraged to
respect the rights of their fellow citizens and also those of their animals.
Primary responsibility is placed upon animal owners to properly train and/or
secure their animals so as to prevent them from causing injuries and/or
creating nuisances.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
      CITATIONS. The city’s Police Department, as well as any other certified
law enforcement officer with appropriate jurisdiction, may issue citations for
the violation of this section.
      DANGEROUS DOGS. A dog(s) which has been classified as dangerous or
potentially dangerous (displaying threatening or aggressive behaviors.) These
types of behavior are established if a dog(s) is found to menace, chase,
display threatening or aggressive behavior or endanger the safety of any
person. Also, these types of behaviors are established if a dog(s), while under
restraint of a leash, confined or at large, that is vicious or mischievous
propensities or tendencies to attack or bite any person(s) or animal is hereby
defined as a DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      DOG(S) AT LARGE. Any dog(s) off the premises of the owner(s) and not
under the complete control of the owner(s), either by leash, rope, chain of
sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such dog(s).
      HARBORING. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a
premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care.
      NUISANCE. An act that threatens the health, morals, safety, comfort,
convenience or welfare of a community. The keeping of any animal in such a
manner as to endanger the public health, to annoy a neighbor by the
accumulation of animal wastes to a cause noxious or distinct odor or be a
NUISANCE to the public. The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or
long-continued barking or noise, shall disturb any person of ordinary
sensibilities in the vicinity.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation who has the right of property in an
animal or who harbors an animal(s) or allows an animal(s) to remain on his or
her premises.
      RESTRAINTS. No person(s) owning, harboring or having the care of a dog(s)
shall allow or permit dog(s) to go unconfined on the premises of such person
(s), nor shall the person(s) allow or permit such dog(s) or dangerous dog(s) to
be loose unless it is securely leashed with a leash, rope or chain or
sufficient strength and length to control the action(s) of said dog(s).
      STRAY DOG. Any dog(s) running at large without vaccination tag and
apparent owner.
      VACCINATION. An injection of a type of vaccination approved by the State
Veterinarian and administered by a veterinarian licensed under state law.
   (C)   (1)   The owner(s) of each dog(s) in the city limits shall be
responsible for that dog(s). Such owner(s) shall receive a citation(s) for
violating this section. If a dog owner receives a second citation, or
subsequent citation, then the owner will be given a mandatory court appearance
date before the City Judge.
      (2)   At the close of the hearing, the owner will be required to pay the
citation and penalty fee for the violation.
   (D)   The city’s Police Department, as well as any other certified law
enforcement officer with appropriate jurisdiction, may serve a citation(s) to
the violator of this section. The Police Chief and/or all police officers shall
have the right to enforce provisions of this section.
(Ord. 23-06-13, passed 6-13-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 FOWL, GAME AND OTHER NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMALS.
   The keeping or other maintaining of fowl, game or other non-domesticated
animals including, but not limited to, chickens, pigs, goats, horses and
cattle, within the city limits, within any zoning classification not expressly
allowing same is hereby prohibited in all respects.
(Ord. 79-11-05-1, passed 11-5-1979) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person(s) violating the provisions of §
90.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of no less than $250, nor more
than $500 for the first occurrence, no less than $500, nor more than $750, for
the second occurrence and $1,000 for the third subsequent occurrence.
      (2)   The city shall increase the penalty of such dog(s) that has been
deemed vicious or dangerous. A person who violates §
90.01 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be assessed a fine of not less
than $250, nor more than $500. Also, the person(s) who violates §
90.01 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall remove the dog(s) from the city.
   (C)   Violation of any provision or provisions of §
90.02 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and each day that said
violation occurs shall be a separate misdemeanor and the penalty for violating
the provisions of §
90.02 of this chapter shall be a fine not to exceed $200 per day.
(Ord. 79-11-05-1, passed 11-5-1979; Ord. 23-06-13, passed 6-13-2023)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Interpretation and effect
   
91.03   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.04   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.06   Exemptions and exclusions
   
91.07   Fair Housing Administrator
   
91.08   Complaints
   
91.09   Investigations
   
91.10   Cumulative legal effect
   
91.11   Unlawful intimidation
   
91.12   Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
   
91.13   Education and public information
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future; words
in the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the plural number
include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural.
   AGE. The calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over.
   CREED. Any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally
expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.03,
91.04 or
91.05 of this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families
or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual or a group of individuals living
together under one common roof.
   MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for
one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning and working.
   MARITAL STATUS. An individual’s status as a single, married, divorced,
widowed or separated person.
   PARENTHOOD. A person’s status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or
children under the age of 18.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY. Any physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT. Includes:
      (1)   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
      (2)   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific learning
disabilities.
   SENIOR ADULT. A person 55 years of age or older.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.02 INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT.
   (A)   This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial
right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies
provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§
3601 et seq., as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15
U.S.C. § 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them
by Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal
Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
   (B)   In construing this chapter, it is the intent of the City Council that
the courts shall be guided by Federal Court interpretations of Title VIII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit
Opportunity Act, where appropriate.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.03 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   Except as exempted by §
91.06 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or
national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or
age;
   (B)   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or
national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or
age;
   (C)   Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling
that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race,
color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability,
marital status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination;
   (D)   Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion
or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood
or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when
such dwelling is in fact so available;
   (E)   For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or
attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or
persons of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin,
physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; and/or
   (F)   For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit to influence or
attempt to influence, by any words, acts or failure to act, any seller,
purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of
racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially
integrated housing.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real
estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing
of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of:
   (A)   The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or
mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of such person or of any
person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other
financial assistance; or
   (B)   The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or
mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of the present or
prospective owner, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings
for which such a loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability,
marital status, parenthood or age.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be exempted from the application of §
91.03 of this chapter all transactions involving:
      (1)   The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of
such units as his or her residence;
      (2)   The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the
person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the
remainder of such dwelling as his or her residence and not more than four such
rooms are offered; and
      (3)   The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who
owns such house; provided that:
         (a)   The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the
sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate
broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person
in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and
         (b)   The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter (this shall
not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies
and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the
title); and
         (c)   The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at
the time of the sale;
         (d)   The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title
to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental
or more than three such single-family houses at any one time; and
         (e)   If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or
was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption
granted by this division (A)(3) shall apply only with respect to one such sale
within any 24-month period.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or any non-profit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental
or physical disability, marital status, parenthood or age.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not
in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose
provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from
giving preference to its members.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating
a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or
rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use
of all persons occupying such housing accommodation.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or
occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults
and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap and marital status.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operates or
controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or
more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings
for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided,
however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented,
the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse
to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the
basis of the tenant’s status as parent or any other of the protected
classifications set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.07 FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor shall appoint and the Council shall confirm a Fair Housing
Administrator (hereinafter referred to as “Administrator”), who shall have the
responsibility for implementing this chapter. The Administrator may delegate
his or her authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city
employees under his or her direction.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.08 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice who believes he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter
referred to as “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Administrator.
Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to
have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice
and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory
housing practice are based. The Administrator shall prepare complaint forms and
furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
   (B)   A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded
to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI Office of
the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   (C)   The Administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to
those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local,
state or federal court.
   (D)   If, at any time, the Administrator shall receive or discover credible
evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons
have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which
no complaint has been filed, the Administrator may prepare and file a complaint
upon his or her own motion and in his or her own name and such complaint shall
thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person
aggrieved.
   (E)   The Administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral
complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of
1968, Pub. Law No. 90-284, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., and shall treat
such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to
division (A) above.
   (F)   All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence
of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of
any complaint, the Administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by
furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly
committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of
receipt of the written complaint.
   (G)   All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an
officer authorized to administer oaths.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.09 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the
Administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the
matter stated in the complaint.
   (B)   If the Administrator determines that there is not probable cause to
believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been
committed, the Administrator shall take no further action with respect to that
alleged offense.
   (C)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of
the notice of complaints, the Administrator shall, if it appears that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary
discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of
future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing said
or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the
Administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings
without the written consent of all persons concerned.
   (D)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the Administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the
complaint with the Administrator, if the efforts of the Administrator to secure
voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the Administrator has made
a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred,
the Administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that such violations be
prosecuted in the Municipal Court. With such recommendations, the Administrator
shall refer his or her entire file to the City Attorney. The City Attorney
shall, within 30 days after such referral, make a determination as to whether
to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in Municipal Court. If the City
Attorney determines to prosecute, he or she shall institute a complaint and
prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon
thereafter as practicable.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.10 CUMULATIVE LEGAL EFFECT.
   This chapter is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and
all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.11 UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or
otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he, she or they
have complied with the provisions of this chapter, because he, she or they have
exercised his, her or their rights under this chapter, or enjoyed the benefits
of this chapter, or because he, she or they have made a charge, testified or
assisted in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any
report to the Administrator.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 COOPERATION WITH SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
   The Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized to cooperate with the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General
pursuant to the provisions of Title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Pub. Law No.
90-284, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., and may render such service to the
Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this
chapter.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.13 EDUCATION AND PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   In order to further the objectives of this chapter, the Administrator may
conduct educational and public information programs.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a
sum not to exceed $200 for each violation. Each day a violation continues after
passage of 75 days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the
Administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this
remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.
(Ord. 93-04-12-01, passed 4-12-1993)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Public places; garbage, litter and the like; removal; lien
   
92.02   Private property; garbage, litter and the like; removal; lien
   
92.03   Noise
Weeds
   
92.15   Growth of weeds, plants and the like
   
92.16   Duty to cut; notice
   
92.17   Performance of work by city
   
92.18   Perfecting lien
   
92.19   Foreclosing lien
Junked Motor Vehicles
   
92.30   Definition
   
92.31   Findings
   
92.32   Public nuisance declaration; notice
   
92.33   Removal; complaint
   
92.34   Public hearing
   
92.35   Exclusions
   
92.36   Authority; administration
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 PUBLIC PLACES; GARBAGE, LITTER AND THE LIKE; REMOVAL; LIEN.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      LITTER. “Garbage”, “refuse” and “rubbish”, as defined herein, and all
other waste material, which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
      REFUSE. All solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market
and industrial wastes.
      RUBBISH. Waste or rejected, useless trash or junk.
   (B)   Prohibited behavior.
      (1)   No person shall store, throw or deposit trash, garbage, litter,
rubbish, leaves, straw or wood in or upon city property, including city
drainage ditches, streets and easements. Any person who purposely stacks,
stores or deposits in drainage, ditch easements, streets or city property shall
be subject to penalty.
      (2)   The presence of any garbage, litter, refuse or junk in city
ditches, streets and easements shall be deemed a public nuisance.
      (3)   No person shall burn trash, garbage, litter, rubbish, leaves, straw
or wood that may contribute to the filling or plugging of ditch property or
drainage culverts. Any violation shall be subject to penalty. Any such burning
shall not be allowed on city easements, streets or ditches past the edge of the
private property.
   (C)   Receptacles. Persons placing litter in a public receptacle shall do so
in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements to any drainage ditch, street or city easements. All private pick-up
receptacles shall be enclosed, bagged, packaged or wrapped until time of
collection. All private collection pick-up points shall be on private property
and never on city property easements, ditches or streets.
   (D)   Notification; lien.
      (1)   Whenever such public nuisance exists on public property within the
city in violation of this section, the Police Chief, or his or her duly
authorized agent, shall notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises
whereupon such public nuisance exists stating the nature of the public nuisance
and that it must be removed and abated within ten days from the receipt of the
notice and that a request for hearing must be make before expiration of said
ten-day period. Such notice shall be hand-delivered or mailed by certified or
registered mail to such owner or occupant at his or her post office address. If
the owner’s address is unknown, notification shall be made by publication of
the required notice twice within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The violator shall call for conformation of complete
clean up when complete. A written confirmation may be issued by the city’s
Police Department.
         (a)   In the event a hearing is requested by the owner or the occupant
of the private premises, such hearing shall be held before the City Mayor or
Assistant City Mayor within ten days after service of notice to abate nuisance.
         (b)   In the event the City Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall determine
that such garbage, litter, refuse or junk constitutes a public nuisance, he or
she shall order the removal of the same from the premises.
         (c)   The Police Chief, any member of the city’s Police Department or
any person authorized by the city to administer the provisions hereof may enter
upon private property for the purposes specified in this section to examine any
garbage, any litter, refuse or junk and remove or cause the removal of the same
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this section. The Municipal Court of the
city may issue all orders that are necessary to enforce this procedure.
         (d)   The expense of performing the work of removal shall be borne by
the owner or occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance
exists or by the owner of occupant of the public premises. Such expense shall
be assessed as a lien against the real estate upon which such public nuisance
exists.
      (2)   (a)   Whenever any work is done under the provisions of division
(D)(1)(b) above, the City Mayor, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement
of the expenses incurred with the County Clerk of the county where such work
was performed. Such statement shall be signed by the Mayor of the city and
shall give the amount of such expenses and give the date or dates on which such
work was done.
         (b)   After the statement provided for in division (D)(2)(a) above is
filed, the city shall have a privilege lien on the real estate affected by such
work. Such lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvement and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per
annum from the date the statement is filed. For any such expenditures and
interests, suit may be instituted and recovered and foreclosure of the lien may
be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses made in accordance
with division (D)(2)(a) above or, a certified copy thereof, shall prima facie
proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements.
(Ord. 02-08-13-04, passed 8-13-2002) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 PRIVATE PROPERTY; GARBAGE, LITTER AND THE LIKE; REMOVAL; LIEN.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
      GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      LITTER. “Garbage”, “refuse” and “rubbish”, as defined herein and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
      PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
      REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
      RUBBISH. Waste or rejected, useless trash or junk.
   (B)   Accumulations of garbage, litter, refuse or junk on private premises.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private property in the
city to place on or allow or permit to be placed, accumulated or remain on such
property any garbage, any litter, any refuse or junk.
      (2)   The presence of any garbage, litter, refuse or junk on any private
property within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance.
      (3)   Whenever such public nuisance exists on private property within the
city in violation of this section, the Police Chief, or his or her duly
authorized agent, shall notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises
whereupon such public nuisance exists stating the nature of the public nuisance
and that it must be removed and abated within ten days from the receipt of the
notice and that a request for hearing must be made before expiration of said
ten-day period. Such notice shall be hand-delivered or mailed using either
certified or registered mail to such owner or occupant at his or her post
office address. If the owner’s address in unknown, notification shall be made
by publication of the required notice twice within ten consecutive days in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      (4)   In the event a hearing is requested by the owner or the occupant of
the private premises, such hearing shall be held before the City Mayor or
Assistant City Mayor of the city within ten days after service of notice to
abate nuisance.
      (5)   The Police Chief, any member of the city’s Police Department or any
person authorized by the city to administer the provisions hereof may enter
upon private property for the purposes specified in this section to examine any
garbage, any litter, refuse or junk and remove or cause the removal of the same
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this section. The Municipal Court of the
city may issue all orders that are necessary to enforce this procedure.
      (6)   (a)   The expense of performing the work of removal shall be borne
by the owner or occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance
exists or by the owner or occupant of the public premises.
         (b)   Such expense shall be assessed as a lien against the real estate
upon which said nuisance exists.
   (C)   Lien for expenses.
      (1)   (a)   Whenever any work is done under the provisions of division
(B) above, the City Mayor, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the
expenses incurred with the County Clerk of the county where such work was
performed.
         (b)   Such statement shall be signed by the Mayor of the city and
shall give the amount of such expenses and give the date or dates on which such
work was done.
      (2)   (a)   After the statement provided for in division (C)(1) above is
filed, the city shall have the privilege lien on the real estate affected by
such work.
         (b)   Such lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvement and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per
annum from the date the statement is filed.
         (c)   For any such expenditures and interests, suit may be instituted
and recovered and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city
and the statement of expenses made in accordance with division (C)(1) above or
a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for
such work or improvements.
(Ord. 02-08-13-03, passed 8-13-2002) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 NOISE.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to create loud and raucous
noises, and shall be deemed a violation of this section, but such enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive: the playing of any stereo system, whether
stationary or located within a motor vehicle, in such a manner or with such
volume as to disturb persons within 50 feet of the stereo system or as to
substantially impair the use of enjoyment of public or private property.
(Ord. 960611, passed 6-11-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
WEEDS
§ 92.15 GROWTH OF WEEDS, PLANTS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, occupant or anyone
having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion
thereof, occupied or unoccupied within the city to suffer or permit grass,
weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a greater height of 12
inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion upon such premises.
   (B)   No person shall permit grass, weeds or any plant, that is not
cultivated, to grow along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between
the property line and the curb or if there is no curb, then within ten feet
outside that property line to a height greater than 12 inches on an average or
to grow in rank profusion upon such premises.
   (C)   The following areas shall be exempted from the above requirements:
those zoned or designated for agricultural use.
(Ord. 02-08-13-02, passed 8-13-2002) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 DUTY TO CUT; NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person, owner, agent, occupant or anyone
having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion
thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to remove or cause to be cut
and removed all such grass, weeds or plants as often may be necessary to comply
with §
92.15 of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   If, at any time, the Police Chief or his or her duly authorized
agent discovers any premises, including lots, blocks, tracts of land or any
portions thereof not exempted under §
92.15 of this chapter, on which grass exceeds 12 inches in height, the Police
Chief shall give written notice to the owner of the land.
      (2)   This notice shall be either hand-delivered or mailed by certified
or registered mail, shall state the particulars of the violation, contain a
description of the property where the violation exists, and require the owner
or owners to correct the violation within ten days of the receipt of the
written notice. In the event the owners are unknown or cannot be located, the
notice shall be published on two separate days within ten consecutive days in
the official newspaper within the city, and return thereof made in conformity
with the provisions of the state statutes governing service of citation by
publication.
(Ord. 02-08-13-02, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.17 PERFORMANCE OF WORK BY CITY.
   Should the recipient of any such notice as above provided fail, neglect, or
refuse to comply with the requirements of such notice within said period of ten
days, the city, by virtue of the power conferred upon it by its Charter and the
provisions of Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code Title 6, Chapter 125,
acting by and through the Police Chief or his or her duly authorized agent,
shall have the power to enter in and upon said premises and perform all work,
acts or things necessary to be done in compliance with the requirements of said
notice, and incur all necessary expenses in connection therewith, and all of
such work and expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be done on the
account of and at the cost of the owner, agent or occupant of any such
premises, and is declared to be a personal charge against any such owner, agent
or occupant, and a lien upon said property as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 02-08-13-02, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.18 PERFECTING LIEN.
   (A)   Whenever the city shall have performed the work and paid all necessary
expenses in connection therewith as hereinabove provided, the Mayor, on behalf
of the city, shall immediately prepare and file for record in the office of the
County Clerk an itemized statement of all the work performed, all costs and
expenses incurred and paid by the city, in connection therewith, in the form of
an affidavit duly sworn to, which affidavit or duly certified copy thereof,
after having been recorded, shall be prima facie proof of the work done and
performed and the amounts paid therefor.
   (B)   Such affidavit, among other things and provisions, shall contain the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of owner, occupant or agent of owner of property
if known and, if unknown, recite that fact;
      (2)   Description of property sufficient to identify same, and where
property has been subdivided, a description by lot and block number of any
particular subdivision shall be sufficient;
      (3)   Statement of the particular violation of this subchapter;
      (4)   Statement that notice of violation was mailed to owner as to
failure to comply therewith;
      (5)   Itemized statement of the work done and performed, together with
costs thereof opposite each item;
      (6)   Statement of payment made by the city, the date of such payment and
to whom made; and
      (7)   Statement that such affidavit is made for the purpose of fixing a
lien upon the property therein described, in accordance with the provisions of
Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code Title 6, Chapter 125, with 10% interest
on the aggregate amount paid by the city.
(Ord. 02-08-13-02, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.19 FORECLOSING LIEN.
   Upon the filing of the statement and affidavit provided for the city shall
have a lien for the re-payment of the aggregate amount so expended and paid as
therein set forth, with 10% interest thereon from the date of payment thereof
by the city, upon the property described in said affidavit; and which lien
shall have precedence over all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens
and liens for street improvements; and for any such expenditures and interest
as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery had and said lien foreclosed
in the manner provided by law, by the city.
(Ord. 02-08-13-02, passed 8-13-2002) Penalty, see §
92.99
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 92.30 DEFINITION.
   A JUNKED VEHICLE means a motor vehicle defined in Tex. Transportation Code
Title 7, Chapter 683, § 683.001 that:
   (A)   Is inoperative; and
   (B)   Does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate
or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, that is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded, or that remains inoperable for a
continuous period of more than 45 days.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.31 FINDINGS.
   Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a
public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare
of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to
invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and are detrimental to the
economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development to the city and such vehicles are
therefore declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.32 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARATION; NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to maintain a public nuisance, as
determined under this section.
   (B)   Whenever such public nuisance exist on private property within the
city, in violation of this section, the Police Chief, or his or her duly
authorized agent, shall give not less than ten days’ written notice that it
must be removed and abated within ten days and that request for a hearing must
be made before expiration of said ten-day period, such notice to be hand-
delivered or mailed by certified mail, or registered mail, with a five-day
return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any
lien holder of record, and the owner or the occupant of the private premises
whereupon such public nuisance exist. If the notice is returned undeliverable
by the United States Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall
be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
   (C)   Whenever such public nuisance exist on public property or on a public
right-of-way in violation of this section, the Police Chief or his or her duly
authorized agent shall give not less than ten days’ written notice stating the
nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed or abated within ten
days and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of said
ten-day period, such notice to be hand-delivered or mailed by certified mail or
registered mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered
owner of the junked vehicle, any lien holder of record and the owner or the
occupant of the public premises or to the owner or the occupant of the public
premises adjacent to the right-of-way, whereupon such public nuisance exist. If
the notice is returned undeliverable by the United States Post Office, official
action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten
days from the date of such return.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 REMOVAL; COMPLAINT.
   (A)   After a motor vehicle has been removed under the terms and provisions
of this section, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
   (B)   Upon the issuance of the order referred to in §
92.34(B) of this chapter hereof by the City Council, the Police Chief, or his
or her duly authorized agent, shall go upon the premises specified in such
order and remove such vehicle or part thereof from the premises to a scrap
yard, demolishers or any suitable site designated by the city.
   (C)   Within five days after the date of removal of such vehicle or part
thereof, the Police Chief, or his or her duly authorized agent, shall give
notice to the state’s Highway Department of such removal identifying the
vehicle or part thereof.
   (D)   If the public nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing not
requested within the ten-day period provided by §
92.32(B) and (C) of this chapter, a complaint shall be filed against the party
violating this section in the Municipal Court of the city.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall affect any statue or ordinance that
permits immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property, which
constitutes an obstruction of traffic.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.34 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   In the event any party to whom notice is directed under the provisions
of this subchapter shall request a public hearing prior to the removal of the
vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, such public hearing shall be held
before the City Council within ten days after service of notice to abate the
nuisance.
   (B)   In the event, after public hearing, the City Council shall determine
that such vehicle or part thereof constitutes a public nuisance, it may order
the removal of such vehicle or part thereof, which order shall include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license
number of vehicle, if available at the site.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.35 EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible form a street or other
public or private property;
   (B)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business or licensed vehicle dealer;
and/or
   (C)   Unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special interest
vehicles stored by a collector on his or her private property; provided that,
the vehicles in the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public
view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate
means. An ANTIQUE AUTOMOBILE means passenger cars or trucks which were
manufactured in 1925 or before, or which become 35 or more years old. Special
interest vehicles are motor vehicles which have not been altered or modified
from original manufacturer’s specifications and, because of their historic
interest, are being preserved by hobbyist. COLLECTOR means the owner of one or
more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicle or parts of them for
his or her own use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or
special interest vehicle for historic interest.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.36 AUTHORITY; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   All of the procedures set forth in this subchapter shall be carried
out by salaried, full-time employees of the city; except that, the removal of
vehicles or parts thereof from any property may be by any other duly authorized
person.
   (B)   (1)   The Police Chief, any member of the Police Department or any
person authorized by the city to administer the provisions of the procedures
set forth in this subchapter may enter upon private property for the purposes
specified herein to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to
the identity of the vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant
hereto.
      (2)   The Municipal Court shall have the authority to issue all orders
necessary to enforce any procedures set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Each violation of §
92.01 of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication of
guilt, a fine not to exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator in
accordance with the provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each continuing day of violation shall be
deemed a separate offense for which a separate fine may be assessed.
   (C)   Each violation of §
92.02 of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication of
guilt, a fine not to exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator in
accordance with the provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each continuing day of violation shall be
deemed a separate offense for which a separate fine may be assessed.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
92.03 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of $100. Each day such
violation shall continue, or be permitted to continue, shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (E)   Each violation of §§
92.15 through
92.19 of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication of
guilt, a fine not to exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator in
accordance with the provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each continuing day of violation shall be
deemed a separate offense for which a separate fine may be assessed.
   (F)   Each individual violation of §§
92.30 through
92.36 of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication of
guilt, a fine not to exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator in
accordance with the provisions of §§
92.30 through
92.36 of this chapter. Each continuing day of each violation shall be deemed a
separate offense for which a separate fine may be assessed.
(Ord. 960611, passed 6-11-1996; Ord. 02-08-13-01, passed 8-13-2002; Ord. 02-08-
13-02, passed 8-13-2002; Ord. 02-08-13-03, passed 8-13-2002; Ord. 02-08-13-04,
passed 8-13-2002)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Lakeport City Park
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   General park rules
   
93.03   Conduct of persons in park
   
93.04   Littering, dumping prohibited
   
93.05   Smoking, drinking alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
93.06   Traffic regulations
   
93.07   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
LAKEPORT CITY PARK
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL BEVERAGES. The same as defined in the Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code §
1.04.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any substance defined as a controlled substance by the
State Controlled Substances Act (V.T.C.A. Health and Safely Code Chapter 481).
   DANGEROUS DRUGS. Any substance defined as a dangerous drug by V.T.C.A.
Health and Safely Code § 483.001.
   DOGS. Animal or pet. The owner is responsible for his or her animal. Must be
on a leash at all times.
   OUTSIDE FITNESS EXERCISE EQUIPMENT ZONE. Exercise equipment for fitness. Not
suitable for children’s play. No child under the age of 16 allowed in the
exercise area.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area
in the city owned, used or designated by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025)
§ 93.02 GENERAL PARK RULES.
   (A)   Park hours. Except for events sponsored by the city or unforeseen
emergencies, park hours shall be only open to the public every day of the year
sunrise to sunset.
   (B)   Unlawful entry. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an
employee of the city in the course of his or her employment, to enter or remain
in the park outside park hours/closed.
   (C)   Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful to use the park at any time for
unlawful meetings or purposes.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN PARK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to:
   (A)   Willfully or intentionally mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper
with or displace or remove any tables, bench, playground equipment, exercise
equipment or other structures, park property or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, either real or personal;
   (B)   Dig or remove any soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or
other wood or materials, or make any excavations by tools, equipment, blasting
or other means or agency;
   (C)   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark or pick flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;
   (D)   Willfully interfere with, disrupt or prevent any orderly conduct of
any supervised schedule conducted by the city or other agency;
   (E)   Discharge, set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn
any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets and other fireworks or explosives of
inflammable materials;
   (F)   Possess, carry or discharge any firearm except by state law;
   (G)   Fail to collect or dispose of any solid waste from a dog or pet on
park ground;
   (H)   Build or attempt to build a fire on park ground;
   (I)   Gamble or participate in or aid any game of chance;
   (J)   Allow any dog or pet within park grounds to be unleashed at any time;
and
   (K)   Allow any child under the age of 16 is allowed in the exercise
equipment area.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 LITTERING, DUMPING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to:
   (A)   Throw, discard, dump, deposit or leave in and upon the grounds of the
park any litter, garbage, trash, or debris except in receptacles provided for
this purpose. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter,
garbage or refuse and like shall be picked up and carried away from the park
grounds;
   (B)   Throw or deposit litter, garbage or refuse onto the grounds of the
city park while as a driver or passenger in or upon a motor vehicle; and/or
   (C)   Use the trash receptacle(s) located within the park for the disposal
of waste generated anywhere other than within the park grounds.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 SMOKING, DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume within park grounds or bring
into the park grounds alcoholic beverages, controlled substances or dangerous
drugs. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume tobacco products within
park grounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into, have in one’s
possession or leave any glass containers within park grounds.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Fail to obey police or traffic officers or city employees instructing
or directing traffic or parking whenever needed in the park and on city street
immediately adjacent thereto;
   (B)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating caution,
stopping or parking on or near park grounds;
   (C)   Park or station a vehicle on park grounds other than in an established
or designated parking area; and/or
   (D)   Drive any motor vehicle on park grounds except paved park roads or
parking areas.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to interfere with, obstruct, resist
or oppose any person(s) authorized to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of the
Police Chief, or his or her designee, and such other person(s) designated by
the city.
   (C)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to
eject from the park any person(s) acting in violation of this subchapter or in
violation of any rules and regulations promulgated by the Council, and to
determine the length of time during which such person(s) shall be excluded from
such park.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the
provisions of §§
93.01 through
93.07 as may be required by governing law. Any person(s) violating any
provision of §§
93.01 through
93.07 is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for
criminal violations.
      (2)   Any person(s) violating any provision of §§
93.01 through
93.07 shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $500 plus court
costs and administration fees as applicable. Each day that a provision of §§
93.01 through
93.07 is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under §§
93.01 through
93.07 is a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 25-03-11, passed 3-11-2025)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING PROCEDURES
      
111.   PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   GAMING AND AMUSEMENT MACHINES
      
113.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
114.   OIL AND GAS DRILLING; PIPELINES
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING PROCEDURES
Section
   
110.01   Commercial businesses; erection
   
110.02   Alcohol; nudity prohibited
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES; ERECTION.
   (A)   Before the erection, construction or alteration of any building
situated within the limits of the city to be used for commercial purposes, a
permit must be obtained from the Mayor or any official so designated by him or
her. The fee for such permit shall be $10.
   (B)   The definition of COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES shall mean that any business
to be used for profit making and in which more than two persons are employed
shall be termed a commercial business.
(Ord. 65-1214-1, passed 12-14-1965) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 ALCOHOL; NUDITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit certain acts of commercial
exploitation of human sexuality in commercial establishments within the city
limits where alcoholic beverages are served, offered for sale for consumption
on the premises, or permitted to be consumed on the premises, and to reduce the
likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the
peace and good order of the community, to prohibit lewd and unlawful activity,
such as proliferation of controlled substances, all of which may occur when
such commercial exploitation is permitted in such places and to promote the
preservation of property values of neighborhoods and adjacent properties.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or
operating a commercial establishment located with the boundaries of the city,
at which alcoholic beverages are served offered for sale for consumption on the
premises, or at which alcoholic beverages are permitted to be consumed:
         (a)   To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of
said commercial establishment, to expose that area of the human female breast
at or below the top of the areola thereof;
         (b)   To suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of
said commercial establishment, to use any device or covering which is intended
to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female
breasts, as described in division (B)(1)(a) above;
         (c)   To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to expose his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus or anal cleft or cleavage; and/or
         (d)   To suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of said
commercial establishment, to use any device or covering which is intended to
give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises
of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city, at
which alcoholic ...MISSING TEXT...
(Ord. 94-07-11, passed 7-11-1994) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this business title for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
110.01 of this chapter shall, separately for each and every violation, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not less than
$10 and not more than $100, and each day shall be deemed a separate violation.
The imposition of such penalty for a violation of §
110.01 of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.
(Ord. 65-1214-1, passed 12-14-1965)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License requirement
   
111.03   Application procedure
   
111.04   Standards for issuance
   
111.05   Revocation procedure
   
111.06   Standards for revocation
   
111.07   Appeal procedure
   
111.08   Exhibition of identification
   
111.09   City policy on soliciting
   
111.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
111.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
111.12   Prohibited solicitation
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an ITINERANT
MERCHANT, PEDDLER or SOLICITOR as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the city.
   PEDDLER. Any person not an itinerant merchant who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a PEDDLER.
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the City Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the City Administrator. This application shall be signed by
the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
the applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to
be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from
stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and/or
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above,
has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the city, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has committed any of the
following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers,
solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; and/or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
§ 111.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the City
Secretary after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
111.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 111.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 111.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
111.04 or
111.06 shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
111.05.
   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 111.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall issue a license to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words
“Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor”, the expiration date of the license
and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee
during such time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.09 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the
residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 111.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third-inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Police Chief to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 111.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
111.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to
attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in
defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the
provisions of §
111.10.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: GAMING AND AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Authority to regulate; administration
   
112.02   Definitions
Game Rooms
   
112.15   Inspection by peace officer
   
112.16   Sign required
   
112.17   Fire and Life Safety Code adopted
   
112.18   Transparent and uncovered windows and door required
   
112.19   Hours of operation
   
112.20   Permit display
   
112.21   Prohibited employment
   
112.22   Distance restrictions
   
112.23   Memberships
   
112.24   Machines; location; illegal machines
   
112.25   Charitable bingo exemptions; food and drink
   
112.26   Illegal game rooms; owners
   
112.27   Fees
Game Room Permits
   
112.40   Application
   
112.41   Permit denial, revocation or suspension; grounds
   
112.42   Appeal after hearing
   
112.43   Operation during pendency of appeal to District Court
   
112.44   Reapplication
   
112.45   Permit renewal; fee; expiration
   
112.46   Effect
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The City Council designates any law enforcement agency to investigate
for violations of this chapter. Any peace officer that is certified by the
state may enforce this chapter.
   (B)   In accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 215.033 and 215.034, the
City Council designates the city’s Police Chief as the game room permit
administrator for the city. The city’s Police Chief shall investigate, deny,
issue, attach conditions to, administratively suspend and/or revoke game room
permits pursuant to this chapter and any applicable state law(s).
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE. Any electronic, electromechanical or
mechanical contrivance, including sweepstakes machines, that for a
consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value,
the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though
possibly accompanied by skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid
by the contrivance, including, but not limited to, gambling device versions of
bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe, eight-
liner or similar electronic, electromechanical or mechanical games, or
facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so, and is in
compliance with Tex. Penal Code § 47.01(4). This term expressly excludes coin-
operated music machines, pay toilets, pay telephones, coin-operated rides for
children and other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend merchandise,
commodities or food directly from the machine.
   APPLICANT. An individual, proprietorship, corporation, association and/or
other legal entity required to obtain a game room permit and/or individual,
proprietorship, corporation, association and/or other legal entity that has
applied for a game room permit.
   CITY OFFICIAL. A code enforcement or building official of the city or any
peace officer of the state.
   CURRENT ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTION REPORT. A fire inspection report issued by
the county’s Fire Marshal or a similar inspection by the department having
competent jurisdiction within the incorporated area of the county within 90
days immediately preceding the date of any application for operation of a game
room or renewal of a game room permit.
   FIRE SAFETY OFFICIAL. The County Fire Marshal or the department official
having competent jurisdiction within the incorporated area of the county to
conduct a fire and line safety inspection.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. A device described in Tex. Penal Code Art. 47.01(4)(A).
   GAME ROOM. A business located in a building or place that contains any of
the following and is open to the public, or operated as a private club:
      (1)   Amusement redemption machines; and
      (2)   Electronic, electromechanically or mechanical contrivances that,
for consideration, afford a player the opportunity to obtain a prize or thing
of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance,
regardless of whether the contrivance is designed, made or adopted solely for
bona fide amusement purposes.
   GAME ROOM PERMIT ADMINISTRATOR. The Police Chief of the City of Lakeport,
Texas, the Chief’s designated agent or the designated official for a
cooperating municipality.
   LICENSEE. Any person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation
operating and amusement redemption machine game room in the city.
   NON-COMPLIANT BUSINESS. Any game room that existed and was in possession and
operating as a game room, including the operation of amusement redemption
machines, as of the date of the passage of this chapter.
   NOTICE. Deemed effective on the date written notice to an applicant, permit
holder or agent thereof is hand-delivered or posted on the front exterior door
of the game room or upon receipt by certified mail.
   OCCUPATION TAX PERMIT FEE. A game room owner of an amusement redemption
machine game room shall be required to secure an occupation tax permit
annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure
an occupation tax permit by paying to the city an annual fee of $15 for each
amusement redemption machine.
   OPERATE A GAME ROOM.
      (1)   Be an owner or operator of a game room, as those terms are defined
hereby;
      (2)   Perform security services for a game room, including, but not
limited to, screening game room customers, regulating entry of customers into a
game room, monitoring game room customers and locking and/or unlocking a game
room’s door(s) during business hours;
      (3)   Fund the operation of a game room;
      (4)   Have a financial interest in a game room;
      (5)   Receive any profit from a game room;
      (6)   Supply machines described herein to a game room;
      (7)   Own machines described herein located in the game room;
      (8)   Receive any profit from a machine described herein located in a
game room; or
      (9)   Have machines described herein registered in his or her name with
the county, the city and/or the state’s Comptroller located in the game room.
   OPERATOR. An individual who:
      (1)   Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the
premises of a game room or of a business where money earned or the records of
credit card transactions or other credit transactions generated in any manner
by the operation of a game room or activities in a game room are kept;
      (2)   Displays, delivers or provides to a customer of a game room;
merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the premises of
a game room;
      (3)   Takes orders from a customer of a game room for merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered on the premises of a game room;
      (4)   Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other
persons into a game room; or
      (5)   Supervises or manages other persons at the game room in the
performance of an activity listed in this definition.
   OWNER. A person who:
      (1)   Has an ownership interest in, or receives the profits from, a game
room or an amusement redemption machine located in a game room;
      (2)   Is a partner, director or officer of a business, company or
corporation that has ownership interest in a game room or in an amusement
redemption machine located in a game room;
      (3)   Is a shareholder that holds more than 10% or the outstanding shares
of a business, company or corporation that has an ownership interest in a game
room or in an amusement redemption machine located in a game room;
      (4)   Has been issued by the County Clerk an assumed named certificate
for a business that owns a game room or an amusement redemption machine located
in a game room;
      (5)   Signs a lease for a game room;
      (6)   Opens an account for utilities for a game room;
      (7)   Receives a certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance
for a game room;
      (8)   Pays for advertising for a game room; or
      (9)   Signs an alarm permit for a game room.
   PEACE OFFICER/LAKEPORT POLICE DEPARTMENT. An individual described in Tex.
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 2.12.
   PERSON. An owner, operator, individual, employee, independent contractor,
agent, proprietorship, corporation, association or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. A building used by federal, state or local government that
is open to the general public.
   REGULATIONS and/or THE REGULATIONS. These regulations of the City of
Lakeport, Texas, for the operation of game rooms.
   REGULATORY ENFORCEMENT LICENSE FEE. A game room owner of an amusement
redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a regulatory
enforcement license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall
be required to secure a regulatory enforcement license by paying to the city an
annual inspection and regulatory license fee implemented to cover the costs to
issue the licenses, regulate the amusement redemption machine game rooms and to
determine whether the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
   SCHOOL. A facility, including all attached playgrounds, dormitories,
stadiums and other appurtenances that are part of the facility, used for the
primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and
private.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of Gregg County, Texas, or the Sheriff’s designated
agent.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
GAME ROOMS
§ 112.15 INSPECTION BY PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   Inspection.
      (1)   Peace officers, fire safety officials and/or designated city
employees are authorized to inspect any business in the city for violations of
this chapter.
      (2)   This chapter does not authorize a right of entry prohibited by law.
Peace officers, fire safety officials and/or designated city employees may
enter a business with consent, with a warrant or under exigent circumstances. A
game room permit issued pursuant to this chapter gives peace officers, fire
safety officials and/or designated city employees implied consent to enter and
to inspect any game room for violations of this chapter.
   (B)   Unpermitted game rooms. An unpermitted business that holds itself out
as a game room by sign, advertisement, word-of-mouth, by offering memberships
and/or by offering for play or displaying six or more machines described in §
112.02 of this chapter is subject to inspection by any peace officer, fire
safety official and/or designated city employee and a game room under this
chapter.
      (1)   Refusal to allow any peace officer, fire safety official and/or
designated city employee entry to inspect such unpermitted game room may be
considered in establishing probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant
to inspect for violations of this chapter.
      (2)   An unpermitted game room is subject to this chapter and will be
held liable for fines and fees listed herein.
   (C)   Compliance inspection. Any peace officer, fire safety official and/or
designated city employee may inspect a permitted game room located within their
jurisdiction to determine if the game room is in compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Consent to entry. A person who does not allow a peace officer, fire
safety official and/or designated city employee to inspect a game room commits
an offense.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 SIGN REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   A game room shall have each outside door marked with a sign that:
      (1)   Reads “Game Room” in four-inch or larger block lettering; and
      (2)   Is legible and visible at all time either on or above the door or a
distance of 25 feet from the outside door.
   (C)   A game room that has been issued an exemption pursuant to §
112.25 of this chapter is exempt from the game room sign requirements.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of an owner or operator to ensure compliance with
this section.
   (B)   A game room shall provide doors that are readily accessible without
the use of a key, special knowledge or effort during business hours or any
other hours of operation.
   (C)   A game room shall comply with all construction and fire codes, and
shall pay any court- approved fee(s) associated with a fire and life safety
inspection, plan review, occupancy load calculation or compliant.
   (D)   All construction and fire code regulations will be strictly enforced
and game rooms shall provide any fire safety official with immediate access to
the premises at all times.
   (E)   A game room shall not use electronic locks to prevent entry during
business hours.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 TRANSPARENT AND UNCOVERED WINDOWS AND DOOR REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   A game room shall provide at least one window in the front of the
building and at least one other window on one other side meeting the criteria
set forth if structurally possible, allowing a clear and unobstructed view of
all machines described in this chapter located in the game room.
   (C)   A game room shall provide transparent uncovered glass in each exterior
game room window or door.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to cover or tint a game room window
or door or otherwise block a window or door to obscure the view of any machine
described in this chapter located in a game room, or the interior of the
location from a sidewalk through a game room window or door.
   (E)   A game room that has been issued an exemption pursuant to this chapter
is exempt from the game room windows requirements.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   A game room shall operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m.
   (C)   A game room that has been issued an exemption pursuant to this chapter
is exempt from the game room hours of operation requirements.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.20 PERMIT DISPLAY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   A game room shall maintain onsite, and produce to any peace officer,
fire safety official and/or designated city employee for inspection:
      (1)   A record for each employee that contains the name, address, date of
birth, state identification number or Social Security number, job function, W-
2 or W-4 form, a copy of application for work with the game room, a copy of the
I-9 filed as part of employment eligibility verification for the Department of
Homeland Security and a photograph of the employee;
      (2)   A daily register that contains the name, date of birth, state
identification number or Social Security number and job function of each
employee and/or independent contractor present at the establishment that day.
Every owner, operator, employee, independent contractor, agent and/or any other
individual acting for or acting on behalf of the game room is required to sign
the daily register with the information required above immediately upon
entering the game room; and
      (3)   A copy of the county and state tax record forms detailing each
machine found on the premises of the game room by identifying the machine by
name of manufacturer, serial number, type of machine, and serial number of the
state tax stamp to include the year of expiration of each tax stamp required,
the county tax stamp to include the year of expiration of each tax stamp
required and the name of the individual(s), proprietorship(s), corporation(s),
association(s) or other legal entity(s) that owns, receive profits from and has
registered the machine in their name with the state’s Comptroller with a brier
description of their ownership and financial interest in the machine in a
spread sheet format.
   (C)   A game room shall preserve the daily register required in division (B)
(2) above for 90 days after the date the register was made. The register must
be maintained at the game room, it must be accessible by any person on duty at
the game room and must be made available to any peace officer, fire safety
official and/or designated city employee upon request.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.21 PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, employee, independent
contractor, agent and/or any other individual acting for, or acting on behalf
of, a game room to have been previously convicted of, entered a plea of nolo
contendere or guilty or received deferred adjudication for any offense set
forth in this chapter.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of any owner or operator to conduct a
criminal background check on every owner, operator, employee, independent
contractor and/or any other individual acting for, or acting on behalf of a
game room.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.22 DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   A game room in operation shall not be located:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet from any existing or planned school, regular
place of religious worship and/or residential neighborhood. PLANNED means that
steps have been taken toward the facility’s or structure’s development
including, but not limited to, a permit received, a plat approved, design work
started, a bond received or an order approved by a governmental entity’s
governing body; or
      (2)   Within a distance of 2,000 feet from where two or more other game
rooms are located.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a
straight line from the nearest portion of the building or appurtenances used by
the game room to the nearest portion of the building or appurtenances that are
used for the purposes identified in division (B) above.
   (D)   (1)   Game rooms are exempt from the distancing restrictions upon
proof that the applicant continuously owned and operated the game room at the
same location and under the same name prior to 6-19-2018.
      (2)   If the game room changes its name, its owner and/or adds another
owner after this date, or if the game room permit was suspended or revoked, or
if the game room permit was denied renewal, or if the game room permit is
allowed to lapse, then the game room will be considered a new game room and not
exempt from the distance requirements outlined in this section.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.23 MEMBERSHIPS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   Game room memberships are prohibited for any purpose.
   (C)   A game room shall not restrict entry to a game room and/or prohibit
the participation in any activity inside a game room by a patron through the
requirement of a game room membership.
   (D)   Game rooms shall not issue membership cards to any individuals for any
purpose.
   (E)   Game rooms shall not have, make use of, employ and/or require check-in
procedures of any kind prior to entering or before existing a game room.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.24 MACHINES; LOCATION; ILLEGAL MACHINES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure
compliance with this section.
      (2)   A game room shall obtain an occupation tax permit from the city and
the state’s Tax Assessor-Collector for each machine described in this chapter
located in the game room and affix the tax permit to the appropriate machine.
         (a)   The annual fee to be paid to the city will be 25% of the state’s
annual fee per machine.
         (b)   All machine tax permit applications are required to indicate the
location on the application where the machines are physically located.
         (c)   Whenever a machine is found not to be in compliance as to tax
permits, it shall be locked by the city or any peace officer and cannot be used
until the owner purchases a tax permit for the machine at a cost of $100,
regardless of which quarter of the year the unlock fee is paid, and then pays
an “unlock fee” of $5 per machine.
         (d)   A game room shall allow a peace officer, fire safety official
and designated city employee entry to the game room to inspect for violations
of the section.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of any owner or operator to ensure
compliance with this section.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a game room to keep, exhibit, operate,
display or maintain any gambling device that is prohibited by the Constitution
of the state or Tex. Penal Code Chapter 47.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.25 CHARITABLE BINGO EXEMPTIONS; FOOD AND DRINK.
   A game room permit holder may apply for multiple exemptions.
   (A)   Statement. Any exemption granted must be clearly stated on the game
room permit.
   (B)   Charitable bingo exemption. An applicant is qualified for a charitable
bingo exemption if the applicant can show a valid and current State Lottery
Commission charitable bingo license, as described in Tex. Occupations Code
Chapter 2001. An original certificate or copy of this license presented with
the complete game room permit application at the time of application or permit
renewal is sufficient to make this showing.
   (C)   Food and beverage sales exemption. An applicant is qualified for a
food and beverage sales exemption if the applicant meets all requirements
below.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
         ENTREE. Main dish of a meal.
         FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE. Cooking or assembling food on premises,
primarily for on-premises consumption. Commercially pre-packaged items which
require no heating, cooking or assembly and which may be purchased off-premises
do not constitute food or beverage service under this section.
         FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES. A portion of the licensed premises where food
is stored and prepared primarily for on-premises consumption.
         MULTIPLE ENTREES. No fewer than eight different entrees per meal
period must be available to customers.
      (2)   An applicant is qualified for a food and beverage sales exemption
if the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to the operation of a game room, the applicant’s
primary business on the premises is food and beverage service;
         (b)   Multiple entrees are available to customers;
         (c)   Food service facilities are maintained on the premises;
         (d)   The hours of operation for sale of food and beverages are the
same as the hours of operation of the game room; and
         (e)   At least 51% of the game room’s total net income is derived from
the sale of food and beverages.
      (3)   An applicant for food and beverage sale exemption shall submit a
sworn statement attesting that food and beverage service is maintained on the
premises and is the primary business on the premises. The applicant shall
furnish the following:
         (a)   The menu or, if no menu is available, a listing of the food and
beverage items;
         (b)   Hours of operation of food and beverage service;
         (c)   Sales data, if not available, projection of sales. The
projection of data should include sufficient breakdown of revenues of food,
alcoholic beverages and game room operation proceeds;
         (d)   Listing of equipment used in preparation and food or beverage
service versus the equipment used in operation of a game room;
         (e)   Copies of floor plans of the licensed premises indicating areas
devoted primarily to the preparation and food and beverage service and those
devoted primarily to operation of a game room;
         (f)   If alcoholic beverages are served, the TABC license or permit as
applicable with the TABC food and beverage certificate as applicable; and
         (g)   The food service permit from the appropriate entity.
      (4)   Applicants for renewal of food and beverage sales exemptions shall
resubmit as required in division (C)(3) above.
      (5)   Failure to meet all requirements of this section or accurately
maintain required records is grounds for denial or revocation of a food and
beverage sales exemption.
      (6)   In verifying that the exemption holder is maintaining food or
beverage service as the primary business on the premises, the game room permit
administrator may examine all books, papers, records, documents, supplies and
equipment of the exemption holder.
      (7)   Recordkeeping requirements for holders of food and beverage sales
exemption include the following.
         (a)   Each holder of a food and beverage sales exemption shall
maintain records to reflect separate totals for beverage sales, food sales and
other major sales categories at the location, including proceeds from machines
located in the game room. Purchase invoices must be maintained to reflect the
total purchases of beverages, food and other major purchase categories.
         (b)   Complimentary food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages,
shall not be calculated in determining whether the premises meet the 51% or
more food or beverage sales threshold.
         (c)   All records are required to be maintained for four years and
made available to authorized representative of the game room permit
administrator upon reasonable request.
         (d)   In examining the food and beverage sales, the game room permit
administrator may compute and determine the percentage of food and beverage
sales upon the basis of information filed with the game room permit
administrator or held by the permit holder, but if such information is
insufficient, the computation and determination of the percentage of sales may
be based upon any records or information which is available.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.26 ILLEGAL GAME ROOMS; OWNERS.
   It is not a defense to prosecution under this section if an individual does
not have the DBAs in his, her or their name and/or does not lease the property
in his, her or their name.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.27 FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 215.034, the city is authorized to
suspend or revoke in Municipal Court for a suspension or revocation of the
occupation license to prohibit the violation or threatened violation of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Parties suspension or revoking. The city may ask, in Municipal
Court, for an injunction to prohibit the violation or threatened violation of
the ordinance against any owner, operator or other person or entity who
maintains, owns, uses, is a party to the use or who owns the real property
where the violation or threatened violation of this chapter is occurring and/or
has occurred.
      (2)   Notice.
         (a)   As a prerequisite to filing a suit seeking injunctive relief,
the city shall give written notice to the party from which relief is sought at
least 30 days before filing.
         (b)   This written notice will advise the party from which relief is
sought of the violation or threatened violation occurring on the premises.
      (3)   Abatement.
         (a)   A person or entity against whom a suspension or revocation is
pending who does not receive written notice, may file a plea in abatement not
later than the thirtieth day after the date the person or entity files an
original answer in the court in which the suit is pending.
         (b)   The court shall abate the suit if the court, after a hearing,
finds that the person or entity is entitled to an abatement because notice was
not provided as required.
         (c)   The court shall abate the suit no longer than 30 days.
   (C)   The City Council is authorized and empowered to revoke the regulatory
enforcement license or permit of any person licensed or permitted under this
chapter, after giving such person ten days’ notice of a hearing and after
conducting such hearing for the purpose of determining whether such license
should be revoked because of the violation of this section.
   (D)   (1)   The city may seal an amusement redemption machine on which the
permit and/or license has not been paid. The city shall charge a fee of $25 for
the release of any machine sealed as provided herein for non-payment.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal affixed in
the name of the city or exhibit, display or remove from location any machine on
which the seal has been broken.
      (3)   Upon proof that all fees have been paid in full and an inspection
of the location of business has been completed, any and/or all sealed machines
may be unsealed by a city official.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
GAME ROOM PERMITS
§ 112.40 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An applicant for a license or permit shall file with City Secretary a
written application on a form provided for that purpose by the city, which
shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the game room owner of the
amusement redemption machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an
amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate
application must be filed for each location.
   (B)   The following information is required in the application:
      (1)   The applicant shall apply in person. The applicant shall be an
owner of the game room. The game room permit administrator shall establish the
hours when an application can be submitted;
      (2)   (a)   The application fee shall not exceed $500/annually as
established by the City Council. The application fee shall be attached to the
application form.
         (b)   A receipt will be hand-delivered or sent certified mail within
14 days of the application being submitted. This receipt is not a permit.
      (3)   Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. Once a complete
application has been submitted, the application process will begin;
      (4)   Once a complete application has been received, the game room permit
administrator will conduct up to three inspections of the applicant’s proposed
game room to ensure compliance with the regulations. The applicant must be
present in person during these inspections. Furthermore, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide an interpreter if necessary during
the inspection(s).
         (a)   After the initial inspection, the applicant will be informed in
writing of what corrections must be made to the proposed game room to comply
with the regulations.
         (b)   A re-inspection will be performed and the applicant will again
be informed in writing of what collections must be made to the proposed game
room to comply with the regulations.
         (c)   If, after a third and final inspection, the applicant’s proposed
game room fails to comply with the regulations, the game room permit
administrator shall deny the application.
         (d)   If the proposed game room passes inspection, the game room
permit administrator shall approve the application.
      (5)   The applicant has 60 days from the initial inspection to complete
the inspection process. Failure to complete the inspection process within these
60 days shall result in denial of the application. It is the duty of the
applicant to ensure that the process is completed in the requisite 60 days;
      (6)   Failure to provide any information required by this section, or a
determination by the game room permit administrator that inaccurate, erroneous
and/or incomplete information has been submitted, the game room permit
application shall be denied;
      (7)   A completed background check and authorization permitting the
release of this information to the city for all parties listed herein in
addition, a completed background check and authorization permitting the release
of this information to the city is also required for property owners if the
property owner owns, operates or supervises the business operating the
amusement redemption machine. The background check will include a state and
Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history record information background
check. The form authorization permitting release of results of the background
checks to the city is available from the City Secretary’s office. The license/
permit will be denied if any individual has a felony conviction, a Class A
misdemeanor conviction in the last ten years, a Class B misdemeanor conviction
in the last five years or a current arrest warrant even though the issuing
state will not extradite from the state;
      (8)   A sworn statement that:
         (a)   All the facts contained in the application are true and correct;
         (b)   The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine
game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; and
         (c)   The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in
accordance with all laws and city ordinances, including Tex. Penal Code Chapter
47.
      (9)   Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact person
who can be reached after hours;
      (10)   Diagram attached of the building showing the specific location of
all the amusement redemption machines along with all exit doors and signs;
      (11)   A current annual fire inspection report from the county’s Fire
Marshal’s office showing compliance with all applicable fire safety codes and
showing all connections have been made that were ordered by the Fire Marshal;
      (12)   A true and collect copy of the assumed name certificate filed in
the office of the County Clerk, bearing the file mark or stamp that evidences
its filing, if the game room will be operating under an assumed name;
      (13)   A photocopy of the applicant’s driver’s license or government-
issued photo identification;
      (14)   Proof that the proposed game room is exempt from, or will follow,
the requirements set forth in the distance restrictions;
      (15)   A copy of the current and valid lease agreements between the owner
of the real property where the proposed game room is planning to operate from,
and the applicant, with the applicant listed as an owner of the game room or
proof that the applicant owns the real property where the proposed game room is
planning to operate from;
      (16)   A complete and accurate list of all addresses, telephone numbers
and driver’s licenses numbers for all owner(s), operator(s), employee(s),
independent contractor(s), agent(s) and any other individual(s), proprietorship
(s) corporation(s), association(s) or other legal entity(s) acting for, or
acting on behalf of the game room along with a photocopy of the individual(s)
driver’s license or government- issued identification or incorporation papers
as applicable;
      (17)   A current list of current state permit numbers for each amusement
redemption machine, one for each machine;
      (18)   A current list of the state coin-operated machine occupation tax
records exhibited or displayed or permitted to be exhibited or displayed in the
game room in a spread sheet format;
      (19)   A copy of the game room applicant’s federal employer
identification number (EIN);
      (20)   (a)   A copy of the sworn statement that the materials presented
in this application are true and correct under the penalty of perjury as
defined by Tex. Penal Code § 37.02.
         (b)   Additionally, any misrepresentation by the applicant on the
application is a third-degree felony offense as defined by Tex. Penal Code §
37.10;
      (21)   A game room application shall be rejected upon failure to produce
all documents required as stated;
      (22)   A game room shall not operate during the pendency of the
application and shall not operate until the game room application has been
approved and the game room permit issued;
      (23)   (a)   The city shall provide a duplicate permit or license for a
valid permit or license that has been lost, stolen or destroyed at a charge of
$10; and
         (b)   The original permit or license for which a duplicate permit or
license was issued shall be void.
      (24)   A game room permit is not transferable, assignable, divisible and
it is in violation of the regulations for any person to attempt to do so. If
the ownership of a game room changes, the game room shall be deemed unpermitted
and the new owners must reapply and must do so before the game room may
operate.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.41 PERMIT DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; GROUNDS.
   (A)   Any violation of any section or division of this chapter or failure to
meet all requirements of this chapter shall be grounds for denial, revocation
or suspension of a game room permit. If a permit has been denied, revoked or
suspended, the game room shall not operate during the pendency of any appeal to
the hearing examiner.
   (B)   A game room permit shall be denied upon a finding by the game room
permit administrator of any of the following facts:
      (1)   An applicant, owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent
contractor(s), agent(s) and any other individual(s), acting for, or acting on
behalf of the game room has previously violated or been convicted of, any level
of offense for the following crimes:
         (a)   Gambling, gambling promotion, keeping a gambling place,
communicating gambling information, possession of gambling devices or equipment
or possession of gambling paraphernalia, as described by Tex. Penal Code
Chapter 47;
         (b)   Forgery, credit card abuse or commercial bribery as described by
Tex. Penal Code Chapter 32;
         (c)   Any criminal offense described by Tex. Penal Code Chapter 34;
         (d)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses; or any other offense to the laws of another state or of
the United States that, if committed in the state, would have been punishable
as one or more of the aforementioned offenses:
            1.   Less than two years has elapsed since the dale of the
violation, or of the conviction, or of the date of release from confinement
imposed by the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the violation or
conviction was a misdemeanor offense; or
            2.   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of the
violation, or conviction, or the date of release from confinement imposed by
the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the violation or conviction was
a felony offense.
      (2)   An applicant provides false, fraudulent or untruthful information
in the application for a game room permit and/or withholds pertinent
information in the application for a game room permit;
      (3)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (4)   An applicant, owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent
contractor(s), agent(s) and any other individual(s), acting for or acting on
behalf of the game room, has had a game room permit revoked within the 180-day
period immediately preceding the date the application was filed; or is
delinquent in the payment to the county of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed or imposed regarding the operation of a game room;
      (5)   An application or renewal fee required has not been paid;
      (6)   An applicant fails to complete the inspection process within the
60-day period described herein;
      (7)   An offense was committed at the game room or another game room at
the same location within one year prior to the application; and
      (8)   Any violation of the ordinance.
   (C)   If the game room permit administrator denies a game room permit
application, the game room permit administrator shall document the denial and
provide notice to the applicant of the denial within 21 days from the date on
which the denial was documented by the game room permit administrator. The
denial letter shall provide the reason(s) for the action.
   (D)   The game room permit administrator shall have the authority and power
to initiate a proceeding to revoke or administratively suspend a game room
permit if one or more of the following events or conditions has occurred:
      (1)   Any violation of any of the offenses described in this chapter has
occurred on the premises of the game room;
      (2)   An applicant made a misleading statement in the application for the
game room permit, provided false, fraudulent or untruthful information in the
application for a game room permit and/or withheld pertinent information in the
application for a game room permit;
      (3)   The game room permit should not have been issued pursuant to this
chapter;
      (4)   An owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent contractor(s),
agent(s) and any other individual(s) acting for, or acting on behalf of the
game room has failed to make corrections ordered by a fire safety official or
has violated any of the offenses described in this chapter;
      (5)   If any of the stated events or conditions providing a basis for
revocation or suspension of a game room permit under division (B) above has
occurred, the game room permit administrator shall document the violation and
provide notice to the applicant or permit holder of revocation or suspension
within 21 days from the date on which the violation was documented by the game
room permit administrator. The revocation or suspension letter shall provide
the reason(s) for the action. A revocation or suspension of a game room permit
by the game room permit administrator shall become final on the seventh day
after notice, except for situations outlined in this chapter; and
      (6)   The revocation or suspension of a game room permit by the game room
permit administrator shall take immediate effect upon notice by the game room
permit administrator if:
         (a)   An applicant, owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent
contractor(s), agent(s) and any other individual(s) acting for, or acting on
behalf of, the game room violated any offense described in this chapter;
         (b)   A violation of any offense described in this chapter has
occurred on the premises of the game room;
         (c)   There is a necessity for immediate action to protect the public
from injury or imminent danger; or
         (d)   A game room permit was issued based on a misrepresentation in
the application, and but for the misrepresentation, the game room permit would
not have been issued.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.42 APPEAL AFTER HEARING.
   (A)   lf the game room permit administrator denies a game room permit
application, revokes a game room permit or administratively suspends a game
room permit, the applicant or permit holder shall have the opportunity to make
a written request for a hearing before a hearing examiner (Municipal Judge)
appointed by the City Council. The hearing examiner shall not have participated
in any investigation of the alleged grounds for denial, revocation or
suspension.
   (B)   All requests for hearing must be in writing and delivered to the game
room permit administrator within 14 days upon notice to the applicant or permit
holder. The applicant or permit holder waives the right to a game room permit
appeal hearing if the request is not timely received by the game room permit
administrator.
   (C)   The game room permit appeal hearing shall be held within 21 days from
the receipt of request for a game room permit appeal hearing by the game room
permit administrator. The applicant, permit holder and game room permit
administrator shall be provided an opportunity to present evidence, cross-
examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. The formal rules of
evidence do not apply.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or permit holder to
provide a court reporter and an interpreter if necessary for the game room
permit appeal hearing before the hearing examiner.
   (E)   The applicant or permit holder shall be present in person at the game
room permit appeal hearing. If the applicant or permit holder is not present in
person at the game room permit appeal hearing, his or her game room permit
shall be automatically denied or revoked.
   (F)   (1)   The hearing examiner has the power to uphold or reverse the
denial, revocation or suspension in lieu of revocation if appropriate, the
operator of the game room shall be suspended for a period not to exceed 180
days.
      (2)   The hearing examiner shall issue a written order suspending the
game room permit and attaching conditions, if applicable, and the suspension
shall become effective on the date the hearing examiner issues his or her
order.
   (G)   Upon a finding by the hearing examiner that the ordinance has been
violated, revocation of the gamer room permit shall be mandatory.
   (H)   (1)   The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. On final
decision by the hearing examiner, the losing party may appeal the decision by
filing a petition in a District Court in the county with jurisdiction within 30
days after the date of the decision by the hearing examiner.
      (2)   Appeals to the District Court shall be governed by the substantial
evidence rule defined by Tex. Gov’t Code § 2001.174.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.43 OPERATION DURING PENDENCY OF APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   If the applicant or permit holder’s appeal to the hearing examiner for
revocation or suspension is unsuccessful, the game room shall not operate
during the pendency of an appeal to the District Court.
   (B)   If the applicant or permit holder’s appeal to the hearing examiner for
denial, revocation or suspension is successful, the game room may resume
operation and may operate during the pendency of an appeal to the District
Court.
   (C)   No game room may operate pending an appeal for denial of a game room
permit to the District Court.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.44 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   After the hearing examiner’s final ruling of permit denial or
revocation, an applicant may reapply for a game room permit after the
expiration of 180 days from the date of the ruling.
   (B)   This application will be considered a new application regarding the
application timeliness and fee established in this chapter and for the distance
requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.45 PERMIT RENEWAL; FEE; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   A game room permit may be renewed for the following year starting 60
days before expiration on the current permit by filing a complete application
for a game room permit with the City Secretary and paying the applicable fee
set forth in this chapter. A renewal application shall be subject to the same
requirements in the regulations as are required for a game room permit
application. If the completed renewal application was submitted within this 60-
day period, the previous permit will remain in effect until the game room
permit administrator decides in accordance with the regulations as to whether
the game room permit will be renewed.
   (B)   An applicant shall pay a non-refundable game room permit fee of $500
as established by City Council. The game room permit fee shall be paid in
person to the City Secretary upon application renewal. A receipt of payment and
renewal application submission shall be hand-delivered or sent by certified
mail to the applicant within 14 days of the receipt of the non-refundable fee.
   (C)   (1)   A regulatory enforcement license and tax permit issued by the
city shall automatically expire on January 31 following its issuance, except as
otherwise stated herein. Such license and permit shall automatically expire if
the licensee or permittee sells the property or the business, transfers equity
in to accomplish same or license and/or permit is revoked.
      (2)   A regulatory enforcement license or permit is not assignable or
transferable. The city shall not refund any portion of a regulatory enforcement
license or permit after the license or permit is issued, nor shall it prorate
or reduce in amount any fee due to the city.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.46 EFFECT.
   (A)   Each applicant, owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent
contractor(s), agents(s) and any other individual(s), acting for or acting on
behalf of a game room must meet and comply with all requirements of all
applicable law(s).
   (B)   The issuance of a game room permit pursuant to this chapter shall not
excuse any applicant, owner(s), operator(s), employee(s), independent
contractor(s), agent(s) and other individual(s), acting for, or acting on
behalf of, a game room or any patrons of such premises from compliance with
such law(s) or regulations(s).
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined a sum no less than $250, but not to exceed $500, per machine, per
violation for each day that violation occurs.
      (2)   The unlawful operation of any amusement redemption machine shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense for each day that the same is
operated or exhibited.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she
or they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.15 of this chapter.
         (b)   Any violation of §
112.15 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
      (2)   If a person operates a game room in violation of §
112.15(D) of this chapter, he, she or they shall be assessed a fine of $250,
not to exceed $500, per violation. Each peace officer, fire safety official
and/or designated city employee denied entry will be considered a separate
violation.
   (C)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.16 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.16 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (D)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or they
intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.17 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.17 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (E)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.18 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.18 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (F)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.19 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.19 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (G)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.20 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.20 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (H)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.21 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.21 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (I)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.22 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.22 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (J)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.23 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any violation of §
112.23 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (K)   (1)   (a)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she
or they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.24(A) of this chapter.
         (b)   Any violation of §
112.24(A) of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
      (2)   (a)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of §
112.24(B) of this chapter.
         (b)   Any violation of §
112.24(B) of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (L)   (1)   A person commits a Class A misdemeanor offense if he, she or
they intentionally or knowingly operate a game room in violation of §§
112.40 through
112.46 of this chapter.
      (2)   A violation of §§
112.40 through
112.46 of this chapter is grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a
game room permit.
   (M)   Any person who violates §
112.40 of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor if he, she or they intentionally or knowingly
transfer, assign or divide a game room permit issued pursuant to the chapter or
attempt to do so.
(Ord. 19-05-13-2, passed 5-13-2019)
CHAPTER 113: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Intent and purpose
   
113.03   Location of business and signage
   
113.04   Sexually-explicit films or videos
   
113.05   Adult motels
   
113.06   Exceptions
   
113.07   Enforcement and inspection
   
113.08   Unlawful acts
   
113.09   No legalization of prohibited activity
Licensing
   
113.20   License required
   
113.21   License display
   
113.22   License application
   
113.23   License investigation, issuance or denial
   
113.24   License fee
   
113.25   License transfer
   
113.26   License suspension or revocation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which as one
of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describes specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in state of nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slide or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of the adult type of photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   CITY. The City of Lakeport, Texas.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership or corporation or other entity.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area zoned for any type of residential use under
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS.
      (1)   Any commercial enterprise whose major business is the offering of a
product or service which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to the customer, and which is distinguished by or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas or where the employer, employees or
patrons in the presence of another adult, may be nude, partially nude or with
specified anatomical areas covered.
      (2)   This term shall include, but not be limited to, adult video
arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult video stores, adult movie
theaters, adult theaters, sex parlors, massage parlors, nude studios, modeling
studios, love parlors, adult tanning salons, topless or nude bars, topless
carwashes or other similar establishments.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any one of the following; less than completely
and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock,
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any
combination of the foregoing; or human male genitals in a discernibly erect
state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The deception or display of, in person or by
picture of, any one of the following: human genitals in a discernible state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or
pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or any combination of the
foregoing.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of the city; to protect and preserve the quality, property values and
characteristics of the city; to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented
businesses within the city; and to minimize the potential negative impacts of
sexually-oriented businesses on residential areas, churches, schools and public
areas.
   (B)   (1)   Each sexually-oriented business shall comply with all of the
provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, including all requirements, as it may
be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Additionally, such signs as are used shall not advertise either
graphically or verbally, either by explicit of literal expression, connotation
or implied reference, any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.03 LOCATION OF BUSINESS AND SIGNAGE.
   (A)   A sexually-oriented business shall be located at least 1,000 feet from
the property line of any residentially-zoned property, and at least 1,500 feet
from the property line of any lot on which is located a church, a school,
college, child/adult care center, park, hospital, nursing home or swimming
pool. For the purposes of the section, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a
sexually-oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises of a church, school, park, college, child care center or residential
district.
   (B)   It is expressly not the intent or effect of this chapter to impose a
limitation upon rights granted under the First Amendment.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business,
which exhibits a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The City Council may waive the foregoing diagram
for renewal application if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
   (B)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
   (C)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station
may be made without the prior approval of the City Council.
   (D)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
   (E)   (1)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from the manager’s station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
      (2)   If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations.
The view required in this division (E) must be by direct line of sight from the
manager’s station.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
view area specified in division (E) above remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all to ensure that no
patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to division (A) above.
   (G)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the
floor level.
   (H)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttle presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel, as that terms is defined in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a
sexually-oriented business license, he or she rents or sub-rents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he or
she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUB-RENT mean
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The regulations contained in this chapter do not apply to the following:
   (A)   Any business operated by or employing psychologists, physical
therapists, athletic trainers, masseuses, cosmetologists or barbers licensed by
the state and performing functions authorized under the license held;
   (B)   Any business operated by or employing physicians, osteopaths, nurses
or chiropractors, licensed by the state engaged in practicing the healing arts;
and
   (C)   Any retail business whose major business if the offering of wearing
apparel for sale to customers.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.07 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall have the power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter upon presentation of
property identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge of any premises
where a sexually-oriented business is located. The Chief of Police, or his or
her designee, may enter for the purposes of inspection and investigation to
ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, any building, structure or
other premises where the sexually-oriented business is located, at any time it
is occupied and open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his or her agent
or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the City Council, its
designee or the Chief of Police at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
   (C)   However, when the City Council, his or her designee, or the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, is denied permission to inspect any premises,
inspection shall be made only under the authority of a warrant issued by a
magistrate authorizing the inspection for violation of this chapter. In
applying for such a warrant, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall
submit an affidavit to a magistrate setting forth his or her belief that a
violation of these regulations exists with respect to the premises sought to be
inspected and the reasons for such belief. The affidavit shall designate the
location of such operator or occupant thereof. If the Magistrate finds that
probable cause exists for a search of the premises, such warrant shall describe
the premises with sufficient certainly to identify the same. A warrant so
issued shall constitute authority for the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, to enter upon or inspect the premises described therein.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.08 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false,
fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way
knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any assumed name or
fictitious name other than the one duly files for record in compliance with the
Assumed Business or Profession Name Act (Tex. Business and Commerce Code Title
5, Chapter 71).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity to use a license which has been issued to another individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change,
deface or alter a license.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, possess or consume
alcoholic beverages on the premises of any sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.09 NO LEGALIZATION OF PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   This chapter does not legalize anything prohibited under the Penal Code or
any other state law or city ordinance. Further, any violation of the Penal Code
or other state law or city ordinance shall be deemed grounds for revocation of
the license issued.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
LICENSING
§ 113.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All sexually-oriented businesses to be operated within the city shall
first obtain a valid license under the provisions of this chapter. A license
shall be valid for one year, but may be renewed annually.
   (B)   A license shall only be issued for sexually-oriented businesses that
fulfill the locational requirements of §
113.03 of this chapter.
   (C)   A business is not exempt from this chapter because it holds a license
or permit under the Alcoholic Beverage Code, authorizing the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.21 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   A license issued under this chapter shall be displayed at all times in an
open and conspicuous place on the premises of the sexually-oriented business
for which it was issued.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.22 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license shall file a sworn written application
with the City Council. The application shall set forth the following:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant. is an
individual, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other
entity;
      (2)   The name under which the sexually-oriented business is to be
operated and a general description of the services or products to be provided;
      (3)   The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which
the sexually-oriented business is to be located;
      (4)   The name, resident address and telephone number of the manager or
other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the sexually-
oriented business;
      (5)   A written declaration that the information contained in the
application is true and correct; and
      (6)   If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed
and verified by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the
application shall be signed and verified by all of the partners thereof. If the
applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed and
verified by the President and the Treasurer of such corporation or entity.
   (B)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   Payment of the license fee, as provided in this chapter;
      (2)   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in
compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Tex. Business
and Commerce Code Title 5, Chapter 71), if the applicant is to operate the
sexually-oriented business under the assumed name;
      (3)   If the applicant is a state corporation, a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, shall be
filed;
      (4)   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all
amendments thereto, shall be filed;
      (5)   If the applicant is a foreign or limited partnership, a certified
copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments
thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the state’s
Limited Partnership Act (Tex. Business Organizations Code Title 4, Chapter
153);
      (6)   A complete list of persons employed by the sexually-oriented
business, including the age, date and place of birth, Social Security number,
driver’s license number and salary or wage rate. This list shall be updated
monthly by a verified report by the City Clerk, listing all of the above
information for any employees hired during the previous month; and
      (7)   A detailed development plan, which described the dimensions and
location of the sexually- oriented business and clearly shows it to be in
compliant with the locational requirements of §
113.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.23 LICENSE INVESTIGATION, ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a license, the City Council, or its
designee, shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of determining whether
the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied or not. The City Council
shall coordinate this investigation in order to determine if the application
complies with the locational and sign requirements as set forth in this
chapter. The City Council shall deny the application for a license if any
requirements of this chapter is not satisfied.
   (B)   The City Council shall deny the application for a license if one or
more of the following is determined to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a sexually-oriented
business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant or applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a
sexually-oriented business without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect;
      (5)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid;
      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually-oriented business in a
managerial capacity with the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an
inability to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business premises in a
peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement
officers; and
      (7)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse or any employee has been
convicted of a crime involving:
         (a)   Any of the following offenses as described in Tex. Penal Code
Chapter 43: prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of
prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to
minors; sexual performance by a child; possession of child pornography;
         (b)   Any of the following offenses, as described in Tex. Penal Code
Chapter 21: public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
         (c)   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault, as described in
Tex. Penal Code Chapter 22;
         (d)   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child, as
described in Tex. Penal Code Chapter 25; or
         (e)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or the applicant’s spouse.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state, on its face, the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (E)   (1)   The City Council shall notify each applicant of his, her or
their eligibility for a license within 20 days of the receipt of the completed
application.
      (2)   If the applicant complies with the provisions of this chapter, the
City Council shall issue a license.
      (3)   In the event that any applicant fails to comply with this chapter,
then the applicant shall be so notified and be entitled to a hearing held
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.24 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   To defray the cost of processing the license application, the
applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $500.
   (B)   No portion of any fee collected under this section shall be retained
after a license has been issued or denied.
   (C)   The license may be renewed annually, if all provisions of this chapter
have been complied with, upon payment of a $100 renewal fee.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.25 LICENSE TRANSFER.
   A license shall not be transferred to another, nor shall a license holder
operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.26 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The City Coordinator, or his or her designee, is hereby granted, and shall
have the power to suspend any and all licenses authorized by this chapter, if
he or she determines that a licenses or employee or business invitee or guest
of licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter;
   (B)   Engaged in sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages while on the
sexually-oriented business premises;
   (C)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
   (D)   A licensee or employee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
113.23(B) of this chapter;
   (E)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual
activities to occur in or on the sexually-oriented business premises; or
   (F)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for taxes, fees, fines
or penalties.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to
a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in
the Muncipal Court, shall be punished by fine not to exceed the sum of $500 for
each offense, and each day that such offense shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 94-08-08, passed 8-8-1994)
CHAPTER 114: OIL AND GAS DRILLING; PIPELINES
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Pipeline construction; license
Oil and Gas Wells
   
114.15   Definitions
   
114.16   Permit required
   
114.17   Application; information
   
114.18   Location restrictions; blockages
   
114.19   Bond
   
114.20   Insurance
   
114.21   Permit revocation or suspension
 
   
114.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Chapter 150
   Health and Sanitation, see
Chapter 92
   Zoning, see
Chapter 154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION; LICENSE.
   The City Council requires a corporation to obtain approval and a license to
construct a pipeline within the city limits.
(Ord. 95-05-08-1, passed 5-8-1995) Penalty, see §
114.99
OIL AND GAS WELLS
§ 114.15 DEFINITIONS.
   All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used in this
subchapter, and not specifically defined herein, shall have that meaning
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas
industry.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971)
§ 114.16 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or herself or
acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant of any other
person, to commence to drill or to operate any well within the city limits, or
to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such
well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first
been issued by the authority of the City Council.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.17 APPLICATION; INFORMATION.
   (A)   Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same
on his or her behalf, and it shall be filed with the City Secretary and be
accompanied with a filing fee of $500 in cash.
   (B)   No application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one
well, the said application shall include full information, including the
following:
      (1)   The date of said application;
      (2)   Name of the applicant;
      (3)   Address of the applicant;
      (4)   Proposed site of the well, including:
         (a)   Name of the fee owner;
         (b)   Name of the lease owner; and
         (c)   Brief description of the land.
      (5)   Type of derrick to be used; and
      (6)   The proposed depth of the well.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971)
§ 114.18 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS; BLOCKAGES.
   (A)   No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to
be drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the
city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any
drilling or production operation, except by special permit by order of the City
Council and then only temporarily.
   (B)   No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to
be drilled at any location which is nearer than 300 feet of any residence or
commercial building without the applicant having first secured the written
permission of the owner or owners thereof. No well shall be drilled and no
permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on an area leased for such
purpose of less than 160,000 square feet, or a city block.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.19 BOND.
   In the event a permit is issued by the City Council under the terms of this
subchapter for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling
operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the City
Secretary a bond in such principal sum as is determined by the City Council,
but not to be less than $25,000. Such bond shall be executed by a reliable
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with
the permittee as principal, running to the city, for the benefit of the city
and all persons concerned.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971)
§ 114.20 INSURANCE.
   (A)   In addition to the bond required by §
114.19 of this chapter, each permittee, prior to the commencement or any
drilling operations, shall file with the City Secretary a certificate or
certificates of insurance showing that the permittee has, in full force and
effect, a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability
insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and
property damage, naming the permittee and the city, in an insurance company
authorized to do business within the state.
   (B)   Such policy or policies, in the aggregate, shall provide for the
following minimum coverage:
      (1)   Bodily injuries: one person $100,000; one accident $200,000; and
      (2)   Property damage: $500,000.
   (C)   The permittee shall file with the City Secretary certificates of such
insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the
City Manager, who shall act thereon within ten days prior to the effective date
of such filing.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971)
§ 114.21 PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The City Council, at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may,
after ten days’ notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be
considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this
subchapter and under which drilling or producing operations are being
conducted, in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of the
permit, bond or this subchapter. In the event the permit is revoked, the
permittee may make application to the City Council for a reissuance of such
permit, and the action of the Council thereon shall be final. Revocation of any
permit under this section shall be in addition to the penalties prescribed for
the violation involved.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provision of §
114.01 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $200, for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be committed on each day during or
on which violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any person violating §§
114.15 through
114.21 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5 and not more than $200
for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 71-09-07, passed 9-7-1971; Ord. 95-05-08-1, passed 5-8-1995)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 130: FIREWORKS
Section
   
130.01   Definition
   
130.02   Manufacture, sale and discharge
   
130.03   Bond for display required
   
130.04   Unfired fireworks; disposal
   
130.05   Seizure of fireworks
   
130.06   Exception
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITION.
   FIREWORKS means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or
any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols,
toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers or other devices of like
construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or
any tablet or other device containing an explosive substance; except that, the
term FIREWORKS shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in
excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
§ 130.02 MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISCHARGE.
   (A)   The manufacture of fireworks within the city limits is prohibited,
except under special permits as are required by local and state regulations.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess, store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or
explode any fireworks within the city limits; provided that, the Fire Chief
shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of
permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the city, fair
associations, amusement parks, other organizations or for the use of fireworks
by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Every such use or display shall be
handled by a competent operator approved by the Fire Chief, and shall be of
such character and so located, discharged or fired so as not to be hazardous to
property or endanger any person.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the Fire Chief at
least ten days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege
shall be granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for
such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
shall be transferable.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 BOND FOR DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount
deemed adequate by the city for the payment of all damages which may be caused
either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted
display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, his or her agents,
employees or subcontractors.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
§ 130.04 UNFIRED FIREWORKS; DISPOSAL.
   Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be
immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks
remaining.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
§ 130.05 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   The Fire Chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale,
stored or held in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
§ 130.06 EXCEPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks
by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes of
illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or
for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports or for use by military
organizations.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon adjudication of guilt, a fine not to
exceed $200 shall be assessed against such violator. Each continuing day of
violation shall be deemed a separate offense for which a separate fine may be
assessed.
(Ord. 84-08-06-A(1), passed 8-6-1984)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   SIGNS
      
152.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Codes Adopted
   
150.01   Building Code
   
150.02   International Fire Code
Vacant and Dangerous Buildings
   
150.15   Definitions
   
150.16   Enforcement officer
   
150.17   Right of entry
   
150.18   Warrant to inspect premises
   
150.19   Citation; service
   
150.20   Hearing; remedy
   
150.21   Order; posting
   
150.22   Failure to comply
   
150.23   Lien
   
150.24   Liability
 
   
150.99   Penalty
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   (1)   The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, and International
Residential Code, 2018, and International Energy Conservation Code, 2015, and
Chapter 11, Energy Conservation, published by International Code Council, Inc.
(herein referred to as “Code”), is hereby adopted as the official “Building
Code of the City of Lakeport, Texas”.
      (2)   Schedule of building permit fees: on all buildings, structures or
alterations requiring a building permit, a fee shall be paid at the time of
filing application in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Permit fees.
            1.   New construction and remodels:
               a.   An initial deposit of $250 will be required at the time of
application for new construction and remodeling;
               b.   Permit holder will be responsible for all inspection
related fees;
               c.   Fees will be charged at $50 per required inspection; $30
per re-inspection;
               d.   Certificates of occupancies will be required;
               e.   Prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the
permit holder shall contact the city and pay any remaining fees accrued for
performed inspections; and
               f.   Gas pressure test inspection fee: $50.
            2.   Gas inspections: gas pressure test re-inspection fee: $30;
            3.   Electric service inspections:
               a.   Electric service inspection fee: $50; and
               b.   Electric service re-inspection fee: $30.
            4.   Sewer replacement inspections:
               a.   Sewer service inspection fee: $50;
               b.   Sewer service re-inspection fee: $30;
               c.   Insulation inspections: insulation inspection fee: $50; and
               d.   Insulation inspection re-inspection fee: $30.
            5.   Energy conservation inspections:
               a.   Energy conservation inspection fee: $50; and
               b.   Energy conservation re-inspection fee: $30.
         (b)   Moving of building or structures. For the moving of any building
or structure, the fee shall be $150.
         (c)   Demolition of building or structures. Demolition of any building
or structures, the fee shall be $50.
         (d)   Starting or proceeding work prior to obtaining permit. Where
work for which a permit is required by this code is started or proceeded with
prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but
the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully
complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor
from any other penalties prescribed herein.
         (e)   Plan-checking fees. When the valuation of the proposed
construction exceeds $1,000 and a plan is required to be submitted by § 105.3,
a plan-checking fee shall be paid to the Building Official at the time of
submitting plans and specifications for checking.
            1.   In lieu of §§ 112 and 113 of the International Building Code,
the method of an appeal shall be as follows, to wit: whenever the Building
Official (being the same as the Building Inspector) shall reject or refuse to
approve the mode of manner of construction proposed to be followed, or
materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure,
or when it is claimed that the provisions of this section do not apply or that
an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in any
specific case or, when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the
Building Code or any regulation thereof has been misconstrued or wrongfully
interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his or her agent may
appeal from the decision of the Building Official or Building Inspector.
               a.   The City Council shall set a date for hearing, either at
regular or special meeting thereafter. At such hearing, the City Council shall
hear witnesses or other evidence and consider such other facts as may be deemed
necessary by them to arrive at a proper conclusion relating to the appeal.
               b.   The City Council shall issue its order based upon its
findings of fact either approving the decision of the Building Official
(Building Inspector) or reject it or modify the same, as it shall deem proper.
The order of the City Council shall be final, subject however, to such remedy
as any appealing party might have at law or in equity. Such order shall be in
writing and shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy
shall be kept by the City Secretary.
            2.   All areas presently or hereafter situated in on B-1 (General
Business) and GI-1 (General Industrial) Zoning District, according to the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map of the city, are hereby
a part of the Fire Districts, as that term is defined herein.
   (B)   This section shall be held and construed to be cumulative of all other
provisions of the Building Code of the city, except in instances where the
provisions of this section are in conflict with the Building Code heretofore
passed and all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this section are
expressly repealed.
   (C)   The term BUILDING OFFICIAL, as used in the International Building
Code, 2015 Edition, International Residential Code, 2018, and International
Energy Conservation Code, 2015 and Chapter 11, Energy Conservation, published
by International Code Council Edition, shall be construed to be used
interchangeably with BUILDING INSPECTOR as used in all ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 18-04-10, passed 4-10-2018) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Secretary, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code,
2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F and G as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of
the city, in the state regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and
use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor: and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the city are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
section.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby adopted:
      (1)   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Fire
Code of the City of Lakeport”, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
      (2)   (a)   Section 109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate
a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or
of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine up to the maximum allowed by state law or
by imprisonment as allowed by state law or both such fine and imprisonment.
         (b)   Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 06-07-11, passed 7-11-2006)
VACANT AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 150.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning. Words used in the
present tense include the future. The singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The legally designated inspection authority of the city
or his or her authorized representative.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Lakeport.
   DANGEROUS STRUCTURES. Any building or dwelling, found by the Building
Inspector to have any of the following defects and be unfit for human
habitation:
      (1)   Lacking illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of occupants or the
public; and
      (2)   Be damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, vermin-infested or
otherwise unsafe to such extent as to create a serious threat to the well-being
of occupants or the public.
   OWNER. Owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee,
lessee or other person, firm or corporation, in control of a structure.
   PREMISES. A lot or parcel of land, including a building or dwelling, and
auxiliary structures thereon.
   VACANT STRUCTURES. Any building or dwelling to which utility services have
been disconnected and/or which has been continuously unoccupied for as long as
60 days.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.16 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector, or his or her duly authorized representative, of the city.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.17 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter, and
he or she, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner of such
property, and in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the persons in possession, may enter any building, structure or premises during
all reasonable hours, to make inspections or examinations thereof in order to
perform the duties imposed on him or her by this subchapter.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.18 WARRANT TO INSPECT PREMISES.
   If the owner of any building or dwelling refuses admittance thereto of the
Building Inspector, or his or her agent or representative, for the purpose of
making an examination or inspection of the premises, the Building Inspector may
make an affidavit before any judge or a court of competent jurisdiction that
the Building Inspector believes or has reason to believe, that by an inspection
of certain premises designated in the affidavit, he or she will obtain evidence
tending to reveal the existence of violations of this subchapter. Upon
receiving this affidavit, the judge may issue a warrant authorizing the
Building Inspector to inspect the premises named in the affidavit and
designated in the warrant; to obtain evidence tending to reveal the existence
of violations of this subchapter.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.19 CITATION; SERVICE.
   (A)   (1)   When it shall be determined by the Building Inspector that a
building or structure is vacant and dangerous, within the terms of this
subchapter, the Building Inspector shall cite the owner of such building or
structure, or his or her authorized agent or representative, to appear before
the City Council and show cause why such building should not be declared to be
a public nuisance and why the owner should not be ordered to remove or demolish
and clear such building or structure from its premises.
      (2)   The date of such hearing shall be not less than days after such
citation shall have been made.
   (B)   Citation may be served by personal delivery of a copy thereof to the
owner of the property, as such ownership appears on the last city tax roll; or
by depositing such citation properly addressed and as certified mail in the
United States Post Office; or by attaching a copy of such citation to a place
of prominence on such building or structure. Notice shall also be given by
publishing the same in the official publication of the city at least ten days
prior to the date set for a hearing which notice shall state the time and place
of such hearing.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.20 HEARING; REMEDY.
   (A)   On the date set in such citation for hearing, hearing shall be had
and, on the basis of such hearing, the City Council shall determine whether or
not such building or structure is vacant and dangerous.
   (B)   When, upon proper hearing, the City Council determines that a building
or structure is vacant and so dilapidated, damaged or decayed as to be beyond
repair, it shall issue such orders, by the adoption of a proper resolution, as
shall appear reasonably necessary to prevent that building or structure from
continuing as a hazard to life and property. Such orders shall ordinarily be to
demolish and clear or remove the building or structure, and such orders shall
include the specifying the owner may voluntarily comply with the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.21 ORDER; POSTING.
   Any order issued by the City Council for the demolition or removal of a
building or structure shall be immediately and prominently posted by the
Building Inspector on the premises, in the form of a placard. Such placard
shall declare the premises unfit for human habitation and contain other
information as to the order in force.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.22 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   In any case where the City Council orders a building or structure demolished
and cleared or removed, and the owner of any such building or structure fails
to comply within the time period allowed in the order, the City Council may
cause the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred
thereby to the owner of such premises. Such expense shall be assessed against
the lot or real estate upon which the work was done. The doing of such work by
the city or the ordering of the same by the City Council may not relieve the
owner from prosecution for failure to comply under the terms of this chapter or
other ordinances.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.23 LIEN.
   Whenever any work is done on any building or structure by the city under the
provisions above, the Building Inspector, on behalf of the city, shall file a
statement of the expenses incurred with the County Clerk. Such statement shall
give the amount of such expenses incurred, and costs of demolishing, cleaning
or removing the building or structure. When this statement is filed with the
County Clerk, the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate
upon which the work was done to secure the expenses involved. Such lien shall
be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount
thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the
statement was filed with the County Clerk. The statement of expenses for work
done and filed with the County Clerk, or a certified copy thereof, shall be
prima facie proof of the amount expended for such repairs, demolition,
clearance or removal.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.24 LIABILITY.
   Neither the city, nor any authorized agent or employee of the city, acting
under the terms of this subchapter shall be liable or have any liability by
reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or organization who shall violate the provisions of §
150.01 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not less than $25, nor more than $500,
and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating the terms of §§
150.15 through
150.24 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $5, nor more than $200, and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $200; and each and every
day’s violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   Any person who shall use, enter or occupy such premises and/or any
person who shall interfere or hinder the demolition or removal of any building
or structure under the terms of §§
150.15 through
150.24 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine as prescribed herein.
(Ord. 89-04-03-1, passed 4-3-1989; Ord. 18-04-10, passed 4-10-2018)
CHAPTER 151: SIGNS
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Prohibited signs
   
151.03   Changeable copy signs
   
151.04   Authority
   
151.05   Violations
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions not expressly prescribed in this chapter are to be construed in
accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practice.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (CEVMS). A sign which permits
light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way
whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated
sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity
and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light
emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A
CEVMS does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as
a traffic-control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway
Administrator as the National Standard.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign, commonly known as a billboard that advertises a
business, person, activity, goods, products or services not located on the
premises where the sign is installed and maintained, or that directs persons to
a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and maintained.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign identifying or advertising the business, person,
activity, goods, products or services sold or offered for sale on the premises
where the sign is installed and maintained when such premises is used for
business purposes.
   SIGN CODE APPLICATION AREA. The corporate limits of the city and the area of
its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by Tex. Gov’t Code § 42.021.
(Ord. 08-07-08, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 151.02 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   Prohibition of new off-premises signs. From and after the
effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued for the erection of
an off-premises sign, including, but not limited to, a new off-premises CEVMS
or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within
the Sign Code application area.
      (2)   Prohibition of changeable electronic variable message signs. From
and after the effective date, no CEVMS shall be allowed within the Sign Code
application area.
   (B)   This CEVMS prohibition applies to both on-premises and off-premises
signs. Due to the recent increase and proliferation of on-premises CEVMS, one
may want to consider this blanket prohibition. After obtaining input from
citizens and the city’s business community, one may decide to moderate the
CEVMS prohibition with size (sign area), height and spacing provisions.
(Ord. 08-07-08, passed 7-8-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.03 CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS.
   All changeable copy signs (as defined herein) lawfully in existence on the
date of passage of this chapter shall have 90 days from said date to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-07-08, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 151.04 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The City Council meeting at which this chapter was approved was, in
all things, conducted in strict compliance with the state’s Open Meetings Act,
Tex. Gov’t Code Chapter 551.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Chapter 211.
(Ord. 08-07-08, passed 7-8-2008)
§ 151.05 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to such penalties and
enforcement as provided for in this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 08-07-08, passed 7-8-2008)
CHAPTER 152: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Location of RVs other than in RV park
   
152.04   Registration of occupants
   
152.05   Inspections; fee
   
152.06   Exceptions
Permit Process
   
152.20   Permit required
   
152.21   Permit fee
   
152.22   Procedure for changes/additions to existing RV parks
   
152.23   Procedure for continued operation of existing RV parks
Standards and Conditions
   
152.35   Size and density
   
152.36   Individual site requirements
   
152.37   Parking
   
152.38   Toilet and shower facilities
   
152.39   Emergency telephone
   
152.40   Fencing
   
152.41   Accessory structures
   
152.42   Drainage
   
152.43   Refuse and garbage; storage, collection and disposal
   
152.44   Rodents, insects and other pests; control
   
152.45   Fire safety and protection
   
152.46   Storm shelters
   
152.47   Landlords and tenants
   
152.48   Existing RV parks grandfathered
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect the city’s water
resources and to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements
for safe, sanitary and suitable methods for construction and operation of RV
parks within the city.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structural addition to the recreational vehicle or
site, including awnings, cabanas, carports, garages, porches, storage cabinets,
storage sheds and similar structures.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Graphic representation, drawn to scale, delineating the
outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations,
accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use
to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property includes existing
structures, proposed construction, drainage and any easements or rights-of-way.
   EXISTING RV PARK. Any RV park with water, sewer and electrical hook-ups;
active utility accounts for water, sewer and electrical service; and paying
occupants.
   OWNER or MANAGER. Any person who has the control, direction, maintenance or
supervision of an RV park, whether as owner or otherwise.
   PERMIT. A written permit issued by the city authorizing and permitting a
person to alter or operate an existing RV park under the provisions of this
chapter. There will be no new RV parks or RV subdivisions in the city. No
building permits will be issued for new RV parks or RV subdivisions in the
city.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). Any of the following while in use as a residence.
      (1)   DEPENDENT TRAILER. A travel trailer which is dependent upon a
service building for toilet and lavatory facilities.
      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A motor vehicle equipped like a travel trailer and
which is a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and
vacation.
      (3)   SELF-CONTAINED TRAILER. A travel trailer which can operate
independent of connections to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains a
water-flush toilet, lavatory, shower and kitchen sink, all of which are
connected to water storage and sewage-holding tanks located within the trailer.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use,
and constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by a
motor vehicle.
      (5)   TRUCK CAMPER. A camper unit equipped like a travel trailer that
fits in the bed of a pick-up truck and may or may not be separated from the
truck for use as living quarters.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RV PARK). Any tract or parcel of land used in
whole or in part, for the accommodation of RVs by the day, week or a longer
period of time.
   RV SITE. Any designated site or pad within an RV park for the parking of an
RV.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.03 LOCATION OF RVs OTHER THAN IN RV PARK.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person may not live,
sleep or occupy an RV in the city other than in an existing RV park or in an
existing RV subdivision. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate and
maintain for dwelling or sleeping purposes any travel trailer in any place in
the city other than a duly licensed travel trailer park.
   (B)   This section does not apply to an RV that is:
      (1)   Located on a construction site and is used as a field office during
construction;
      (2)   An RV sales lot;
      (3)   An RV that is under construction or stored at an RV manufacturing
plant; or
      (4)   A property owner who is replacing the RV. Rules for replacement
are:
         (a)   The RV can be no older that five years old at the time of
permitting;
         (b)   The RV must be at least the same size or larger than the one
that is being replaced;
         (c)   One must own the property and RV and be living in the RV for a
replacement to be allowed; and
         (d)   The RV on the lot can only be replaced one time.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   The owner, manager, operation or person in charge of the RV park shall
maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain at least the
following information:
      (1)   Name of occupant(s);
      (2)   Full address of permanent residence of occupant(s);
      (3)   Automobile and recreational vehicle license plate number and the
state in which each is registered;
      (4)   Driver’s license number of the occupant(s);
      (5)   The number or letter of the site rented; and
      (6)   Date of arrival and departure.
   (B)   The City Administrator or any other duly authorized employee of the
city shall have the right and authority to inspect the register, which shall
available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.05 INSPECTIONS; FEES.
   (A)   The City Administrator or any other duly authorized employee of the
city shall have the right and authority to enter upon the RV parks at all
reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting same and to see that no legal
violations are made.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
permits if conditions are urgent, or to order utility disconnection for any of
the following reasons.
      (1)   Violations. The owner or any of his or her agents, representatives
or employees are violating or have violated any provisions of this chapter or
any other ordinance of the city or laws of the state.
      (2)   Refusal to allow inspections. The owner or any of his or her
agents, representatives or employees have refused to allow the City
Administrator or any other duly authorized employee of the city to enter upon
and inspect the RV park.
      (3)   Failure to pay permit fee. The permit fee is not paid by the stated
time.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Recreational vehicles stored by owner. Recreational vehicles stored at
or near the owner’s residence and used personally by the owner for vacation
travel;
   (B)   Recreational vehicles in storage facilities. Recreational vehicles
stored in off-site storage facilities with no hook-ups and personally used by
the owner for vacation travel; and/or
   (C)   Recreational vehicles for sale. Locations where recreational vehicles
are displayed and/or sold, whether by an individual seller or dealer.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
PERMIT PROCESS
§ 152.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or
operate any existing RV park within the city limits without obtaining the
appropriate permit from the city.
   (B)   Existing RV parks that have not filed an application for a permit at
City Hall within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter will be deemed
in violation of this requirement.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.21 PERMIT FEE.
   The annual permit fee for up to ten RV sites shall be $250. The annual
permit fee for more than ten RV sites shall be $500. In the event, an
application for a permit is rejected or withdrawn, half of the fee shall be
returned to the applicant and the other half retained by the city to cover the
cost of inspection, plan review and study.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.22 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES/ADDITIONS TO EXISTING RV PARKS.
   (A)   Application. An application for a permit to change or add to an
existing RV park shall be made to the city on forms available at City Hall for
that purpose. An application to change or add to an existing RV park shall made
prior to any actual construction and shall include a development plan and the
applicable permit fee.
   (B)   Review and approval. Upon receipt of a properly completed application
that does not contemplate new or additional hook-ups to the city water system,
the City Administrator shall review the application with the City Council to
determine conformance with the applicable standards listed in §§
152.35 through
152.48 of this chapter. Upon approval of the application by the City Council, a
permit shall be issued to the applicant, which shall be valid until December 31
of that year at which time application for renewal shall be made for the next
calendar year.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.23 PROCEDURE FOR CONTINUED OPERATION OF EXISTING RV PARKS.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   An application to continue operation of an existing RV park (no
changes or additions) shall be made to the city on forms available at City Hall
for that purpose.
      (2)   Such application shall include receipts evidencing active utility
accounts for water, sewer and electrical service and a copy of the RV park’s
register of occupants.
   (B)   Permit fee. The annual permit fee for up to ten RV sites shall be
$250. The annual permit fee for more than ten RV sites shall be $500. In the
event, an application for a permit is rejected or withdrawn, half of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant and the other half retained by the city to
cover the cost of inspection, plan review and study.
   (C)   Review and approval.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application that does not
contemplate new or additional hook-ups to the city water system, the City
Administrator shall review the application to determine conformance with the
applicable standards listed in §§
152.35 through
152.48 of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon approval of the application by the City Administrator, a
permit shall be issued to the applicant, which shall be valid until December 31
of that year at which time application for renewal shall be made for the next
calendar year.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS
§ 152.35 SIZE AND DENSITY.
   Each RV park shall have a minimum size of two acres, with a maximum size of
five acres. The maximum site density for RV parks shall be 20 sites per acre.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.36 INDIVIDUAL SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Only one RV per site. Only one recreational vehicle is permitted per
recreational vehicle site.
   (B)   Distance between RVs. All RVs shall be located no closer than the
following.
      (1)   The sides of the RV shall be no closer than 18 feet from any other
RV.
      (2)   The rear of the RV shall be no closer than ten feet from any other
RV.
      (3)   No part of the front of any RV shall be closer than ten feet from
the internal roadway.
   (C)   Internal roadway.
      (1)   Each recreational vehicle site shall be accessible by an internal
roadway, which shall provide access to a public street. The internal roadway
shall have a width at least equal to the public streets in the city.
      (2)   Approaches to all sites shall be kept clear for access by EMT and
firefighting personnel and equipment. Each site shall be clearly marked
identifying the site number.
   (D)   Water, sewer and electrical hook-ups. Each site shall be equipped with
water, sewer and electrical hook-ups which shall conform to all applicable
codes and regulations, including all applicable regulations of the state’s
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.37 PARKING.
   Each RV park shall provide off-road parking spaces for two passenger
vehicles at each recreational vehicle site.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.38 TOILET AND SHOWER FACILITIES.
   Each RV park shall provide toilet and shower facilities in properly
constructed buildings. Such buildings shall be well-lighted and ventilated at
all times. Floors shall be of concrete or some similar material, and each room
shall be provided with floor drainage. All toilet and shower facilities shall
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101
et seq.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.39 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE.
   A minimum of one land-line telephone shall be provided in an easily
accessible location 24 hours a day, seven days a week for emergency use.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.40 FENCING.
   (A)   A solid fence at least eight feet in height shall be placed on or just
inside the property line to buffer the RV park from view.
   (B)   The fence shall be installed on both sides and at the rear of the
property.
   (C)   The fence must be of metal or galvanized materials.
   (D)   No wood fences are allowed.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.41 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures are not allowed at the individual sites within the RV
park.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.42 DRAINAGE.
   The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded and
equipped to ensure rapid drainage and to be free from stagnant pools of water.
Topography shall be such that it shall not create a hazard to the property or
the health and safety of the occupants.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.43 REFUSE AND GARBAGE; STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   Each RV park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the
collection and removal of waste and garbage. Storage, collection and handling
shall be conducted so as to create no health or fire hazards.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.44 RODENTS, INSECTS AND OTHER PESTS; CONTROL.
   Grounds, buildings and structures in the RV park shall be maintained free of
the accumulation of high grass and weeds and debris so as to prevent rodent and
snake harborage or the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other pests. The RV
park owner or manager shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of
the park free of dry brush, leaves, limbs and weeds.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.45 FIRE SAFETY AND PROTECTION.
   The owner or manager of an RV park shall see that the city’s burn ban
contained in Ord. 06-07-11 and all other city ordinances relating to prevention
of fires shall be fully complied with at all times.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.46 STORM SHELTERS.
   (A)   General requirements. Every RV park or RV subdivision of ten or more
RV spaces shall be provided with above-grade or below-grade storm shelters
which shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum floor area of 15 square feet for each RV space in
said RV park or RV subdivision;
      (2)   Be designed by a licensed structural engineer or architect and
built in accordance with plans as approved by the City Engineer, Building
Official or licensed structural engineer or architect;
      (3)   Be designed and constructed to meet all Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) requirements and guidelines if the shelter is located
in a floodplain;
      (4)   Be designed and constructed to meet the minimum lighting,
ventilation and exiting requirements of the city’s Building Codes, where
applicable;
      (5)   Be designed and constructed to meet all applicable requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.;
and
      (6)   Be located no farther than 1,320 linear feet from the farthest RV
space in the RV park or RV subdivision.
   (B)   Additions to existing communities. For any addition of ten or more RV
spaces to any existing RV park or RV subdivision, a storm shelter which
complies with the general requirements of this subchapter shall be provided to
serve such additional spaces. For any addition of fewer than ten RV spaces to
an existing RV park or RV subdivision which otherwise complies with the
requirements of this subchapter, there is no requirement that an additional
shelter be provided to serve such additional spaces; provided, however, when
two or more such additions of fewer than ten RV spaces result in a cumulative
addition of ten or more RV spaces to a RV park or RV subdivision which
otherwise complies with the requirements of this subchapter, a storm shelter
which complies with the general requirements hereof shall be provided to serve
such additional spaces.
   (C)   Restroom facilities. Restroom facilities in required storm shelters
are not mandatory, but may be installed at the owner’s option. If restrooms are
installed, toilets may be either flush-type operating from nom1al water supply,
chemical or other approved types.
   (D)   Access to shelters. The RV park or RV subdivision owner, or such
owner’s designated agent or representative, shall be responsible for making the
storm shelter accessible and usable in times of need. It is unlawful for any
required storm shelter to be used for storage purposes if such storage reduces
the minimum floor area available for shelter of persons below the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (E)   Existing non-conforming RV parks or RV subdivisions. Any RV park or RV
subdivision of ten or more RV spaces which has an existing above- or below-
grade storm shelter as of the effective date of this chapter which does not
conform with the requirements of this subchapter, shall be deemed a non-
conforming RV park or RV subdivision with regard to the requirements for storm
shelters and may continue to exist as a non-conforming RV park or RV
subdivision for so long as said existing shelter remains in place and usable;
provided, however, that, any RV spaces added to such community after the
effective date of such ordinance shall require storm shelters as provided in
this subchapter. Current RV parks or RV subdivisions are exempt from having
storm shelters.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.47 LANDLORDS AND TENANTS.
   The owner or manager of an RV park shall ensure compliance with Tex.
Property Code Title 8, Chapter 94, as it applies to the landlord-tenant
relationship of RV park owners/managers and their occupants.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.48 EXISTING RV PARKS GRANDFATHERED.
   An existing RV park is considered grandfathered and shall not be required to
comply with the standards set forth in §§
152.35 through
152.43 of this chapter. Compliance with §§
152.46 and
152.47 of this chapter is required. To maintain their grandfathered status,
existing RV parks shall maintain a minimum access space between the sides of
each RV is at least ten feet, and the approach to all sites must be kept clear
for EMT and fire-fighting personnel and equipment. Upon change of controlling
interest of a grandfathered RV park or RV subdivision, the new owner shall
immediately bring the existing RV park or RV subdivision into full compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any non-compliance with this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. The city
may abate and remove the nuisance and punish the person(s) responsible for
causing or allowing the nuisance condition to exist. Such person(s) shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each provision violated, and each day
that there is a failure to comply with the terms of any provision of this
chapter is declared to be a separate offense. For violations of the provisions
that govern fire safety, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of
refuse, the fine may not exceed $2,000 per day, per violation.
(Ord. 20-11-10, passed 11-10-2020)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference
§ 153.01 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s subdivision regulations, and any and all amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 93-10-11-1, passed 10-11-1993)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
   
154.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference
§ 154.01 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s zoning regulations, and any and all amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 68-02-05-6, passed 2-5-1968; Ord. 780403, passed 4-3-1978; Ord. 87-08-03,
passed 8-3-1987; Ord. 12-11-13, passed 11-13-2012; Ord. 24-12-10, passed 12-10-
2014)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS, DEANNEXATIONS AND BOUNDARY EXTENSIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   PROPERTY AND REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
IV.   FUNDS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS, DEANNEXATIONS AND BOUNDARY EXTENSIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
73-0806       9-3-1973    Deannexing an area adjacent to S.H. 149
                          Executing a correction deed in favor of the city for
R. 79-12-26   12-26-1979  land intended to be conveyed in the original deed
                          (Meredith and Jamie Gladys Jones property)
80-04-07-02   4-7-1980    Extending the corporate limits of the city
15-07-14      7-14-2015   Annexing territory into the city, and extending the
                          city limits
                         
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./  Date
Res.   Passed Description
No.
68-    2-5-   Approving the continuance of an electric cooperative with the Rusk County
0205-2 1968   Electric Cooperative
68-02- 2-5-   Granting a gas distribution franchise to Southern Gas Company
05-3   1968
4-7-   4-7-   Authorizing and permitting electric rates under an experimental rider filed by
69-1   1969   Southwestern Electric Power Company
69-05- 5-19-  Fixing maximum and minimum rates for gas distribution service to be charged by
19     1969   Southern Gas Company
70-05- 5-4-   Granting a telephone franchise to Southwestern Bell Telephone Company
04     1970
70-07- 7-16-  Fixing maximum and minimum rates for gas distribution service to be charged by
16     1970   Southern Gas Company
7-72   7-5-   Fixing maximum and minimum rates for electric service to be charged by
       1972   Southwestern Electric Power Company
73-    5-4-   Granting the creation of the Cherokee Municipal Utility District No. 1
0504   1973
81-03- 3-2-   Denying an electric service rate increase to be charged by Southwestern
02-2   1981   Electric Power Company
81-07- 7-6-   Approving rate schedules to be charged by Southwestern Electric Power Company
0601   1981
82-08- 8-2-   Suspending rate schedules filed by Southwestern Electric Power Company
02-1   1982
82-08- 8-2-   Granting a television antenna service franchise to Star CATV Investment
02-2A  1982   Corporation
82-08- 11-12- Granting a television antenna service franchise to Star CATV Investment
02-2B  1982   Corporation
82-11- 11-1-  Approving rate schedules to be charged by Southwestern Electric Power Company
01-2   1982
83-    8-15-  Suspending rate schedules filed by Southwestern Electric Power Company
0815   1983
84-01- 1-2-   Approving rates and the rate schedule charged by Southwestern Electric Power
02     1984   Company
R. 87- 1-5-   Approving the transfer of a cable television franchise system from Star Cable
1-5    1987   TV, Inc., to Galaxy Cablevision, L.P.
87-1-5 1-5-   Granting approval of the off-peak service rider rate sought by Southwestern
       1987   Electric Power Company
88-05- 5-2-   Granting a gas distribution franchise to Lone Star Gas Company, a division of
02     1988   Enserch Corporation
R. 89- 7-10-  Establishment of enhanced 9-1-1 emergency telephone number and fee
008    1989   implementation
R. 90- 11-5-  Accepting a contract from Walsh-Morris Engineering Company to act as City
11-05  1990   Engineer
910603 - -    Executing a ambulance service contract between the city and Longview
       1991
R. -   4-5-   Mutually appointing certain officials and joining the county’s Emergency
       1991   Management program
92-07- 7-13-  Granting a telecommunications franchise to Southwestern Bell Telephone Company
13     1992
93-10- 10-11- Approving, ratifying, confirming and accepting electric rates under an
11-2   1993   experimental rider filed by Southwestern Electric Power Company
94-05- 5-9-   Transferring a cable television franchise from Galaxy Cablevision, L.P., to
09-1   1994   Friendship Cable of Texas, Inc.
97-08- 8-12-  Providing a longer term between the city and Southwestern Bell Telephone
12-2   1997   Company
030616 6-16-  Denying TXU Gas Company’s request to change rates
       2003
04-04- 4-13-  Approving the radio frequency meter installation rider of AEP Southwestern
13     2004   Electric Power Company
R. 07- 10-9-  Rate change suspending a rate increase for electric power by the Mid-Texas
10-09  2007   Division of Atmos Energy Corporation
15-01- 1-13-  Approving the creation of the Lakeport Economic Development Corporation
13     2015
R. 15- 6-9-   Approving the bylaws of the Lakeport Economic Development Corporation
06-09  2015
R. -   3-13-  Authorizing the creation of the Piney Woods 9-1-1 District
       2018
R. 18- 7-10-  Concerning and opposing Southwestern Electric Power Company’s interest in the
07-10  2018   Wind Catcher Wind Energy Connection Project
R. 20- 11-10- Rate change suspending a rate increase for electric power by Southwestern
11-03  2020   Electric Power Company
R. 22- 8-9-   Participating in the Multi-Regional Purchasing Cooperative
07-12  2022
             
 
TABLE III: PROPERTY AND REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
R. 89-001     2-15-1989   Accepting the loan offer to purchase the loan on the
                          sewer system
                          Supporting immediate steps to establish, construct
R. 89-007     5-10-1989   and develop an industrial/business park at or
                          adjacent to the Gregg County Airport
R. 93-04-12   4-12-1993   Exchanging a vehicle from the city to the Elderville
                          Volunteer Fire Department
R. 1995-07    8-8-1995    Proposing the purchase of real property and
                          construction thereon
960910-3      9-10-1996   Allowing a variance from the Zoning Ordinance for a
                          playhouse to be built
                          Authorizing the County Appraisal District to sell
R. 22-06-14   6-14-2022   excess property (land at Lake Lamond Road in
                          Longview)
                         
 
TABLE IV: FUNDS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
97-08-12-1    8-12-1997   Municipal Court Building Security Fund
03-09-09-03-1 9-9-2003    Municipal Court Technology Fund
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
Texas Code Cites Code Section
Texas Code Cites                                      Code Section
Alcoholic Beverage Code 1.04                          93.01
Business and Commerce Code Title 5, Chapter 71        113.08;
                                                      113.22
Business Organizations Code Title 4, Chapter 153      113.22
Civil Practice and Remedies Code Title 6, Chapter 125 92.17;
                                                      92.18
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 2.12                  112.02
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 14.06(b)              33.01
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 15.03(b)              33.01
Gov’t Code 42.021                                   151.01
Gov’t Code Chapter 551                              151.04
Gov’t Code 2001.174                                 112.42
Health and Safely Code Chapter 481                    93.01
Health and Safely Code 483.001                        93.01
Local Gov’t Code Title 2, Chapter 5, 5.902          11.02
Local Gov’t Code Title 6, Chapter 200               34.04
Local Gov’t Code Chapter 53                         10.01
Local Gov’t Code 54.001                             10.99
Local Gov’t Code 201.001 et seq.                    34.03
Local Gov’t Code 201.003(13)                        34.04
Local Gov’t Code 203.023                            34.04
Local Gov’t Code Chapter 211                        151.04
Local Gov’t Code 215.033                            112.01
Local Gov’t Code 215.034                            112.01;
                                                      112.27
Local Gov’t Code 217.002                            10.99
Occupations Code Chapter 2001                         112.25
Penal Code Chapter 21                                 113.23
Penal Code Chapter 22                                 113.23
Penal Code Chapter 25                                 113.23
Penal Code Chapter 32                                 112.41
Penal Code Chapter 34                                 112.41
Penal Code 37.02                                      112.40
Penal Code 37.10                                      112.40
Penal Code Chapter 43                                 113.23
                                                      112.24;
Penal Code Chapter 47                                 112.40;
                                                      112.41
Penal Code 47.01(4)                                   112.02
Penal Code Art. 47.01(4)(A)                           112.02
Property Code Title 8, Chapter 94                     152.47
Transportation Code Subchapter A, Chapter 543         33.01
Transportation Code Title 7, Chapter 683, 683.001     92.30
Transportation Code 682.002                           33.01
                                                      
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.   Date Passed Code Section
79-12-26   12-26-1979  TSO Table I
87-1-5     1-5-1987    TSO Table II
89-001     2-15-1989   TSO Table III
89-007     5-10-1989   TSO Table III
89-008     7-10-1989   TSO Table II
90-11-05   11-5-1990   TSO Table II
-          4-5-1991    TSO Table II
93-04-12   4-12-1993   TSO Table III
93-06-07   6-7-1993    31.02
95-06-15   6-15-1995   30.02
1995-07    8-8-1995    TSO Table III
98-12-08   12-8-1998   30.03;
                       30.99
05-10-05-1 10-5-2005   33.05
-          8-14-2007   30.01;
                       30.04
07-10-09   10-9-2007   TSO Table II
2011-09-13 9-13-2011   33.04
11-10-11   10-11-2011  33.01
13-01-15-2 1-15-2013   31.01
15-06-09   6-9-2015    TSO Table II
-          3-13-2018   TSO Table II
18-07-10   7-10-2018   TSO Table II
19-05-13   5-13-2019   32.01
20-11-03   11-10-2020  TSO Table II
21-07-13   7-15-2021   33.03
22-06-14   6-14-2022   TSO Table III
22-07-12   8-9-2022    TSO Table II
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
65-1214-1     12-14-1965  110.01;
                          110.99
65-1214-2     12-14-1965  11.01
68-02-05-1    2-5-1968    11.02
68-0205-2     2-5-1968    TSO Table II
68-02-05-3    2-5-1968    TSO Table II
68-02-05-6    2-5-1968    153.01
69-01-09      1-6-1969    Ch. 70, Schd. I
69-0106-1     1-6-1969    Ch. 70, Schd. I
4-7-69-1      4-7-1969    TSO Table II
69-05-19      5-19-1969   TSO Table II
10-6-1969     10-6-1969   Ch. 70, Schd. I
70-05-04      5-4-1970    TSO Table II
70-07-16      7-16-1970   TSO Table II
                          114.15—
71-09-07      9-7-1971    114.21;
                          114.99
7-72          7-5-1972    TSO Table II
72-0807-3     8-7-1972    31.16;
                          31.99
73-0504       5-4-1973    TSO Table II
73-0806       9-3-1973    TSO Table I
780403        4-3-1978    153.01
79-11-05-1    11-5-1979   90.02;
                          90.99
80-04-07-02   4-7-1980    TSO Table I
81-03-02-2    3-2-1981    TSO Table II
81-07-0601    7-6-1981    TSO Table II
                          50.15—
82-04-05-1    4-5-1982    50.22;
                          50.99
82-08-02-1    8-2-1982    TSO Table II
82-08-02-2A   8-2-1982    TSO Table II
82-11-01-2    11-1-1982   TSO Table II
82-08-02-2B   11-12-1982  TSO Table II
83-05-02-1    5-2-1983    Ch. 70, Schd. I
83-0815       8-15-1983   TSO Table II
83-09-12      9-12-1983   50.03;
                          50.99
84-01-02      1-2-1984    TSO Table II
                          130.01—
84-08-06-A(1) 8-6-1984    130.06;
                          130.99
84-08-06-E(5) 8-6-1984    50.04;
                          50.99
87-1-5        1-5-1987    TSO Table II
87-03-02      3-2-1987    33.02
87-08-03      8-3-1987    153.01
88-05-02      5-2-1988    TSO Table II
                          150.15—
89-04-03-1    4-3-1989    150.24;
                          150.99
910603        - -1991     TSO Table II
                          32.15—
041591        4-15-1991   32.22;
                          32.99
92-07-13      7-13-1992   TSO Table II
                          91.01—
93-04-12-01   4-12-1993   91.13;
                          91.99
93-10-11-1    10-11-1993  153.01
93-10-11-2    10-11-1993  TSO Table II
94-05-09-1    5-9-1994    TSO Table II
94-05-09-2    5-9-1994    34.01—
                          34.08
94-07-11      7-11-1994   110.02
                          113.01—
                          113.09;
94-08-08      8-8-1994    113.20—
                          113.26;
                          113.99
95-05-08-1    5-8-1995    114.01;
                          114.99
960213        6-11-1996   Ch. 70, Schd. I
960611        6-11-1996   92.03
960910-3      9-10-1996   TSO Table III
97-08-12-1    8-12-1997   TSO Table IV
97-08-12-2    8-12-1997   TSO Table II
01-06-12      6-12-2001   31.15
                          92.30—
02-08-13-01   8-13-2002   92.36;
                          92.99
                          92.15—
02-08-13-02   8-13-2002   92.19;
                          92.99
02-08-13-03   8-13-2002   92.02;
                          92.99
02-08-13-04   8-13-2002   92.01;
                          92.99
030616        6-16-2003   TSO Table II
03-09-09-03-1 9-9-2003    TSO Table IV
04-04-13      4-13-2004   TSO Table II
04-12-14-01   12-14-2004  50.02
121305        12-13-2005  Ch. 70, Schd. II
06-07-11      7-11-2006   150.02
08-07-08      7-8-2008    151.01—
                          151.05
12-11-13      11-13-2012  154.01
15-01-13      1-13-2015   TSO Table II
15-07-14      7-14-2015   TSO Table I
18-03-13      3-13-2018   50.01
18-04-10      4-10-2018   150.01;
                          150.99
                          112.01;
                          112.02;
                          112.15—
19-05-13-2    5-13-2019   112.27;
                          112.40—
                          112.46;
                          112.99
                          152.01—
                          152.06;
                          152.20—
20-11-10      11-10-2020  152.23;
                          152.35—
                          152.48;
                          152.99
23-06-13      6-13-2023   90.01;
                          90.99
24-12-10      12-10-2024  154.01
                          93.01—
25-03-11      3-11-2025   93.07;
                          93.99
                         
 
